an earthworks embankment a section of pavement or a soil nail wall .
this is not practical for sprayed sealing and asphalt resurfacing contracts it really applies to new pavement constructions and bridge works .
Where a width of possession is shown in subClause .C b such width shall be measured between the traffic faces of barriers or between the pavement edge and the traffic face of any barriers placed .
These procedures may include but are not limited to water quality and monitoring including loss of bitumen or runoff during or after rain leading to water pollution aggregate entering stormwater pits kerb and channel air quality including odour and other emissions from bitumen bitumen overspray and drift especially in marked areas of roadside significance materials and resource use including use and care of stacksites treatment of hazardous chemicals and petroleum spills preservation of habitat and parking vehicles or plant in roadway reserves waste management including raised reflective pavement markers petroleum wastes and weed management and plant hygiene .
The Traffic Guidance Scheme shall show proposed temporary signing and other traffic control device layouts including temporary barriers temporary pavement marking and temporary islands to a suitable scale and be fully dimensioned and shall generally agree with the construction sequence and other requirements shown elsewhere in the Contract .
all sidetracks shall Be designed in accordance with Austroads Guides Be sealed and line marked with temporary pavement markings when in use for more than one week Department of State Growth May Section Page of Department of State Growth Have a lateral clearance of at least .
SBSB will not be approved for temporary erection where posts have to be installed through pavements which remain part of the permanent works .
d Testing Small Areas For earthworks and pavement construction any lot which has a surface area less than m may be treated as a small area .
TESTING OF SURFACE LEVEL OF EARTHWORKS AND PAVEMENT COURSES RANDOM LEVEL MEASUREMENT PROCEDURE a General The requirements of this clause apply to the top of Type B material in fills the Cut Floor Level in cuts where Type A material is specified the finished surface of the subgrade and pavement courses where Scale A and Scale B surface level is specified by the random level measurement procedure in accordance with the VicRoads Test Method .
TESTING OF SURFACE LEVEL OF EARTHWORKS AND PAVEMENT COURSES NONRANDOM LEVEL MEASUREMENT PROCEDURE a General The requirements of this clause apply to the finished surface of the top of Type B material in fills the Cut Floor Level in cuts where Type A material is specified the subgrade pavement courses where a nonrandom method of level assessment is permitted or where Scale C level assessment is specified .
b Earthwork Formation The surface level of the finished earthwork formation including table drains verges the top of Type B material in fills the Cut Floor Level in cuts where Type A material is specified and the prepared subgrade shall be checked longitudinally for conformity with the specified requirements at intervals not exceeding m. Level measurements shall be taken and recorded at all changes in gradient at the edges of prepared earthworks surfaces designated lane lines and at intervals not exceeding m transversely across the prepared surfaces prior to placing Type A material or pavement material .
Department of State Growth August Section Page of Department of State Growth c Pavement Courses The surface level of each completed pavement course shall be checked longitudinally and transversely for conformity with the specified requirements at intervals not exceeding m in the longitudinal direction .
At each location checked for longitudinal level conformity the surface level shall be checked in the transverse direction at all of the following locations i at the edges of the pavement ii at all changes of gradient across the pavement iii at intervals not exceeding m across the pavement .
d Pavement Layer Thickness In cases where drawings showing the finished surface level are not provided but the thickness of pavement courses or resheet is specified the Contractor shall determine the thickness of pavement courses or resheet by taking the difference between the surface level measurements recorded in accordance with the requirements of Clause .c .
Coarse Aggregate Quality by Visual Comparison AS Bituminous emulsions for the construction and maintenance of pavements AS Coldformed structural steel hollow sections AS series Structural design actions Part Amdt Permanent imposed and other actions Part Amdt Wind actions AS Pt to A to B Methods of test for hose made from elastomeric materials First group Methods A B AS Pt A to D F G J A and B Methods of test for hose made from elastomeric materials Second group Methods A B C D F G J A B AS Cor Polytetrafluoroethylene PTFE skived tape AS Cor Polytetrafluoroethylene PTFE moulded sheet AS HotDip Galvanized Coatings on Threaded Fasteners ISO metric coarse thread series AS series Flat Metal Washers for General Engineering Purposes metric series Part Amdt Plain washers for metric bolts screws and nuts for general purposes General plan Part Plain washers for metric bolts screws and nuts for general purposes Tolerances ASNZS High Strength Steel Bolts with Associated Nuts and Washers for Structural Engineering Department of State Growth August Section Page of Department of State Growth Table .
in part ASNZS series Retroreflective materials and devices for road traffic control purposes Part Retroreflective materials Part Retroreflective materials non pavement application Part Raised pavement markers retroreflective and non retroreflective AS .
Welding of ferrous castings Steel castings AS Bitumen for pavements ASNZS Amdt Glass beads for pavement marking materials ASNZS .
Density ratio of compacted asphalt ASNZS Amdt Electrical installations known as the AustralianNew Zealand Wiring Rules ASNZ Electrical installations Construction and demolition sites AS Oils for reducing the viscosity of residual bitumen for pavements Department of State Growth August Section Page of Department of State Growth Table .
Australian Standards including test methods continued Australian Standard Standard Specification Section AS series Paints and related materials Pavement marking materials Part Solventborne paint For use with surface applied glass beads Part Thermoplastic pavement marking materials For use with surface applied glass beads Part Amdt Waterborne paint For use with surface applied glass beads Part High performance pavement marking systems ASNZS Precast concrete pipes pressure and nonpressure AS Amdt Supp Steel structures Commentary AS Hand torque tools see ISO AS Amdt Polyethylene PE pipes for pressure applications AS .. Methods of testing rocks for engineering purposes Rock strength tests Determination of point load strength index AS Fibre reinforced concrete pipes and fittings ASNZS .
Other Standards and Test Methods Document Standard Specification Section Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater nd edition water tests series conductivity Joint Publication AHPA American Public Health Association AWWA American Water works Association Water Environment Federation ASCA S rd Edition Installation requirements for customer cabling Wiring Rules Australian Technical Infrastructure Committee ATIC ATICSP September Fasteners for Structural Purposes Australian Technical Infrastructure Committee ATIC ATICSP March Cementitious materials for Concrete Australian Paint Approval Scheme Specifications series APAS November Inorganic zinc coating for protection of steel APAS May Polyurethane coating for protection of steel standard durability APAS June Organic zinc rich coating for protection of steel primers APAS December Single pack moisture cure urethane coating for the long term protection of steel APAS December Epoxy twopack durable primer for protection of steel in atmosphere APAS December Medium build twopack epoxy coating for the long term protection of steel in atmosphere APAS October Road marking paint solvent borne APAS October Road marking paint water borne APAS June Glass beads for pavement marking paint American Concrete Institute ACI .M Specification for Carbon and Glass FiberReinforced Polymer Bar Materials for Concrete Reinforcement ASTM AAMbc Specification for Chromium and ChromiumNickel Stainless Steel Plate Sheet and Strip for Pressure Vessels and for General Applications .
GENERAL This section relates to ride quality performance for pavement construction .
PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS The finished surface of the pavement shall have a smooth longitudinal profile and comply with the minimum ride quality requirements specified .
the surface of all pavement construction shall be tested for ride quality .
The Contractor shall provide the Superintendent with a copy of all test results representing the final roughness survey of completed pavement together with the calculated values of the individual and mean lane roughness for each lot . .
A x C A x C . . . . . E whereA the total area of pavement with the same unit cost as shown in Table .
PAVEMENT RECTIFICATION The Contractor shall bear the full cost of any necessary rectification work including the cost of any additional work required to the underlying or adjacent pavement to comply with this section .
Basis of Payment Deduction Location Unit Cost per sq m specify locations by pavement type refer to Table B of Guide Notes Department of State Growth Department of State Growth August Section Page of Department of State Growth SECTION PROVISION FOR ADJUSTMENT OF CONTRACT SUM .
Boxing The space above the subgrade to be occupied by the pavement bounded by the subgrade level and the inside faces of the constructed verges or unsealed shoulders .
Capping A Type A material layer of low permeability placed immediately below the pavement subbase or selected material to minimise changes in moisture content in the material below the capping layer .
Where no capping or selected material is required the cut floor level is subgrade level and the underside of pavement .
Recycled Material Various products derived from resource recovery of construction and demolition waste from building waste reclaimed asphalt pavement RAP from maintenance and rehabilitation activities and reclaimed glass from the glass disposal industry blended to produce Type A Type B and Type C products .
Selected Material A Type A material layer placed immediately below pavement subbase to provide greater strength to support the pavement .
Subgrade Subgrade is the trimmed or prepared portion of the formation on which the pavement including shoulders is constructed .
In Cuts subgrade level is the level of the top of cappingor selected material or where no capping or selected material is to be placed the cut floor level and the underside of pavement .
Department of State Growth August Section Page of Department of State Growth b Formation Level and Shape outside subgrade width excluding batters Verges shall be constructed such that they match the finished surface level at the outer edge of shoulder or pavement or where installed the level of kerb and channel or concrete edgings .
e Recycled Materials Blends of crushed recycled materials such as crushed concrete crushed brick reclaimed asphalt pavement RAP slag and crushed glass may be used as Type A B and C materials in earthworks applications .
Department of State Growth August Section Page of Department of State Growth Where the cut floor on which capping or selected material or pavement is to be placed consists of soil and rocky materials meeting the specification requirements but is too rocky to trim to the tolerances specified in Clause .f the material shall be ripped to a minimum depth of mm loosened and broken down to a maximum particle size of mm .
f Treatment of Rock Subgrade Where rock exists in a cut below subgrade level but within the designed capping or selected material layer the material shall be excavated to a depth of not less than mm below subgrade level in all areas on which pavement is to be placed and all loose material and soil shall be removed from the rock floor .
g Treatment of Cut to Fill Zones All pavement and verge areas at cut to fill zones shall be excavated to a minimum depth of mm below the Cut Floor Level or top of Type B material for a distance of not less than m into the cut and m under the fill from the cutfill line at the upper surface of Type B material earthworks .
In sideling cut areas the cut shall be excavated to a depth of mm below the Cut Floor Level for the full cut width to be occupied by pavement and verge material .
b Cuts Where in situ material within mm below capping selected material andor pavement has an Assigned CBR less than that specified at that level or has a swell of .
Other unsuitable materials below the Cut Floor Level on which pavement subbase capping or selected material is to be placed shall be either treated in situ or excavated and replaced with Type B material .
m material immediately below the surface exposed after stripping of topsoil or removal of existing pavements shall be scarified to a depth of not less than mm and recompacted to the specified density ratio for the location and type of material being placed .
Existing pavements under areas upon which fills are to be constructed that are not required to be salvaged shall be scarified to a depth of not less than mm and compacted as specified .
Material within mm of subgrade shall be maintained such that its moisture content is not less than of optimum moisture content prior to the placement of any pavement layer . .
Soft Subgrade Material The following hierarchy of controls should be implemented when soft subgrades or other unsuitable materials are encountered on road projects Excavation and replacement of the soft material with suitable select fill material Stabilisation of the subgrade with suitable stabilisation agents Use of geotextiles geofabrics and geogrids note these products are not to be used to modify the thickness of proposed pavements In all of the options above critical attention to drainage is required .
The following types of drainage systems are applicable Surface drainage Subsurface drainage Drainage blankets Drainage blankets have a particular application in the construction of road pavements and road embankments .
In this situation the use of a rock blanket as a lower subbase layer may be the most effective means of removing the free water from beneath the pavement or embankment .
This section is not applicable for lime pretreatment of pavement layers .
For lime pre treatment of pavement layers Standard Section Insitu Stabilisation of Pavements with Cementitious Binders shall be used. . DEFINITIONS Available Lime The amount of Calcium Oxide CaO or Calcium Hydroxide CaOH contained in Quicklime or Hydrated Lime respectively .
b Continuous Weighing System The mass of lime spread over the pavement surface may be measured and recorded by a spreader fitted with a fully calibrated computerised electronic weigh scale system capable of continuously measuring and recording the mass of lime at intervals of not more than m of forward travel .
If any of the above sections are not included in the specification all references to those sections should be struck out ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent include the option to use crushed concrete as a specified alternative to the use of Class or Class pavement materials manufactured from virgin rock shown on the drawings as necessary .
DESCRIPTION This section covers the requirements for the placement of gravel sand soft or ripped rock crushed rock crushed scoria or crushed concrete pavement materials for the construction of unbound flexible pavement layers. . DEFINITIONS Unbound Flexible Pavement A pavement consisting of an unbound granular base and subbase materials with a thin asphalt or sprayed bituminous seal surfacing .
Pavement Course For the purpose of this specification the pavement base upper subbase and lower subbase shall each be termed a pavement course .
A pavement course may comprise one or more layers .
Base One or more layers of material usually constituting the uppermost structural element of a pavement on which the surfacing may be placed which may be composed of crushed rock or other materials as specified in Clause ..
Typically base is the top mm of the pavement or the pavement base thickness as specified or shown on the drawings .
Subbase The pavement material constructed on the subgrade to the underside of the base either for the purpose of making up the additional pavement thickness required or to provide a working platform .
Subgrade Subgrade is the trimmed or prepared portion of the formation on which the pavement including shoulders is constructed .
Segregated Area An area of a pavement layer which does not comply with the grading requirements of Clause ..
Water added to the pavement material shall be clean and substantially free from detrimental impurities such as oils salts acids alkalis and vegetable substances .
CONFORMITY WITH DRAWINGS All pavement courses shall after compaction be finished to smooth and uniform surfaces free of segregated areas and conforming to the limits for level line grade thickness and cross section shown on the drawings or as specified .
Any material that has been compacted and then trimmed from the compacted surface to conform to the correct level or thickness as shown on the drawings shall not be reused in the pavement construction without the approval of the Superintendent .
a Width and Alignment The width of each side of the pavement shall not be less than the specified offset width or more than mm outside the specified offset width when measured at right angles from the centre line or design line .
b Surface Level of Pavement Courses The surface level of the pavement courses shall be measured in accordance with the requirements of Section and every test lot shall meet either Scale A B or C requirements as specified in Clause ..
The maximum lot size for measurement and assessment of surface level shall be m but may be increased to match the maximum lot size for assessment of compaction specified in Table .. Where pavement is to be constructed to the lip level of kerb and channel it shall be constructed flush with the lip of the channel or not more than mm above .
The mean and standard deviation of the departures from the design surface level for the pavement courses at their respective levels within each lot shall meet the requirements of Table .. Table .
and the unit rates for pavement construction as specified in Clause .b .
The surface level of the pavement courses shall comply with the requirements of Table .. Table .
Level Tolerances at the Surface of Pavement Courses Lower Subbase mm Upper Subbase mm Base mm to to Department of State Growth Department of State Growth August Section Page of c Thickness of Pavement Layers In addition to complying with pavement layer surface tolerances specified in Clause .b the following tolerances shall apply to the thickness of any pavement layer i the subbase course shall be not less than the specified thickness by more than mm ii the base course shall be not less than the specified thickness by more than mm and the average thickness of base over every m section over the full carriageway width shall be not less than the specified thickness iii the combined thickness of subbase and base courses shall be not less than the specified thickness by more than mm .
Where the Contract does not require design finished surface level control but specifies a pavement composition or a minimum resheet thickness only the Contractor shall construct the pavement to comply with the requirements of thickness of each pavement layer as specified in this subclause .
d Shape No point on the surface of any pavement layer shall vary by more than mm from a m straight edge or mm from a m straight edge placed in any direction .
At no location shall water pond on the surface of any pavement layer .
e Rideability Note to specification author include this clause and Section where Rideability targets are required Note that if a rideability requirement is included the tolerance requirements of Clause .b may not apply and can be struck out In addition to the above requirements for surface tolerance the finished surface shall satisfy the requirements specified in Section . . JOINTING The layout of joints shall conform to the following requirements a material shall be spread in such a manner as to minimize the number of joints b for all pavement layers transverse joints in adjoining paver runs shall be offset by not less than m c transverse joints shall be offset from one layer to the next by not less than m d longitudinal joints shall be offset from one layer to the next by not less than mm e longitudinal joints shall be located within mm of the planned position of traffic lanes lines or within mm of the centre of a traffic lane .
iv All pavement layers shall be compacted to withstand rolling and shall be test rolled in accordance with Section prior to acceptance of the layer .
For pavement construction any lot that has a surface area less than m may be treated as a small area and tested in accordance with Section .
v The maximum thickness of any pavement base layer shall not exceed mm and the maximum thickness of any subbase layer shall not exceed mm .
vi The minimum thickness of any pavement layer shall be times the nominal size of the material .
MAINTENANCE OF COMPACTED LAYERS The surface of any compacted pavement layer or prepared subgrade shall be maintained in such a way as to minimise dust prevent ravelling erosion deformation or any other damage to the layer resulting from environmental conditions traffic or construction activities .
The layer shall be kept free from contamination until any subsequent pavement work under the Contract is commenced or the Superintendent accepts and takes responsibility for that part of the Works. . POST COMPACTION REQUIREMENTS FOR PAVEMENT MATERIAL If specified in Clause .c or Clause .d following completion of compaction material shall be tested for postcompaction grading or Plasticity Index PI at the frequency specified in Clause .
The test samples to be used for postcompaction grading and PI tests shall be a combined sample made up from six randomly selected increments extracted from the lot of pavement construction being assessed .
requires it to be Scale A all pavement layers shall be tested for postcompaction grading and PI at the frequency specified in Table ..
The first lot of each pavement layer shall be tested for postcompaction grading and PI .
requires it to be Scale B the first lot of each pavement course shall be tested for postcompaction grading and PI .
If the first lot each pavement course satisfies the specified post compaction requirements in Clause .a and b as applicable no further postcompaction testing will be required for that pavement course .
Include the option to use crushed concrete as a specified alternative to the use of Class or Class pavement materials manufactured from crushed rock .
DESCRIPTION This section covers the requirements for the delivery spreading and compaction of plant mixed crushed rock and recycled crushed concrete for the construction of pavement subbase treated with cementitious binder to produce a modified or bound subbase .
This section is to be read in conjunction with the following sections Section Cementitious Treated Crushed Rock for Pavement Subbase Section Cementitious Treated Crushed Concrete for Pavement Subbase. . DEFINITIONS Cementitious Binder A cementitious material capable of being uniformly mixed into a granular pavement material to bind the particles together to increase its strength .
Pavement Design Modulus The presumptive modulus used as the basis for the mechanistic design of a bound pavement with a bound cementitious treated crushed rock or crushed concrete subbase .
Working Time The time required to transport place compact and trim the pavement layer after the cementitious binder is added at the mixing plant. . CONFORMITY WITH DRAWINGS Pavement subbase shall be finished to a smooth and uniform surface and shall after compaction conform within the following limits to the levels lines grades thicknesses and cross sections as specified or shown on the drawings .
Department of State Growth Department of State Growth August Section Page of a Width and Alignment The width of pavement measured on each side of the centreline or design line shall not deviate by more than mm from the designed offset when measured at a right angle .
b Surface Level of Subgrade and Pavement The surface level of the subgrade and pavement courses shall be measured in accordance with the requirements of Section and every test lot shall meet either Scale A B or C requirements as specified in Clause ..
The mean surface level and the variation in surface level for the subgrade and pavement courses within each lot shall meet the requirements of Table .. Table .
The value of the lot of work shall be calculated from the unit rates for pavement construction as specified in Clause .b .
Level Tolerances at the Surface of Subgrade and Subbase Subgrade mm Subbase mm to to c Shape No point on the prepared surface of the subgrade shall lie more than mm below a metre straight edge placed on the pavement in any direction .
Water shall not pond on the surface of the cementitious treated subbase. . MATERIALS The Contractor shall supply all materials required to construct the cementitious treated pavement subbase .
A lot shall consist of a single layer of pavement material placed on the same day and all lots shall be tested for compliance with the requirements of this section .
but greater than or equal to the work represented by the lot may be accepted but the method of rectification or redesign of the pavement shall be approved by the Superintendent .
but greater than or equal to the work represented by the lot may be accepted but the method of rectification andor redesign of the pavement shall be approved by the Superintendent .
For the application of this formula the value of work represented by the lot shall be calculated from the unit rate of payment specified in Clause .b. . TEST ROLLING Test rolling may be carried out in accordance with the requirements of Section on the cementitious treated pavement subbase layer within the maximum allowable working time for the relevant binder and time of year as specified in Table .. . CURING AND PROTECTION OF COMPACTED LAYERS Unless there are special design and construction conditions specified for placing of multiple layers cementitious treated subbase with a pavement design modulus exceeding MPa shall be placed in a single layer .
b Pavement Design Modulus of MPa In addition to meeting the requirements of Clause .a above the Contractor shall i cure the cementitious treated subbase by maintaining the surface in a moist condition for seven days ii prevent construction plant from using the pavement during the seven day curing period apart from that required to maintain and cure the surface and iii after the seven day curing period restrict all construction traffic to vehicles with a maximum axle group load of tonnes until asphalt base and intermediate courses are placed priming primersealing and asphalt placement activities excepted .
ii allow the cementitious treated subbase to cure for seven days without trafficking except for the application of a prime or primerseal iii prevent construction plant from using the pavement during the seven day curing period apart from that required to maintain and cure the surface and iii after the seven days curing period restrict construction traffic to vehicles with a maximum axle group load of tonnes until asphalt base and intermediate courses are placed priming primersealing and asphalt placement activities excepted .
DESCRIPTION This section covers the requirements for in situ stabilisation of existing pavements by addition of cement blended cement lime or other supplementary cementitious materials .
The requirements relate to mix design preparation of existing pavement materials lime pretreatment of pavement materials with high plasticity supply of cementitious binders construction plant and spreading mixing and compaction of pavement layers .
Available Lime Index ALI The Calcium Oxide or Calcium Hydroxide content of quick lime or hydrated lime respectively expressed as a percentage of the total mass of lime determined in accordance with AS Cementitious Binder A cementitious material capable of being uniformly mixed into a granular pavement material to bind the particles together to increase its strength .
Typically deep lift stabilisation requires a high spread rate of slow setting cementitious binder and heavy compaction equipment to produce a fully bound pavement layer .
Working Time The time required to mix fully compact and trim the stabilised pavement layer after the addition of cementitious binder. . CONFORMITY WITH DRAWINGS Completed stabilised base and subbase layers shall conform within the following limits to the levels lines grades thicknesses and cross sections shown on the drawings or specified or directed by the Superintendent .
Department of State Growth Department of State Growth August Section Page of Subbase If the cementitious stabilised material forms a subbase for an unbound flexible pavement or an asphalt pavement the requirements for surface level of the subbase layer shall be as specified in Sections or unless specified otherwise .
c Pavement The in situ pavement material to be stabilised shall be the existing surfacing and pavement material and any additional material placed over the existing pavement for mixing with the pavement below .
PAVEMENT MATERIALS INVESTIGATION AND MIX DESIGN a General Unless otherwise specified in Clause .d and e the Contractor shall produce a mix design for the in situ stabilised pavement material in accordance with VicRoads Code of Practice .
The in situ stabilised pavement material is required to meet the specified grading plasticity and strength requirements and contain a cementitious binder which will allow sufficient working time to mix place compact and trim the material before the initial set takes place .
b Grading and Plasticity Index The final grading of the material to be stabilised after addition of any additional granular material to correct the grading or to increase the thickness of the pavement shall be within the limits specified in Table ..
b Mixing Machine A purpose built mixing machine designed for in situ stabilisation of roadworks shall be used to pulverise the existing pavement material and uniformly mix the material together with water and cementitious binder to the specified depth of stabilisation .
If the compacted depth of layer exceeds mm the following items of compaction plant shall be used as a minimum requirement a vibrating pad foot roller for initial compaction a vibrating steel flat roller for densification a multi wheel roller for finishing and sealing off the surface prior to trafficking. . CONSTRUCTION a General Construction includes the pulverisation of any seal or asphalt surfacing premixing of in situ materials supply and spreading of any additional granular material supply spreading and mixing of cementitious binder into the in situ pavement material and compaction trimming and curing of the stabilised layer .
Unless otherwise specified stabilisation work undertaken each day shall be completed across the full pavement width .
Stabilisation operations may continue during light rainfall if the moisture content of the in situ pavement material can be maintained below modified optimum moisture content .
Department of State Growth Department of State Growth August Section Page of Only sufficient area of pavement is to be pulverised that can be mixed and fully compacted in one day .
For stabilised patching work which is to be trafficked or sealed immediately after completion of compaction only sufficient pavement area shall be opened up to enable work to be completed within the maximum allowable working time specified in Table .. b Preparation of the Existing Pavement The existing pavement shall be pulverised and mixed to the proposed depth of stabilisation prior to spreading of the cementitious binder .
If significantly different in situ materials are present across the width of pavement to be stabilised the Contractor shall use a system for cross blending materials as necessary to produce a uniform material prior to addition of cementitious binder .
In locations where a pavement has been pretreated with lime to dry the material out or lower the Plasticity Index addition of further cementitious binder and remixing shall not commence until the following day .
The volume any large size material removed from the site shall be replaced with an equivalent volume of suitable granular pavement material .
Mixing of quicklime into the pavement material shall not commence until full slaking has been achieved .
If the required Spreading Rate for lime or cementitious binder exceeds kgm it shall be spread in two equal spreading runs with material from the first spread run being fully mixed into the pavement material prior to the second spreading run being undertaken .
Department of State Growth Department of State Growth August Section Page of The prepared pavement shall not be trafficked until the cementitious binder has been mixed into the pavement material .
e Mixing in Cementitious Binder Mixing shall commence as soon as practical after spreading of the cementitious binder and shall continue until all pavement materials and cementitious binder are uniformly blended throughout the full depth of the stabilised layer .
The moisture content of the pavement material prior to addition of the cementitious binder shall be within the range to of the Modified optimum moisture content .
MAINTENANCE OF THE STABILISED SURFACE PRIOR TO SURFACING OR OVERLAY The Contractor shall keep the stabilised pavement surface moist and protected from damage by traffic or construction activities until either a further pavement layer or the bituminous surfacing is applied . .
Department of State Growth Department of State Growth August Section Page of d Scale C Requirements for Acceptance of Compaction The Superintendent may direct the Contractor to construct a trial section of stabilised pavement as specified in Clause ..
b Continuous Weighing System The mass of lime or cementitious binder spread over the pavement surface may be measured and recorded by a spreader fitted with a fully calibrated electronic weigh scale system capable of continuously measuring and recording the mass of lime or cementitious binder at intervals of not more than m of forward travel .
MINIMUM TESTING FREQUENCY The Contractor shall test the materials and the stabilised pavement layer at a frequency which is sufficient to ensure that the materials and work under the Contract comply with the specified requirements but not less than the frequency specified in Table .. Table .
DESCRIPTION This section covers the requirements for preparation of unbound granular pavements including in situ cementitious and bituminous stabilised pavements for sprayed bituminous surfacing or asphalt surfacing. . PAVEMENT PREPARATION The Contractor shall prepare for bituminous surfacing the lengths widths and areas specified or shown on the drawings for bituminous surfacing plus an additional .
The surface of the shoulders and verges shall be matched to the finished surface of the prepared pavement .
Where the Superintendent considers the prepared surface to have excessive fines the pavement layer shall be rectified to a condition acceptable to the Superintendent .
The pavement shall be prepared to produce a surface that is a constructed to meet specified shape and level requirements b homogenous and consistent with the material in the pavement base layer c uniform in texture d free of tearing and scabbing e free of lamination on or within mm of the finished surface f level with adjacent sealed areas and edgings at the joints g a hard dense and tight surface capable of being swept with a rotary road broom or similar h free of loose and foreign materials i dried back to the moisture content and embedded requirements specified in Clause .. Any imperfections as listed above shall be corrected in a manner acceptable to the Superintendent .
DRYING BACK OF PAVEMENT BASE PRIOR TO BITUMINOUS SURFACING a Pavement Dryback The uppermost pavement layer after preparation of the surface and prior to priming or primersealing shall be allowed to dry back so the moisture content of the layer meets the requirements of Table .
Requirements for Pavement Dryback and Embedment Testing Scale Pavement Dryback Pavement Embedment Mean Moisture Ratio Maximum of any individual result Ball Penetration Maximum individual result A Less than mm B Less than Not required Less than mm C Less than Not required c Testing Schedule The Contractor shall carry out testing for pavement dryback and embedment in accordance with Table ..
Where the pavement moisture content has increased during the period between dryback testing and the proposed time of bituminous surfacing the Superintendent may require pavement dryback and embedment to be reassessed in accordance with this clause .
MAINTENANCE PRIOR TO BITUMINOUS SURFACING Following the acceptance of the prepared surface and until bituminous surfacing is completed the Contractor shall maintain the pavement in the accepted condition until surfacing works are completed .
Should the pavement condition deteriorate before surfacing works are completed the Contractor shall reprepare the pavement and represent the pavement for acceptance .
GENERAL This section covers the requirements for removal of pavement by cold planing including the cleaning up removal and disposal of the excavated materials . .
COLD PLANING Cold planing shall be carried out in a manner as to leave a uniform surface on a plane parallel with the ultimate finished surface of the pavement as shown on the drawings .
The nominal depth and width of pavement to be removed shall be as specified in Clause .. After planing no point on the planed surface shall lie more than mm below a m straightedge placed on the planed surface in any direction .
In locations where removal and replacement of asphalt or pavement is required on the same day the rate of cold planing including clean up shall be at a rate consistent with the asphalt replacement process to minimise the pavement area closed to traffic . .
Prior to opening to traffic placing asphalt or leaving the site the Contractor shall present a clean planed surface. . ASPHALT REPLACEMENT Where work under the Contract includes replacement of excavated material with asphalt supplied and placed under Section the following requirements shall apply a Exposed granular pavement material shall be watered recompacted and where specified primed or heavily tack coated or for larger areas given a bitumen emulsion primerseal prior to placing asphalt .
and new asphalt shall be compacted flush with the existing pavement in accordance with the requirements of Clause .a .
SCHEDULE OF DETAILS strikethrough items below which are not applicable a Type of Work i Removal of asphalt with a standardfine toothstrikethrough inappropriate option cold planer ii Cutting of tapered longitudinal chases against kerb and channel median openings and side streets iii Cutting of tapered transverse chases iv Excavation of granular pavement material v Profiling of concrete pavement vi Removal and replacement of asphalt in accordance with Section of this specification b Nominal area and depth of removal m mm Clause .
If any cold planing is undertaken in association with placing of asphalt Section shall apply. . DEFINITIONS Asphalt Base Course Asphalt base course is that part of an asphalt pavement supporting the intermediate and wearing courses .
It rests on the subgrade or pavement subbase .
Asphalt Intermediate Course Asphalt intermediate course is that part of the asphalt pavement immediately under the wearing course .
Asphalt Pavement Asphalt pavement comprises the combined thickness of all asphalt courses as defined in Clause .. Asphalt Regulating Course Asphalt regulating course is an asphalt course of variable thickness applied to the road surface to adjust the shape prior to the wearing course or any other bituminous surfacing or resurfacing .
Types of Dense Graded Asphalt Mix Designation Description L A light duty Size or wearing course with low air voids and higher binder content for use in very lightly trafficked pavements .
N A light to medium duty Size or wearing course or regulating course for use in light to moderately trafficked pavements .
H A heavy duty Size or asphalt wearing course or regulating course for use in most heavily trafficked pavements .
SI A multi purpose Size or structural asphalt for intermediate course in heavy duty pavements or base course in medium duty pavements .
SF A fatigue resistant Size structural base course asphalt for heavy duty asphalt pavements with a total asphalt thickness in excess of mm .
SS A very stiff Size structural intermediate course asphalt sometimes used to increase pavement stiffness for very large scale heavy duty asphalt pavements .
Asphalt Wearing Course Asphalt wearing course is the final part of the pavement upon which the traffic travels except for Open Graded Asphalt OGA where the wearing course is the layer beneath the OGA .
Department of State Growth August Section Page of Department of State Growth Reclaimed Asphalt Pavement RAP Reclaimed asphalt pavement is asphalt removed from an existing asphalt pavement and re processed by crushing andor screening for recycling into new asphalt .
Classes and bitumen used for production of asphalt shall comply with AS Bitumen for pavements .
c Bitumen Emulsion Bitumen emulsion used for tack coating shall be a cationic rapid setting type complying with AS Bitumen emulsions for construction and maintenance of pavements .
Alternatively it may be added to the RAP stockpile and reprocessed to comply with the requirements of Clause .. . ASPHALT RECYCLED FROM RECLAIMED ASPHALT PAVEMENT a General Requirements Reclaimed Asphalt Pavement RAP may be recycled by adding it to new asphalt during the mixing process subject to the following requirements i all mixes containing RAP shall be registered mixes ii RAP shall consist of milled or excavated asphalt pavement free of foreign material such as unbound granular base broken concrete or other contaminants and shall be crushed and screened to a maximum size not exceeding the size of asphalt produced iii the manufacturing process shall provide for addition of RAP to a batch plant pug mill or drum mixer separately from other mix components by a method that avoids damage to the mix by overheating iv no RAP shall be added to Asphalt Types V HP HG SS or SP .
Where new pavement abuts an existing pavement the existing pavement shall be removed in steps to achieve an offset from layer to layer of not less than mm .
d Junctions At junctions where the new asphalt mat is required to match the level of existing pavement surface at the limits of work chases shall be cut into the existing pavement by cold planing as specified in Section .
times the nominal size of the asphalt from the existing pavement to the minimum width as follows i at side streets and median openings mm ii on through carriageways with a speed limit of kmh or less m iii on through carriageways with a speed limit of more than kmh m. Department of State Growth August Section Page of Department of State Growth e Treatment of Exposed Edges under Traffic On completion of each days work and prior to opening to traffic the following treatment of exposed edges shall be adopted for asphalt work .
Maximum Grade of Temporary Ramping Maximum Ramp Grade Horizontal to Vertical to to to to iii Removal of Temporary Ramping Before commencement of each days work all temporary ramping shall be removed by cutting back along a straight line to expose a vertical face of fully compacted asphalt at the specified layer depth. . COMMENCEMENT OF PLACING HP The placement of asphalt on the subbase or granular base for a new pavement or for an overlay of an existing bituminous surfaced pavement shall not commence until approval to proceed is obtained from the Superintendent . .
REGULATING COURSE A regulating course of asphalt of the type and size specified shall be placed for correction of longitudinal and transverse pavement shape so that the resulting surface is parallel with the finished surface .
iii Shape No point on the finished surface of the wearing course shall lie more than mm below a m straight edge laid either parallel to the centreline of the pavement or except on crowned sections at right angles to the centreline .
iv Alignment Where asphalt pavement is not placed against a concrete edging the edge of asphalt layers shall not be more than mm inside nor more than mm outside the designed offset from centreline or design line .
Within these tolerances the rate of change of offset of the edge of layer shall not be greater than mm in m. v Width Where asphalt pavement is not placed against a concrete edging the width of asphalt layers shall not be less than the design or specified width of layer by more than mm or greater than the design or specified width by more than mm .
Department of State Growth August Section Page of Department of State Growth b Conformity with Drawings for New Pavements and Major Pavement Rehabilitation Projects For pavement works where design drawings show the finished surface level and thickness of each pavement course the surface level of each asphalt course shall be measured in accordance with the requirements of Section .
The value of the lot of work shall be calculated from the unit rates for pavement construction as specified in Clause .c .
Where a uniform thickness of new asphalt pavement construction is specified the mean thickness of a lot of asphalt shall be not less than the combined thickness of all asphalt courses specified in Clause .
For the purpose of this clause the maximum lot size shall be not more than m of pavement area .
c Asphalt Overlays Where a minimum average or nominal thickness of overlay is specified and no existing pavement or finished levels are available the average thickness of the overlay shall be calculated by T M x D x A Where T is the thickness of overlay in millimetres A is the area of the job in square metres D is the mean field density of placed asphalt in tonnesm .
VicRoads SECTION SPRAYED BITUMINOUS SURFACINGS GUIDE NOTES FOR THE USE OF THE STANDARD SPECIFICATION This section is used for sprayed bituminous surfacing treatments including priming primersealing and sealing of road pavements .
Contractor and Superintendent agree that the pavement surface is fit and ready for surfacing .
May GUIDE NOTES Page of VicRoads TYPICAL BINDER SAMPLE LABEL Contract Number Contract Item Number Sample Number of Date and time of sampling ______________ at _______ a.m. p.m. Road and location kms Binder Type and Source and Manufacturer Other Comments GENERAL INFORMATION Basic Sprayed Seal Treatment Types Sprayed sealing comprises three basic treatment types as follows a Priming Priming is a type of initial treatment carried out on a dry pavement as part of an initial treatment prime and seal or in some cases beneath asphalt surfacing usually where the asphalt surfacing is less than mm in thickness .
A prime consists of a light grade of cut back bitumen with a low viscosity which enables it to penetrate the surface of most dry pavements and if applied at the correct rate of application it will leave a thin skin of bitumen on the pavement surface .
The prime tends to bind the fine particles of pavement together to form a clean dust free surface promoting a strong bond between the pavement and the following seal or asphalt surfacing .
A primerbinder consists of a medium grade of cut back bitumen having a viscosity low enough to provide some penetration of the granular pavement surface but high enough to sufficiently wet and retain a small to medium sized aggregate .
Primerseals typically achieve significantly less penetration when compared to primes and generally rely predominantly on adhesion to the pavement hence the condition of the surface prior to sealing is critical .
A primerseal has an average life of between one and two years although longer may be achievable from more robust primerseal treatments May GUIDE NOTES Page of VicRoads Choice of Seal Type Conventional Seal C A conventional seal using Class bitumen binder should generally provide a satisfactory result for sound pavements without steep grades sharp curves and large numbers of truck turning movements and where the Annual Average Daily Traffic AADT over a hour period does not exceed around vpd .
Strain Alleviating Membrane SAM SAM seals are used where there is a need for enhanced performance waterproofing properties or to delay the propagation of cracks on moderately cracked pavements .
SE or SE binder classes can also be used as binders in SAM applications although they offer a lower level of modification and should be reserved for lesser cracked pavements .
Strain Alleviating Membrane Interlayer SAMI SAMI treatments are used as an interlayer under asphalt surfacing to provide increased waterproofing andor resistance to reflective cracking when placed over a cracked pavement .
A GRS is normally used to waterproof and extend pavement life of severely cracked pavements or as a SAMI treatment under a thin asphalt surfacing .
A GRS can be also used as a SAMI treatment as an alternative to a highly modified binder over severely cracked pavements and will provide a higher level of resistance to cracking .
An FRS is also used for severely cracked pavements in a similar manner to a SAM seal or GRS .
pavement dryback .
Guidance as to the appropriate treatment selection and timeframes for placement on pavements constructed clear of traffic is provided in VicRoads Code of Practice RC .
This particularly applies to initial treatments where excessively damp or poorly prepared unbound pavements can be detrimental to the performance of priming and primersealing .
For existing sealed pavements this is normally done using hand sprayed painted arrows on the pavement .
For new pavements not yet constructed drawings need to be available in sufficient detail to enable the areas of various elements of the job to be accurately determined to enable the Schedule of Details Clause .
Conventional seals make up the large majority of seals on sound pavements for roads with relatively low traffic and low stress locations .
Cutter is used to temporarily reduce the viscosity of a binder in cooler weather to achieve an even distribution of binder across the pavement and more importantly to achieve initial adhesion to and proper embedment of aggregate into the binder .
The proportion of cutter is dependent on the specific pavement temperature and ambient conditions .
Excessive cutter can lead to bleeding or flushing of the completed seal during hot weather whereas insufficient cutter can result poor distribution of binder to the pavement and poor initial aggregate adhesion .
Recent practice therefore has been to use a further or parts cutter for low trafficked roads in addition to requirements for pavement temperature in place of Flux Oil .
The most commonly used fabric for general applications has a minimum mass of gm but a gm fabric is available for special applications such as large aggregate sizes greater than mm or for use as an initial treatment on unbound granular pavements .
j Prime The Contractor is required to select a grade of prime depending on the porosity of the pavement and how tightly bound the surface is after preparation .
paver laid pavement Heavy . . Porous pavements materials such as sandstone limestone and scoria .
Very Heavy . . k Primerbinder As for selection of a prime the Contractor is required to select a suitable grade of primerbinder for a primerseal based on the type porosity and condition of the pavement materials to be treated .
Tightly bonded or medium porosity pavements .
Porous pavements materials such as sandstone and limestone .
Lm second application May GUIDE NOTES Page of VicRoads Table E Typical Rates of Application for Cutback Bitumen Primerbinder Aggregate Size Primerbinder Lm Aggregate square metres per cubic metre AADT Lane Less than and . . . . . . Table E Typical Base Rates of Application for Aggregate and Binder for Sealing Nominal Size Estimated Rate of Application mm Traffic Range AADT lane S . . . . . . . S . . . . . . . S . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Notes on above Tables E E and E Typical rates of application for priming and primersealing are based on average grades of primer and primerbinder on average pavements .
It is usually more economical to use heavier grades of prime or primerbinder on known porous pavements rather than specifying abnormally high rates of application .
Surface pretreatment in sprayed sealing contracts is intended only for the correction of variations in surface texture and does not extend to the correction of defects such as pavement weakness potholes wide cracks surface shape or extensive areas of severe surface bleeding .
d Minimum Temperature The viscosity of bitumen changes with temperature which is an important consideration for the longer term performance of sprayed seals as lower viscosities are required for initial wetting and adhesion to pavements and sealing aggregates .
Texture depth of primerseals should be assessed after a period of trafficking to weeks to take into account the influence of aggregate embedment into the underlying pavement. . RECORDS The Contractor is required to prepare a job completion report for all work including pretreatments refer Attachment A of Section .
Treatment Type Prime Only PO Specified when the sealing contractor is only required to apply a prime to a pavement or bridge deck and the remainder of the work typically asphalt surfacing is to be completed by others .
Prime An initial treatment comprising of the application of a bituminous primer to a prepared granular pavement base or concrete surface without cover aggregate .
Strain Alleviating Membrane SAM where the bituminous binder is a heavily modified PMB or has parts of crumbed rubber added to treat cracked pavements .
A Geotextile Reinforced Seal GRS is a type of SAM or SAMI seal where the bituminous binder is reinforced with a geotextile fabric to treat extensively cracked pavements .
A Fibreglass Reinforced Seal FRS is a type of SAM or SAMI seal where the bituminous binder is reinforced by the inclusion of chopped fibreglass strands to treat cracked pavements .
HP Work shall not commence until the Contractor and the Superintendent have agreed that the road or pavement surface is fit and ready for surfacing no more than hours prior to the works occurring. . LIMITS OF WORK Where the Job Items are detailed in Table .
the limits of work at the start and finish chainages plus the limit in any side road have been marked on the pavement surface .
The Works shall include all existing tapers bell mouths at intersecting roads pavement widenings turn lanes traffic lanes and sealed shoulders .
If any sprayer has its spray equipment overhauled or replaced it shall be issued with a new Certificate of Calibration prior to use. . BITUMINOUS MATERIALS a Adhesion Agent Adhesion agent may be added to the aggregate precoat binder or primerbinder to promote adhesion to the cover aggregate andor pavement surface .
c Bitumen Bitumen shall be Class complying with the requirements of the current Australian Standard for Bitumen for pavements as listed in Section .
Department of State Growth March Section Department of State Growth d Bitumen Emulsion Bitumen emulsion of Class ARS or CRS shall comply with the requirements of the current Australian Standard for Bituminous emulsions for the construction and maintenance of pavements as listed in Section .
f Cutter Cutter shall comply with the current Australian Standard for Oils for reducing the viscosity of residual bitumen for pavements as listed in Section .
j Primer The primer shall be cutback bitumen complying with the requirements of .e of this clause and shall be of a suitable class to ensure penetration into the pavement surface and when cured be waterproof of uniform appearance and capable of providing a strong bond between the bituminous surfacing and the pavement .
The primerbinder shall be waterproof and capable of penetrating into and adhering to the pavement surface while retaining sufficient binder on the surface to hold the aggregate in place .
will not be waived for any job item unless these requirements are waived in Table .. c Geotextiles Geotextile fabric shall be fixed to the pavement surface free of wrinkles andor folds .
d Minimum Temperature Unless otherwise approved by the Superintendant the Contractor shall not apply any sprayed bituminous treatments unless the air and pavement temperature are above those listed in Table .
Minimum Temperatures for Spraying Bituminous Materials Treatment Type Minimum air and pavement Temperature C Initial Treatments Primes Primerseals singlesingle Primerseals doubledouble Reseal Treatments C and crumb rubber modified PMBs Other PMBs Geotextile Reinforced seals Department of State Growth March Section Department of State Growth e Aggregate Spreading Forward Direction Only Not Applicable HP Where the contractor proposes to use forward aggregate spreading plant written approval is required from the Superintendent prior to use unless written approval has been previously provided by the Department .
Loose aggregate may be temporarily dumped at the stack sites nominated in Table .. For seals of nominal size mm and over including multiple application seals After the removal of loose aggregate and at any time during the Defects Liability Period of the Contract no more than loose stones in any square metre of pavement shall remain .
For seals of nominal size mm and under After the removal of loose aggregate and at any time during the Defects Liability Period no more than loose stones in any square metre of pavement shall remain .
Such failures include but are not limited to potholing emulsification flushing bleeding fatty areas significant areas of bitumen on kerb and channel excess bitumen without aggregate cover at the startfinish of runs aggregate stripping nonuniform aggregate spreading and streaking of aggregate but do not include pavement failures or events beyond the reasonable control of the Contractor .
For the purposes of this clause a test lot shall be defined as an area of up to a maximum of m. Unless otherwise specified all areas of the existing pavement surface that are not free draining shall be filled or regulated with dense graded asphalt as specified prior to placing OGA . .
JOINTS AND JUNCTIONS At junctions where the new asphalt mat is required to match the level of the existing pavement and where the depth of the OGA can not be used to match into the existing pavement junctions shall be constructed with Size Type H dense graded asphalt over the full width of carriageway as follows Side streets and median openings mm Through carriageways with a speed limit of kmh or less metres Through carriageways with a speed limit of more than kmh metres .
The temperature limits shall be C higher than those shown in Table .. . AMBIENT CONDITIONS FOR PLACING Bitumen Crumb Rubber Asphalt shall not be placed when the pavement temperature is less than C. Department of State Growth August Section Page of Department of State Growth SECTION BITUMINOUS SLURRY SURFACING This section crossreferences Sections and .
BITUMINOUS MATERIAL Bitumen used for emulsion manufacture shall comply with the requirements of AS Bitumen for pavements .
Slurry surfacing shall not be placed when the pavement temperature and air temperature is C and falling but may be placed when the pavement and air temperature is C and rising .
Sprayed Seal The sprayed application of bituminous binder to a pavement surface followed by an application of aggregate to form an all weather skid resistant road surfacing .
If waste is to be left at an approved site other than a licensed waste facility for any period of time the waste must be contained to the site where it was placed with appropriate bunding used. . LIMIT OF WORK The limits of work at the start and finish chainages and any individual areas within these limits have been marked on the pavement surface .
DAMAGED PAVEMENT AREAS CAUSED BY CONTRACTED WORKS The Contractor shall be responsible for all repairs to any damaged pavement areas caused as a result of these works .
Delamination Delamination includes failure of the binder and aggregate to adhere to the existing pavement surface .
Skid Resistance Skid resistance is the friction between the vehicle tyre and the pavement surface .
High Friction surface Treatment which is deemed to be unacceptable shall be rectified with the agreement of the Superintendent. . SITE PREPARATION The existing pavement markings at the site may be covered by the surface treatment by the Contractor as part of the site preparation works or may be masked to ensure the high friction surface treatment is not applied to the markings .
All reinstatement of RRPMs and pavement markings shall be in accordance with Section .
Any damage caused to the surface by the removal of pavement marking and RRPMS shall be repaired prior to placement of high friction surface treatment .
Cleaning and preparation shall not cause structural damage to the pavement .
d Temperature The pavement temperature of the site shall be measured and recorded at least every hours during the works .
The Contractor is not responsible for defects caused by either settlement or failure of the existing pavement or for damage including gouging and vehicle fire and repairs to the surface caused by traffic incidents .
Delamination Delamination refers to failure of the binder and aggregate to adhere to the existing pavement surface .
Skid Resistance Skid resistance is the friction between the vehicle tyre and the pavement surface .
Cleaning and preparation shall not cause structural damage to the pavement .
Existing pavement markings shall be masked to ensure the coloured surface treatment is not applied to the markings .
Any damage caused to the surface by the removal of pavement markings and RRPMs shall be repaired prior to placement of the coloured surface treatment .
HP The Superintendent shall agree to the method of removal and any pavement repairs for pavement markings and RRPMs prior to these works occurring .
All pavement markings covered by the application of coloured surface treatments shall be reinstated in accordance with Section .
This shall also apply to any pavement markings or RRPMs which are covered partially or wholly by the coloured surface treatment due to inadequate masking .
d Temperature The pavement temperature of the site shall be measured and recorded at least every hours during the works .
The Contractor is not responsible for defects caused by either settlement or failure of the existing pavement or for damage including gouging and vehicle fire and repairs to the surface caused by traffic incidents .
EXCLUDED AREAS The following areas are excluded from the limits of work all service pits and valve covers less than .m traffic detector loops pedestrian crossings the white pavement markings and designated travel path of pedestrians .
Temporary piles under proposed road pavement shall be cut back to at least mm below subgrade level .
The Contractor shall maintain the temporary riding surface for the period during which construction traffic is required to pass over the culvert and shall remove it prior to construction of the final embankment and pavement .
The Contractor shall maintain the temporary riding surface for the period during which construction traffic is required to pass over the culvert and shall remove it prior to construction of the final embankment and pavement .
DELIVERY Delivery by road transport shall be to the road pavement or firm ground in the vicinity of the bridge site .
Should the Contractor require delivery to a location such that the transport is required to leave the road pavement he shall provide a suitable access track and shall assume full responsibility for the safety of the contents of the vehicle and the movement of the vehicle while on the access track .
Where rubber rings are disturbed they shall be cleaned and reassembled prior to refitting. . PLACEMENT OF FILLING a Unless the culvert is installed through an existing paved area selected and ordinary backfill shall be placed as follows under around and above the culvert after the sections are bedded and compacted as specified in Clause .. i Culvert Under Area to be Paved Where the trench has been excavated from design subgrade level or above the trench shall be backfilled to design subgrade level with selected backfill material and above that level with appropriate pavement material .
INSTALLATION OF CULVERTS THROUGH EXISTING PAVED AREAS The trench of culverts through existing paved areas shall be backfilled to the existing subgrade level with selected backfill material and the pavement restored using materials as shown below Pavement Layer Material Type Thickness mm . . . . . .
Except where the pavement under which the culvert passes is to be abandoned the trench shall be kept to the minimum width to allow removal of the culvert or laying a replacement .
INSPECTION OF DRAINAGE LINES BENEATH PAVEMENTS HP Unless approved otherwise by the Superintendent all drainage lines constructed beneath pavements shall be inspected after completion of earthworks to subgrade level and prior to construction of pavement layers by an independent testing organisation using closed circuit television CCTV .
Any sections of damaged pipe shall be removed and replaced prior to construction of the pavement layers and a further CCTV survey shall be undertaken to verify correction of the defects .
e Kerb and channel shall be constructed to the level of the adjoining pavement with a tolerance of to mm .
Where it is necessary to excavate existing pavement the excavation shall not extend more than mm from the edge of the adjacent face .
a Edgings Where edgings are constructed over pavement layers bedding shall be provided between the pavement layer and the underside of the edging or the edging thickened to match the pavement layer .
Where edgings are not constructed over pavement layers bedding shall be not less than mm compacted thickness .
Where edging has been constructed alongside an existing pavement part of which has been excavated to permit the construction of the edging the excavated space shall be backfilled to the surface level of the existing pavement .
PLACING OF PRECAST SPIKED KERBS Where precast kerbs are to be pinned to existing pavements they shall be placed true to line with adjoining sections firmly butted together .
The kerb sections shall be held in position by mm diameter steel spikes mm long driven into the pavement so that the tops are at least mm below the tops of the kerbs .
Department of State Growth Department of State Growth August Section Page of Unless otherwise specified the annulus between the bore and the pipe or carrierconduit shall be filled by pressure grouting. . EXCAVATION Where the open trench method of crossing under a carriageway pavement is accepted the line of the trench shall be straight at right angles to the carriageway and form the shortest link between terminals wherever practical .
The edges of all trenches located within a road pavement shall be sawcut .
c Conduits through Existing Paved Areas including Shoulders and Verges Unless otherwise specified or shown on the drawings the opening shall be backfilled to the existing subgrade level with selected backfill material placed and compacted in layers not exceeding mm loose thickness and the pavement material placed and compacted in layers not exceeding mm loose thickness using materials in accordance with Clause .
b. . COMPACTION STANDARDS a Bedding and Backfill except pavement Unless otherwise specified bedding and backfill shall have during compaction a uniform moisture content within the range to of the optimum moisture content as determined in the Standard compactive effort .
b Pavement Unless otherwise specified pavement material shall have during compaction a uniform moisture content within the range to of the optimum moisture content as determined in the Modified compactive effort .
All pavement layers shall be compacted to a mean value of density ratio not less than the percentage specified in Clause .b .
All pavement layers shall be tested . .
Additional pavement material shall be placed in the trench and compacted as specified where in paved areas settlement or loss of material from the surface exceeds mm measured from a straight edge laid across the top of the trench . .
Retroreflective materials and devices for road traffic control purposes Retroreflective devices nonpavement application AS Steel wire ropes Product specification AS .
The Contractor shall plan and execute the work in a manner that prevents damage to underground and above ground facilities such as utilities services structures pavements vegetation etc .
The installation must not cause any damage to the pavement beyond mm from any part of any post including any soil plate attached to the post .
Where the maintenance strip is adjacent to kerb or pavement separation from the kerb or pavement by the use of a cork expansion joint or approved alternative shall be produced .
The Contractor shall provide additional pavement between the edge of existing pavement and the guard fence .
The Contractor shall adopt the nominated pavement design .
Where a nominated pavement design has not been specified the Contractor shall construct the widening with a pavement that matches the existing .
The edge of shoulder shall be sawcut to provide a neat straight edge against which the additional pavement can be placed . .
Where detailed on the drawings new median crossing points shall be constructed in accordance with the pavement details specified to provide for adequate access for emergency vehicles and shall be integrated with the guard fence installation .
Guide posts shall be placed at a uniform distance from the road pavement edge with the widest face presenting to oncoming traffic .
DESCRIPTION This section covers the fixing of both reflective and nonreflective raised pavement markers to asphalt concrete or sealed pavements using epoxy adhesive or hot melt bitumen adhesive. . TOLERANCES ON POSITION Markers shall be affixed to the pavement at the positions shown on the drawings or specified or directed by the Superintendent within the following limits unless otherwise specified .
Only markers approved for use by the Department of State Growth shall be used and all raised nonreflective pavement markers shall be of the ultra hard plastic type unless otherwise directed .
Glass faced raised reflective pavement markers shall be used on all National Roads and State Freeways unless specified otherwise .
Markers shall only be placed at locations where the pavement is free from dirt oil grease paint or any other material which would adversely affect the bond of the adhesive to the pavement unless otherwise specified .
Unless specified otherwise the Contractor shall clean the pavement to remove oil or grease at every marker site by sand blasting chipping or burning of bitumen as appropriate to ensure that the surface is clean and sound . .
PLACING MARKERS Markers shall not be placed in any of the following circumstances when the pavement is wet when the relative humidity is greater than when the ambient temperature or the temperature of the road surface is less than C for standard set adhesive or C for rapid set or hot melt adhesive .
The marker shall be then positioned correctly on the pavement and pressure shall be applied until the adhesive is uniformly extruded from each edge of the base of the marker indicating that the full base area is supported by adhesive .
Any adhesive on the pavement which might obscure the reflective faces or aspect of the marker shall be removed using a squareended spatula or similar .
On concrete and asphalt pavements wherever possible markers shall be placed clear of longitudinal or transverse joints and on all pavements markers shall be placed clear of any surface cracks or positions from which markers have been removed and the surface is damaged. . PROTECTION FROM TRAFFIC Markers shall be protected from traffic after placing for periods not less than those shown in Table .
WRSB height shall be measured from the road pavement when it is located within .
m of the edge of pavement .
The Contractor shall provide additional pavement between the edge of existing pavement and the WRSB .
The Contractor shall adopt the nominated pavement design .
Where a nominated pavement design has not been specified the Contractor shall construct the widening with a pavement that matches the existing .
The edge of shoulder shall be sawcut to provide a neat straight edge against which the additional pavement can be placed . .
Where detailed on the drawings new median crossing points shall be constructed in accordance with the pavement details specified to provide for adequate access for emergency vehicles and shall be integrated with the WRSB installation . .
gcm The finished level of grassed areas shall be i not higher than mm below weepholes or dampproof courses in adjacent walls ii level with the bottom of fence plinths iii level with adjacent pavements kerbs pits and other structures .
If any of the above sections are not included in the specification all references to those sections should be struck out ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent PART .A GENERAL PART .B PAVEMENT MARKINGS FOR NEW WORKS PART .C PAVEMENT MARKINGS FOR MAINTENANCE WORKS PART .D PAINTED PAVEMENT MARKINGS PART .E LONG LIFE PAVEMENT MARKINGS Department of State Growth Department of State Growth August Section Page of PART .A GENERAL .A GENERAL This section covers the requirements for materials and application of pavement markings including a supply and application of pavement marking paint and glass beads longitudinal lines intersection markings and other markings on the road surface for all new installations and maintenance of pavement markings b supply and application of thermoplastic or coldapplied plastic material and glass beads and pliant polymer tape for all new installations and maintenance of pavement markings c fixing of both reflective and nonreflective raised pavement markers to asphalt concrete or sealed pavements using epoxy adhesive or hot melt bitumen adhesive .
.A DEFINITIONS Pavement Marking The term used to define all linemarking roadmarking and raised pavement markers .
Maintenance of Pavement Markings Refers to the refreshing or replacement of an already existing pavement marking .
New Pavement Markings Refers to applying pavement markings to a new surface where no pavement marking exists i.e .
after reseals asphalt resurfacing newly constructed pavements and modifications to existing pavement markings .
Raised Pavement Marker A device placed on a pavement which may be a Non Reflective Marker A device to provide a degree of delineation during daylight owing to the contrasting colour reflection and profile with respect to the pavement surface .
Also a device to provide a degree of delineation during daylight owing to the contrasting colour reflection and profile with respect to the pavement surface .
Retroreflectivity is the value of reflected light measured in millicandellaluxsquare metre and is used as a measure of light reflected by pavement markings .
.A STANDARDS The dimensions and colour of pavement markings shall conform to the following standards a VicRoads Traffic Engineering Manual Volume as listed in Section b State Roads Standard Drawings for Pavement Markings Paint and long life material shall be white except for No Stopping markings which shall be yellow or as otherwise specified or required in State Roads Standard Drawings for Pavement Markings .
Department of State Growth Department of State Growth August Section Page of c The Superintendent may request the Contractor to undertake additional pavement marking works at sites not listed in the Schedules .
a Raised Pavement Markers i Raised pavement markers shall comply with the relevant requirements of AS Part as listed in Section .
ii Temporary raised reflective pavement markers shall comply with the relevant requirements of AS as listed in Section and shall be at least mm in width and to a height of mm with reflective material on both sides and include protective covers for the reflective material .
d Glass Beads i Glass beads shall be used on all applications of material and for all pavement markings and shall conform to the requirements in ASNZS and the Australian Paint Approval Scheme APAS Specification as listed in Section .
e Thermoplastic Pavement Marking Material Thermoplastic pavement marking material used under this Contract shall comply with the requirements of Clause .A and shall provide a functional service life of a least six years allowing for fair wear and tear .
Department of State Growth VicRoads October Section Page of Department of State Growth August Section Page of f Coldapplied Plastic Pavement Marking Material Coldapplied plastic pavement marking material used under this Contract shall be a Poly Methyl Methacrylate resin based pavement marking material conforming with the colour luminance and bead content requirements of Clause .A and shall provide a functional service life of at least six years allowing for fair wear and tear .
g Pliant Polymer Pavement Marking Tape Pliant polymer pavement marking tape intended for use under this Contract shall be approved by the Superintendent .
.A SITE PREPARATION Site preparation shall be the sole responsibility of the Contractor as part of the works including a the removal of existing unsound obsolete or redundant pavement markings b the removal of any foreign materials and debris within reasonable limits .
.A PLACING RAISED PAVEMENT MARKERS Markers shall be placed in accordance with the manufacturers specification for pavement markers and the adhesives used shall be in accordance with Clause .Ab .
On concrete and asphalt pavements wherever possible markers shall be placed clear of longitudinal or transverse joints and on all pavements markers shall be placed clear of any surface cracks or positions from which markers have been removed and the surface is damaged .
.A REMOVAL OF PAVEMENT MARKINGS Where required the Contractor shall remove existing pavement markings to the standard approved by the Superintendent and appropriate to the marking being removed .
Any pavement damage caused by the installation or removal of pavement markings included in the works shall be the Contractors responsibility .
Rectification of any pavement damage to line and level shall be completed on the same day in accordance with the Superintendents requirements .
On sections of road on which the Contractor has been directed to replace or remove raised pavement markers the Contractor shall also repair damage to the pavement caused by the loss of pavement markers .
.A TOLERANCES ON PAVEMENT MARKINGS The Contractor shall comply with the tolerances as shown in Table .A when installing pavement markings .
Department of State Growth Department of State Growth August Section Page of Table .A Tolerances on Pavement Markings Markings Tolerance A Pavement Markings Distance between the centreline of the marking and the centreline of the set out mark mm Distance between the centreline of the completed marking and the centreline of the previous marking mm Width of completed painted markings mm of the specified dimensions Width of completed markings for long life materials mm to mm Length of completed stripes and blocks to of the specified length Gap between double lines mm to mm of the required mm gap B Raised pavement markers i Markers in line with broken segments Transverse position mm of the centreline of segments Longitudinal position .
Maintenance of pavement markings If the gap between the existing lines is mm or less the gap shall not be reduced by the maintenance application .
HP Where removal of unsuitable pavement marking is required the method of removal shall be subject to the approval of the Superintendent before removal works commence .
Department of State Growth Department of State Growth August Section Page of PART .B PAVEMENT MARKINGS FOR NEW WORKS strikethrough this Part B for Maintenance Contracts .B GENERAL This section covers the requirements for new pavement markings .
.B SCOPE OF WORK The scope of work includes the supply of all materials and placement of pavement markings in accordance with this specification .
For new pavement marking the following works shall be undertaken as part of the works a immediately prior to resurfacing removal of any existing reflective and non reflective markers b placement of temporary reflective pavement markers including removal of protective covers after surfacing works c initial placement of pavement markings including reinstatement of any adjoining pavement markings blackened but not necessarily covered by the surfacing activity comprising reinstatement andor placement of initial coat of painted pavement markings reinstatement andor placement of other long life pavement markings reinstatement andor placement of raised pavement markers and removal of temporary raised reflective pavement markers d final coat of all painted pavement markings e reinstatement andor placement of profiled lines after the final coat of paint .
.B LIMIT OF WORK For new pavement markings the limit of pavement marking works shall be the same as the limit of the new surfacing or as shown in Section Schedule of Drawings .
.B PROGRAM For new pavement markings the Contractor shall undertake pavement marking works in accordance with the following requirements .
a After Surfacing Works The initial coat of paint long life pavement markings other than profiled linemarking and raised pavement markers reflective and nonreflective on newly surfaced pavements shall be installed in accordance with the following timeframes AADT and National Highway within hours of opening to traffic AADT and within days of opening to traffic AADT within days of opening to traffic b All new painted pavement markings shall receive two applications of paint .
d For new works constructed clear of traffic all pavement markings shall be completed prior to opening of traffic .
a New pavement markings shall be positioned in accordance with the following requirements i set out by the Contractor in conformance with the appropriate standard required by Clause .A ii applied within the tolerances listed in Table .A .
Department of State Growth Department of State Growth August Section Page of PART .C PAVEMENT MARKINGS FOR MAINTENANCE WORKS strikethrough this Part C for New Pavement Markings .C GENERAL This section covers the requirements for maintenance of pavement markings .
.C SCOPE OF WORK The scope of work includes the supply of all materials and placement of pavement markings in accordance with this specification .
Maintenance works shall entail preparing the site in accordance with Clause .A and refreshing the existing pavement markings with the same material as the existing markings in accordance with this specification .
.C LIMIT OF WORK For the maintenance of existing pavement markings the works shall include all existing tapers bell mouths at intersecting roads pavement widening and traffic lanes .
.C EXCLUSION OF ROADWORKS For works involving the maintenance of pavement markings the Contractor will not be responsible for maintaining pavement markings unless otherwise directed by the Superintendent where it is evident that roadworks are taking place or will shortly take place which will interfere with the installation of the markings or which will damage the completed markings .
The Contractor shall state the reason as to why the location is not maintained prior to the pavement marking work being undertaken .
.C PROGRAM a For the maintenance of pavement markings the Contractor shall submit the following programs as specified for review by the Superintendent as part of the works .
i Within two weeks of the Date of Award of Contract a pavement marking program for the whole of the works that complies with Section Road Inventory Information .
Department of State Growth Department of State Growth August Section Page of ii Based on the list of jobs requested by the Superintendent the Contractor shall submit a monthly detailed program of planned pavement marking jobs at least five working days in advance of the following month .
The program shall be in sufficient detail to identify dates covering the following activities date of linemarking date of roadmarking dates of placement of raised pavement markers date of retroreflectivity testing .
All pavement markings on individual Job Items shall be completed in the programmed month as specified in Section Road Inventory Information .
.C INSPECTION AND REPLACEMENT REQUIREMENTS FOR MAINTENANCE OF RAISED PAVEMENT MARKERS For maintenance of raised pavement markers the Superintendent will conduct a routine program of inspections of the condition of raised pavement markers .
From the routine program of inspections requests for replacement of raised pavement markers will be made .
For the purpose of replacing raised pavement markers the Contractor may program this based on a minimum run of markers on urban road sections and M and A class roads and a minimum run of markers on other road sections .
.C RECORDS AND REPORTING a Job Completion Report For maintenance of pavement markings the Contractor shall complete and forward to the Superintendent a Job Completion Report Pavement Markings using the proforma included as Attachment A to this Section for each job item in the Schedules .
b Retroreflectivity Report For both new work and maintenance of pavement markings the Contractor shall complete and forward to the Superintendent a Retroreflectivity Report in a form approved by the Superintendent showing the level of retroreflectivity determined for each test lot in accordance with the requirements of Clause .A .
Department of State Growth Department of State Growth August Section Page of PART .E LONG LIFE PAVEMENT MARKINGS .E GENERAL Long life pavement marking materials shall be prepared and used in accordance with the manufacturers specification .
Glass beads shall be sprinkled or sprayed on to the long life material while it is in a fluid state immediately after it has been applied to the pavement to ensure that the beads are embedded by a nominal .
The Contractor shall be responsible for the removal of pavement marking material from such vehicles .
Performance Reporting Treatment Performance Criteria Date of Testing State Growth Use Only Next Schedule Date State Growth Use Only Next Program Date Painted Markings Tolerances on Pavement Markings Retroreflectivity Daylight visibility Colour Skid Resistance Raised Pavement Marker Tolerances on Pavement Markings Retroreflectivity Daylight visibility Colour Long Life Markings Tolerances on Pavement Markings Retroreflectivity Daylight visibility Colour Skid Resistance The Contractor shall include in the Job Completion Report the actual status of the item compared to the specified requirement for that item including tolerances on pavement markings retroreflectivity daylight visibility colour and skid resistance .
Raised Pavement Marker Detail Marker Type Material Unit of Measure Quantity Raised retroreflective pavement marker white mono or bidirectional each Raised retroreflective pavement marker white mono or bidirectional glass faced each Raised retroreflective pavement marker yellow red or green mono or bidirectional each Raised nonreflective pavement marker ceramic each Raised nonreflective pavement marker ultra hard plastic alloy each Long Life Markings Detail Pattern Material ST sprayed thermoplastic ET extruded thermoplastic SCT screeded thermoplastic CA cold applied plastic Unit of Measure Quantity Standard Stripe mm km Semi Barrier mm km Double Barrier mm km Edgeline mm km Single solid lane line or centreline mm km Continuity line mm km Edgeline mm km Single solid lane line mm km Single solid centreline mm km Continuity line mm km Profiled lines km Turn lines mm m Lane lines mm m Chevron diagonal bars or pedestrian crossing stripes mm m Straight ahead arrow .
Unless otherwise shown on the drawings or specified borings and trenches shall comply with the following depth requirements a Where conduits are laid under carriageway pavements the minimum cover from top of conduit to the pavement surface shall be mm for freeways and arterial roads and mm for local roads .
Where the open trench method of crossing under a carriageway pavement is accepted the line of the trench shall be at right angles to the carriageway and the edges of trenches located within a road pavement shall be sawcut .
Percentage Passing by mass Min Max Bedding Selected backfill Common backfill Pavement material shall be as specified and shall comply with the relevant requirements of the appropriate pavement sections .
c Filling Unless otherwise specified or shown on the drawings selected and common backfill shall be placed and compacted as follows under around and above the conduit after the sections are bedded i Conduits under Area to be Paved Where the trench has been excavated from the design subgrade level or above the trench shall be backfilled to design subgrade level with selected backfill material and above that level with common backfill material or the specified pavement material .
iii Conduits through Existing Paved Area Unless otherwise specified or shown on the drawings the trench shall be backfilled to the existing subgrade level with selected backfill material and the pavement restored using materials in accordance with subclause e below .
Where specified pavement material shall be assessed for compaction in lots as defined in Section .
All pavement material shall have during compaction uniform moisture content within the range to of the optimum moisture content as determined in the Modified Compaction test .
All pavement layers shall be placed and compacted in layers to a density ratio of not less than .
Heavy duty pit lids shall be provided where the pit is located in a road pavement .
Conduits under road pavement shall be marked with stakes clear of the road pavement .
Conduits not under road pavement shall be marked with stakes at the ends at changes of direction and at intervals of not more than m. This staking will be additional to any marker pegs to which draw cords are tied .
Bitumen used for field produced cutback bitumen shall comply with AS Bitumen for pavements .
The cutter shall comply with AS Oils for reducing the viscosity of residual bitumen for pavements .
Type AMC . . b Bitumen emulsion of Grade CAM manufactured from Class bitumen and complying with the requirements of AS Bitumen emulsions for construction and maintenance of pavement . .
Department of State Growth Department of State Growth August Section Page of Reclaimed Asphalt Pavement shall consist of milled or excavated asphalt pavement free of foreign material such as unbound granular base broken concrete or other contaminants and shall be crushed and screened to a maximum size not exceeding the size of mix produced .
The material class pavement course use and nominal sizes shall be as specified in the special clauses andor the drawings andor the schedule .
Construction requirements for unbound flexible pavements incorporating crushed rock products are covered in Section Construction of Unbound Flexible Pavements .
Crushed Rock Class For the purpose of this specification Crushed Rock products are to be supplied in various classes broadly defined as follows Class is a premium cohesive pavement base material for unbound pavements where a very high standard of surface preparation for a sprayed sealed or thin asphalt surfacing is required .
It has a minimum plasticity index requirement and will likely have additional requirement for maximum permeability when used for heavy duty unbound pavements .
Class is a high quality pavement base material for unbound flexible pavements in locations where a very high standard of surface preparation may not be required .
Department of State Growth Department of State Growth August Section Page of Class is a high quality upper subbase material for heavy duty unbound flexible pavements .
It may have a minimum permeability requirement to provide positive drainage to the subsurface drains and overlying unbound pavement layer .
Where specified Class may be used as base for lightly trafficked pavements provided the material produces sufficient cohesive fines during compaction .
Class is a lower subbase material for heavy duty unbound andor bound pavements or a subbase material for most other types of pavements .
DESCRIPTION This section covers the production requirements of mm nominal size for pavement subbase treated with a cementitious binder to produce a bound material .
Construction requirements for cementitious treated pavement subbase is covered by Section .
Cementitious Binder A cementitious material capable of being uniformly mixed into a granular pavement material to bind the particles together to increase its strength .
For the purposes of UCS testing one representative sample of fully mixed cement treated material shall be taken either from the plant or at the point of delivery in accordance with AS .. Sampling Preparation of stabilised pavement materials as listed in Section and compacted in the mould within two hours of mixing .
DESCRIPTION This section covers the requirements for hot melt bitumen adhesive for use in bonding raised pavement markers complying with the requirements of AS Part to bituminous and concrete road surfaces .
