When grader blade laser control or other automated control systems are used for the purpose of road construction such that the construction pegging of the subgrade or pavement would not otherwise be provided then the following horizontal and longitudinal alignment control requirements must be established by the Contractor for the use of the Superintendent prior to the commencement of subgrade preparation or any pavement construction Control Requirements a Offset pegs must be established on at least one side of the road formation .
The Contractor must make all necessary arrangements for the supply and servicing of the required quantities of suitable water for the Works both for construction purposes and for potable water for concrete manufacture pavement construction and site facilities .
Examples of Works by Others might include a Relocation of services and utilities often by the relevant service authority b Installation of traffic signals c Provision of pavement marking d Landscaping .
Determination of properties related to the consistency of concrete Slump Test AS Methods for sampling and testing aggregates AS Bituminous emulsions for the construction and maintenance of pavements AS Methods of testing soil for engineering purposes AS Methods of testing soils for engineering purposes Method ..
The Contractor shall submit to the Superintendent a proposed method for the rework repair or removal of the non conforming Lot to ensure conformance to the requirements of the Specification. . Any pavement Lot that is nonconforming in insitu density shall be fully reworked .
Rework for pavements is defined as the reconstruction of the nonconforming Lot in accordance with the requirements of the Specification .
or WA .. Where the pavement material is stabilised or modified with Portland Cement the maximum dry density determinations shall be commenced two hours after mixing is complete and shall be completed within a further two hours .
Specification Quality Systems Issued Document No Dxxxxxxx Page of Contract No xxxxxx Contract Name .. DENSITY AND INSITU AIR VOIDS ASPHALT Density and insitu air voids shall be determined on the basis of the results of tests of core samples of asphalt sampled from the pavement in a stratified random manner after laying and compaction in accordance with WA ..
ii Dryback of Other Layers The Dryback Characteristic Moisture Content DMc of a Lot shall be calculated thus DMc m ks where m average of the sample moisture contents on the Lot being assessed taken from the pavement layer and determined in accordance with WA .
STRUCTURAL CONCRETE .. WELDING .. STEEL FABRICATION .. PAINTING Specification Quality Systems Issued Document No Dxxxxxxx Page of Contract No xxxxxx Contract Name ANNEXURE E REQUIREMENTS FOR SELECTED CRITICAL SUBCONTRACTS Subcontractors for the following critical processes must have Third Party Certification of their Quality Management System to ASNZS ISO for the manufacture and supply of Aggregate Asphalt placement Bitumen stabilised limestone Bitumen products Cement stabilisation of pavements Concrete Culverts pipe and box type Drainage structures including manholes and gullies Electrical Installation including lighting traffic signals ITS installations Limestone Pavement marking Prestressing post tensioning Prime Primer Sealing Sealing Resealing and Enrichment Rockbase Sealing Signs supply only Steel fabrication Steel reinforcing Structural Components for Bridges including but not limited to beams bearings expansion joints and piles Specification Quality Systems Issued Document No Dxxxxxxx Page of Contract No xxxxxx Contract Name SPECIFICATION GUIDANCE NOTES DELETE THESE GUIDANCE NOTES FROM FINAL DOCUMENT AFTER USING FOR REFERENCE All edits to downloaded TDP documents shall be tracked most word processing software allows this to be done automatically .
Clearing for borrow pits access tracks to borrow pits pavement material pits and similar features shall be undertaken in accordance with Specification PITS AND QUARRIES .
At completion of work including pavement construction all table drains and batters and adjacent areas within the limits of clearing shall be cleared of all surplus material rocks and rubbish and removed to nominated spoil sites .
Where material from excavations is suitable for use in embankments but the Contractor elects to Election of Material Usage a spoil it or b use it for the Contractors own purposes or c use it as a source of pavement materials or d construct embankments with dimensions other than those shown on the Drawings or to dimensions as otherwise authorised by the Superintendent and a deficiency of material for embankment construction is thereby created the Contractor shall make good that deficiency from sources of suitable material .
After completion of clearing removal of topsoil and where applicable after removal of the existing seal andor existing pavement and after compaction of the embankment foundation but before the commencement of any other earthworks or culvert work the Superintendent will undertake a digital ground survey in accordance with MRS .
No material resulting from cutting operations of the existing pavement shall be incorporated into the road pavement but may be utilised as oversize material .
The existing seal shall be cut where new pavement is to be blended into existing work or where widening is required .
The Contractor shall ensure that the cut seal edge and the wall of the excavation are not damaged and remain in the specified condition until the pavement stabilisation has been completed .
Where any portion of existing pavement is shown on the Drawings as unused the pavement shall be rehabilitated and the unused pavement including bituminous products and manufactured pavements shall be ripped and removed from the roadway .
Natural gravels used in pavements may be left .
This removal shall be completed with as little disturbance to the underlying pavement as possible . .
Following the removal of the existing seal the exposed surface of the retained pavement shall be prepared to provide a suitable surface prior to the addition of new pavement material .
These levels will be used as the basis for the calculation of the volume of any additional pavement material required to complete the construction of the overlay pavement. . ROCK EXCAVATION .
After the completion of clearing and topsoil removal the material upon which embankment is to be constructed shall be compacted as specified in this Clause to the depth as shown in Annexure B. . Where the embankment is to be founded on the existing road the existing seal shall be cut and removed and the retained pavement prepared in accordance with the Existing Pavement Clause. . Subject to the other requirements of the Contract the existing seal may be incorporated into the embankment foundation by means of a stabiliser to pulverise the seal to size that passes the .mm sieve and compacted in a layer of not less than mm. . No seal material shall be placed within mm of the subgrade surface or batter face . .
Where less than mm is required to be worked the underlying material shall be grader scarified or stabiliser mixed to such a depth that the resulting thickness of the layer to be worked is greater than mm. . Each layer worked shall be generally parallel to the finished pavement surface and shall where practicable extend to the full width of the embankment at that particular level .
Subgrade preparation shall be completed in all areas where a pavement is to be constructed except where the pavement is to be placed directly onto any retained pavement surface . .
The completed subgrade surface shall be maintained in its conforming condition until pavement construction commences and shall be watered as necessary to prevent shrinkage cracking dusting or loosening of its surface. . COMPACTION END PRODUCT SPECIFICATION .
The level of the completed subgrade surface shall be deemed to be conforming when the levels at its junction with the existing pavement are within mm mm of the levels as determined from the total pavement depth making due allowance for the existing crossfall of the pavement .
Unless shown otherwise in the Drawings or in Annexure D all existing redundant pavement shall be ripped and removed as spoil to an authorised waste disposal site in accordance with Specification CLEARING .
The preparatory work required on the retained pavement prior to the overlay being constructed could be paid as a Provisional Sum as the nature and extent of such work is very difficult to price .
This work will vary from contract to contract and could include such items as a trimming off high spots b filling in low spots with additional pavement material c watering and rolling to tighten the exposed pavement surface . .
The questions whether the existing seal may be incorporated into the new pavement and whether any of the existing pavement will be incorporated into the new pavement needs to be considered .
Is it prone to excessive degradation in the mixing process or are there cobbles present in the existing pavement that will lead to rapid wearing or damage of the mixing tynes .. Where the seal is not allowed to be incorporated and mixing is to be carried out by grader only .
.. Over riding the above considerations in terms of the applicability of stabiliser mixing of pavement materials is the nature of the material i.e .
Cutting pulverising mixing adding water and spreading of blended material shall be accomplished using a machine specifically designed for pavement recycling .
A method a total area of the trays m² method b total measured area spread m² T Thickness to be stabilised mm including allowances for tolerances and trimming MDD Maximum Dry Density of the pavement material without the addition of lime kgm³ .
The work under this specification consists of the clearing establishment and reinstatement of pits and quarries or sites for embankment material pavement materials and any other materials to be sourced for the Works. . REFERENCES .
Where fill pavement or any other materials are to be obtained from pits or sites nominated by the Principal site operations shall be in accordance with this Specification .
All garden edging shall be set vertical with the top of the edging set flush with the adjoining surface or pavement .
Grates shall be placed flush with the pavement and guards plumb .
Where a subsoil drain is provided for the drainage of the pavement layer outlets are to be provided as shown on the Drawings .
Where a culvert is constructed under an existing road pavement the pavement on the existing road shall be reinstated by the construction of the appropriate pavement layers with thicknesses as shown on the Drawings .
The pavement layers shall be constructed to the relevant requirements of SPECIFICATION PAVEMENTS .
m. c. the height of fill including pavement between the trafficable surface of the road and the top of the culvert unit or top of the link slab shall not be less than mm and not greater than mm. . For culvert units of mm span or larger with fill heights of up to .
Unless otherwise shown on the Drawings backfill material above subgrade level shall be pavement material placed and compacted in accordance with Specification PAVEMENTS with a testing frequency in accordance with Specification QUALITY SYSTEMS .
Where a structure is constructed within an existing road pavement the pavement on the existing road shall be reinstated by the construction of the appropriate pavement layers with thicknesses as shown in the Drawings .
The pavement layers shall be constructed to the relevant requirements of Specification PAVEMENTS .
Local surface irregularities of the finished surface shall not vary from the prevailing batter slope by more than mm or mm measured at right angles to the slope except for culvert outlet protection which shall not vary by more than mm or mm c On floodways no rock shall project above the shoulder and pavement level. . Rock protection shall present a generally uniform finish with flat surfaces of larger individual spalls facing uppermost comprising the finished surface and thoroughly keyed to the adjoining rocks .
Spikes and nails shall not be driven into the pavement surface . .
The top surface shall be parallel to the ruling grade of the pavement and shall be free from depressions exceeding mm when measured from a m long straight edge .
The Custodian of this specification is Geomechanical and Structural Materials Engineer. . USE OF LOW STRENGTH INFILL .. For redundant or disused pipes and associated drainage structures which are located under roadways or portions of roadways not scheduled for reconstruction the use of a low strength infill is an acceptable alternative to removal and backfilling to avoid unnecessary destruction of an existing pavement .
A portion of the pavement placed and compacted as an entity .
One or more layers of material usually constituting the uppermost structural element of a pavement on which the surfacing may be placed .
The material laid on the Subgrade and below the Basecourse either for the purpose of making up the additional pavement thickness required to prevent intrusion of the Subgrade into the base or to provide a working platform .
The trimmed or prepared portion of the formation on which the pavement is constructed .
Materials for road pavements shall be managed under the sustainability hierarchy of REDUCE REUSE and RECYCLE . .
These materials are a finite resource and waste shall be reduced to a minimum. . Where practical redundant pavement materials should be recovered and reused or otherwise recycled to the highest level use practical .
Recycled materials for pavement construction shall be blended crushed or processed as applicable to produce a homogenous material by a recycling premises licensed by DWER .
Water used in any pavement construction or pavement material manufacture process shall comply with the requirements of Main Roads Western Australia publication Water to be used in Pavement Construction and shall be clean and substantially free from detrimental impurities such as oils salts acids alkalis and vegetable substances .
The source material for the supply of crushed limestone shall be free of organic material clay lumps cap rock or any other foreign material deleterious to its performance in the pavement .
When the stockpiled material contains oversized material the Contractor shall screen the stockpiles to ensure that the pavement material does not contain more than by mass of material retained on a .mm sieve .
Basecourse material having any dimension greater than mm shall be deemed oversize and shall not be delivered to the pavement construction area .
The HCTCRB must be compacted into the pavement in its final position not less than days or greater than days after the addition of cement and water to the CRB i.e .
Pavement construction includes the supply placing compacting and finishing of pavement materials in accordance with the Specifications and Drawings to the prepared Subgrade surface. . Pavement construction shall include construction of stabilised pavements. . Where a drainage layer has been constructed on the prepared Subgrade surface the drainage layer shall be the foundation for the subsequent Pavement Layers .
Prior to the construction of any pavement layer the Contractor shall certify to the Superintendent that the underlying layer has been constructed as specified .
Natural gravels and ferricrete including cement stabilised natural gravels and ferricrete shall not be used as Basecourse material for freeway pavements or future freeway pavements in the metropolitan area .
Pavers including those that utilise transverse augers shall not be used for pavement construction .
Each Pavement Layer worked shall be generally parallel to the finished pavement surface and shall extend the full width of the layer .
The cement stabilised Pavement Layer shall be constructed at the locations shown in Annexure A and to the tolerances and requirements specified for this type of pavement .
It shall be the Contractors responsibility to determine whether preripping the insitu pavement material is necessary .
The cement stabilised Pavement Layer shall contain the proportion of cement as a percentage of the dry mass of pavement material as shown in Annexure A .
A method a total area of the trays m² method b total measured area spread m² T Thickness to be stabilised mm including allowances for tolerances and trimming MDD Maximum Dry Density of the pavement material without the addition of cement kgm³ .
In areas denoted as blend areas or match existing pavement on the drawings the cut edge of the existing bituminous surfacing and the wall of the excavation shall be in accordance with the requirements stated in Specification EARTHWORKS .
The work shall comprise removal of the existing pavement to a sufficient depth to place the new pavement to the required levels shaping and compaction. . Pavement shall be supplied placed and compacted in accordance with this Specification . .
Each Pavement Layer shall be constructed to the dimensions and details shown on the drawings and shall be constructed in accordance with this Specification to satisfy the criteria shown in Annexure A. . Where a pavement material has been supplied by the Contractor the Contractor must undertake required testing of that material sampled from the stockpiles in accordance with Specification QUALITY SYSTEMS to demonstrate that the material complies in all respects with the specified requirements .
Prior to the construction of any Pavement Layer the Contractor shall certify to the Superintendent that the pavement material supplied by the Contractor complies in all respects with the specified requirements .
Where a pavement material has been supplied by the Contractor the Contractor must undertake required testing of that material sampled from the pavement after compaction is completed to demonstrate that the pavement material particle size distribution and linear shrinkage complies with the specified requirements .
Prior to the application of Bituminous Surfacing the Contractor shall certify to the Superintendent that the pavement material supplied by the Contractor complies with the specified linear shrinkage and particle size distribution after compaction into the pavement .
Where the pavement material contains more than by mass of material retained on a .mm sieve the Maximum Dry Density shall be determined on that portion of the material that passes a .mm sieve .
Where the pavement material or the material in the layer mm below the Subgrade contains more than by mass of material retained on a .mm sieve the Optimum Moisture Content and the Maximum Dry Density shall be determined on that portion of the material that passes a .mm sieve .
The outer top edge of any layer of the pavement shall be no closer to the road centreline and no more than mm further away from the road centreline than the positions shown in the drawings . .
Additionally for pavement widening work the crossfall at any position on the new surface measured at right angles to the centreline shall be within .
For pavement widening sections the level of the completed SubBase surface shall be deemed to be conforming when the levels of the SubBase at its junction with the existing pavement are within mm mm of the levels as determined from the Basecourse depth making due allowances for the effect of the existing crossfall of the pavement .
Stabilised Basecourse For pavement widening sections the level of the completed Basecourse surface shall be judged to be acceptable when the levels of the Basecourse at its junction with the existing seal are within mm mm of the top cut edge level of the existing seal .
The layer shall be kept free from contamination until any subsequent pavement work under the Contract is commenced .
The Contractor shall remove all oversize material with any dimension greater than mm and this material shall not be delivered to the pavement construction area .
After the initial crushing any material having any dimension greater than mm shall be deemed to be oversize and shall not be used in pavement construction .
Additional crushing shall then be undertaken until the pavement material does not contain more than by mass of material retained on a .mm sieve .
The section PRODUCTS AND MATERIALS includes commonly used pavement materials .
Other pavement materials should be included under CONTRACT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS and selected as required. . Pavement materials not listed should be researched and approved as required before inclusion. . DRAINAGE LAYER refer Clause . . GEOTEXTILE .
Plastic pavement materials should be moist cured for at least hours before compaction takes place if the in situ or imported Basecourse is in a dry condition .
Insert as a CONTRACT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENT if dieback controls should be included in pavement construction . .
Because lime varies in purity depending on manufacture and strength depending on whether it is quicklime or hydrated lime the optimum lime content must be expressed as a percentage of equivalent pure hydrated lime calcium hydroxide by dry mass of the pavement material .
The process for determining whether Lime modification is appropriate and the required of pure hydrated Lime for pavement modification is a .
Preliminary Binder Selection of the Austroads Guide to Pavement Technology Part D Stabilised Materials to determine if Lime is a suitable additive for the selected pavement material .
HCTCRB should not be specified for pavements with a sprayed seal wearing course or pavements at intersections . .
is suitable to be used as the SubBase layer for Full Depth Asphalt pavements .
The CRC SubBase specification is generally only used in Alliance contracts where the risk of contamination is jointly managed. . RESILIENT MODULUS The basecourse vertical modulus adopted in the pavement design should be inserted in the relevant Table .
Refer to the pavement design for the appropriate criterion .
If it is likely that existing pavement material will be reused as SubBase compliance to the appropriate SubBase specifications is applicable. . CONTRACT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS The following clauses are to be placed under the CONTRACT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS as required .
Where pavement materials are supplied by the Principal details of such materials are provided in Specification GENERAL REQUIREMENTS Annexure E. Specification Pavements Issued Document No DXXXXXX Page of Contract No XXXXX Contract Name .
If the pavement material is made available from borrow pits any removed vegetation or material that is discarded may be stockpiled separately and used later in pit reinstatement in accordance with Specification PITS AND QUARRIES .
When the stockpiled material contains oversized material the Contractor shall screen the stockpiles to ensure that the pavement material does not contain more than by mass of material retained on a .mm sieve .
Basecourse material having any dimension greater that mm shall be deemed oversize and shall not be used in pavement construction .
Any oversize material discarded in the stockpile area or any oversize material discarded from the pavement shall be removed to be stockpiled in borrow pits and respread evenly over the pit excavation area prior to the rehabilitation of the Pit. . Access tracks to pavement material stockpiles and pits shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with Specification PITS AND QUARRIES .
The pavement material shall be stabilised with lime for the sections and to the compacted depths shown either in Annexure A or as shown on the Drawings. . Stabilisation shall include preliminary loosening of the Pavement Layer mixing and compacting the pavement material as necessary spreading lime over the area to be treated and the thorough blending of insitu pavement material lime and water as required to produce a homogeneous stabilised layer over the specified lengths and widths . .
Cutting pulverising mixing adding water and spreading of blended material shall be accomplished using a machine specifically designed for pavement recycling .
Specification Pavements Issued Document No DXXXXXX Page of Contract No XXXXX Contract Name A method a total area of the trays m² method b total measured area spread m² T Thickness to be stabilised mm including allowances for tolerances and trimming MDD Maximum Dry Density of the pavement material without the addition of lime kgm³ .
The work under this specification consists of the supply and application of stone mastic asphalt hereafter referred to as asphalt as a pavement wearing course . .
The works shall include surface preparation supply of materials production hauling placing and compaction of asphalt to the areas as shown in the Drawings or as otherwise directed by the Superintendent but not including correction of existing pavement surfaces .
Reclaimed asphalt pavement RAP shall not be included in the production of any stone mastic asphalt .
The Superintendent may direct the pavement area ahead of the asphalt paver to be resprayed and may specify the time to be allowed between the spraying of tack coat and the placing of asphalt .
Longitudinal joints shall be continuous and parallel to the pavement lane markings .
The rolling shall start longitudinally at the sides and proceed towards the centre of the pavement overlapping on successive passes by at least mm .
Rollers shall be kept in continuous operation as much as practicable and in such a manner that all parts of the pavement receive substantially equal compaction .
Stone Mastic Asphalt provides guidance on the selection and use of SMA including tie in to an existing surfacing or pavement .
The sprayed bituminous treatment must provide a durable surface that Intent a. bonds to the underlying surface whether base course concrete or another bituminous surfacing treatment b. provides a safe wearing surface for traffic and c. waterproofs the pavement or structure. . Where applicable for sealing and resealing works a separate Schedule of Works is included at Annexure A which provides details of specific surfacing treatments .
The units shall be a mechanically or power driven roller broom capable of removing excess cover material andor other loose material from the pavement surface without damage to the existing primerseal or seal surface . .
The pavement surface shall be swept clean of all loose sand stones dust and other foreign matter before surfacing .
Loose material shall be swept a sufficient distance off the pavement to permit execution of the bituminous binder . .
Where the pavement surface is a primed basecourse a seal asphalt or microsurfacing the surface shall be swept clean of all loose sand stones dust and other foreign matter before surfacing .
Loose material shall be swept a sufficient distance off the pavement to permit execution of the bitumen surfacing. . A minimum of one hour prior to application of the bituminous binder the Contractor shall certify to the Superintendent that any required sweeping andor necessary repairs of the underlying surface have been completed and that the surface is suitable to receive the seal .
Where encountered in resealing works the Contractor shall remove and dispose of existing raised pavement markers both permanent and temporary prior to resealing .
The pavement markers shall only be removed at the commencement of works for the day and shall be removed only from the section to be resealed on that day .
Any area of the pavement damaged by the Contractor shall be repaired by the Contractor at no cost to the Principal .
Where the pavement surface to be sealed has been produced by cold planning the surface shall be swept clean of all loose sand stones dust and other foreign matter before surfacing .
Loose material shall be swept a sufficient distance off the pavement to permit execution of the bitumen surfacing. . At the completion of the cold planning surface being swept and prior to the application of the bituminous binder the Contractor shall certify to the Superintendent that the cold planed surface complies with the surface finish requirements as described in Specification COLD PLANING and that the surface is suitable to receive the bituminous binder .
No binder shall be applied whilst the pavement surface temperature is less than Weather a .
When applied during nightworks the pavement temperature for the next day shall be a minimum of C or c. C for primes or primerseals . .
The mechanical spreader shall be fitted with removable cutoff attachments to allow the aggregate spread width to match the required width on the pavement .
Binder shall be applied only when the pavement temperature is between C and C. Application of emulsion at a temperature above C shall only be done when it can be shown by demonstration that the emulsion will not form a skin or break rapidly .
The aggregate shall be applied commencing at the low edge of the pavement in successive runs parallel to that edge .
f. All loose aggregate not incorporated in the mat at the completion of rolling and brooming shall be removed from the pavement prior to the application of the binder for the second coat but after the binder has completely broken and cured .
Where approved by the Superintendent Medium Curing Cutting Oil shall be added to Class Bitumen used for seals and reseals depending on pavement surface temperature at the time of sealing as shown in Figure C Addition of Medium Curing Cutting Oil .
Medium Curing Cutting Oil shall be added to the binder for primerseals as shown in Table C. Specification Bituminous Surfacing Issued Document No DXXXXXX Page of Contract No XXXXX Contract Name FIGURE C ADDITION OF MEDIUM CURING CUTTING OIL LEGEND Line A Class bitumen Note Minimum desirable pavement temperature for seals and reseals is C. Note If the anticipated pavement temperature is likely to rise decrease the Medium Curing Cutting Oil percentage obtained from the chart .
.. Where a doubledouble emulsion primerseal is used for a new pavement the typical treatment is First Coat mm crushed aggregate usually Perth granite BAR .
The work under this specification consists of the supply and application of dense graded and open graded hotmixed or warm mixed asphalt for pavement wearing courses except for Stone Mastic Asphalt which is addressed in Specification STONE MASTIC ASPHALT .
Asphalt used in an asphalt pavement is addressed in Specification ASPHALT INTERMEDIATE COURSE . .
The works shall include surface preparation supply of materials production hauling placing and compaction of asphalt to the areas as shown in the Drawings or as otherwise directed by the Superintendent including correction of existing pavement surfaces. . REFERENCES .
asphalt layer comprises a single paving run of uniform asphalt. . asphalt wearing courses is that part of the pavement upon which the traffic travels including any dense graded asphalt course immediately below a course of open graded asphalt. . asphalt pavement is a pavement the predominate structural strength of which is provided by asphalt layers. . reclaimed asphalt pavement RAP is the material reclaimed from an asphalt wearing or intermediate course by cold planning and reprocessed by crushing andor screening for recycling into new asphalt .
The Superintendent may direct the pavement area ahead of the paver to be resprayed and may specify the time to be allowed between the spraying of tack coat and the placing of asphalt .
Asphalt placement shall not commence or continue upon a surface which is not clean and dry and only when the pavement temperature meets the requirements shown in Table .
PAVEMENT TEMPERATURES FOR PLACEMENT Mix Type Binder in Mix Minimum pavement temperature when wind speed kmhr Minimum pavement temperature when wind speed kmhr OGA AE C C OGA AE with Sasobit C C DGA C bitumen C C DGA C bitumen with Sasobit C C DGA Polymer Modified Binder C C DGA Polymer Modified Binder with Sasobit C C . The Superintendent may if the weather or surface conditions are considered to be unsuitable instruct the Contractor to cease laying operations .
Longitudinal joints shall be continuous and parallel to the pavement centreline .
The rolling shall start longitudinally at the sides and proceed towards the centre of the pavement overlapping on successive passes by at least mm .
Rollers shall be kept in continuous operation as much as practicable and in such a manner that all parts of the pavement receive substantially equal compaction .
The Works shall include but shall not be restricted to a. supply transportation and storage of bitumen emulsion b. supply and blending of dilution water c. preparation of pavement surface where required d. application of diluted emulsion to the pavement surface e. application of cover aggregate where required f. cleanup of the Site. . REFERENCES .
This is to ensure that there is sufficient time after spraying and before sunset for the emulsion to penetrate the pavement and break before traffic is permitted on the newly sprayed works .
Application shall take place only when the pavement temperature is between C and C. Binder shall not be applied if there is excessive wind or if rain is imminent .
No setting out marks will be provided but the Contractor shall uniformly cover the pavement at the rates specified or ordered .
Prior to any application of slurry the pavement shall be swept to ensure that the surface is free from loose material stones dirt dust and foreign matter .
Spreading the slurry shall not commence until the pavement has been prepared in accordance with the Specification and approved by the Superintendent .
The Contractor shall repair surface defects including crack patching pothole repairs and repairs to failed pavement as detailed in Annexure A Schedule of Works or as directed by the Superintendent prior to the spreading of slurry .
The slurry shall not be applied if either the pavement or air temperature is below C and falling .
However slurry may be applied when both the pavement and air temperatures are above C and rising .
The cost of all replacement or correction works including any restoration work to the underlying or adjacent pavement surface or structure shall be borne by the Contractor .
The temporary raised pavement markers shall be either Swarovski Mini star art .
The depth of cut and transverse crossfall shall be adjusted as required during planing. . Each days planing shall be completed transversely across the full pavement width .
The work shall be carried out by a pavement profiling machine which has been specifically designed for such work .
Generally the final cut edge of the existing pavement surface shall be straight and free of all loose material . .
The pavement profiler shall not profile closer than mm to the nearest edge of any bridge expansion joints .
The Contractor shall be responsible for the removal and disposal of raised pavement markers both permanent and temporary prior to surface treatment .
The pavement markers shall only be removed at the commencement of works for each day and shall be removed only from the section to be cold planed that day . .
The Contractor shall also be responsible for the supply and installation of temporary raised pavement markers on all areas cold planed prior to the area being opened to traffic .
The temporary raised pavement markers shall be a. singlesided white b. placed on all lane and edge lines at m intervals .
The Contractor shall be responsible for repairing and sealing the surface of any road pavement or bridge deck exposed by planing operations .
Any area of road pavement exposed by cold planing operations shall be sealed and if necessary corrected prior to subsequent work or opening to traffic. . Pavement surface damage up to a depth of mm shall be repaired as follows a. remove all loose material by hand or mechanical brooming b. spray cationic rapid setting emulsion evenly at a rate of approximately .
The sprayed polymer modified bituminous treatment must provide a durable surface that Intent a. bonds to the underlying surface whether a primed basecourse or concrete surface a seal or asphalt b. provides a safe wearing surface for traffic and c. waterproofs the pavement or bridge deck. . Where applicable a separate Schedule of Works is included at Annexure A which provides details of specific surfacing treatments .
The units shall be a mechanically or power driven roller broom capable of removing excess cover material andor other loose material from the pavement surface without damage to the existing primerseal or seal surface .
Where the pavement to be sealed is a seal microsurfacing asphalt or a primed basecourse the surface shall be swept clean of all loose sand stones dust and other foreign matter before the new surfacing is applied .
Loose material shall be swept a sufficient distance off the pavement to permit execution of the bituminous surfacing. . On a primed basecourse the Contractor shall set out and mark the edge of the binder at a position to achieve the specified tolerances and to suit the method of work employed .
Where encountered the Contractor shall remove and dispose off site existing raised pavement markers both permanent and temporary prior to spraying .
The pavement markers shall only be removed at the commencement of works for the day and shall be removed only from the section to be resealed on that day .
Any depression left by the removal of a raised pavement marker shall be repaired with coldmix to a level flush with the existing seal .
Where the pavement surface to be sealed has been produced by cold planning the surface shall be swept clean of all loose sand stones dust and other foreign matter before surfacing .
Loose material shall be swept a sufficient distance off the pavement to permit execution of the bitumen surfacing. . At the completion of the cold planning surface being swept and prior to the application of the bituminous binder the Contractor shall certify to the Superintendent that the cold planed surface complies with the surface finish requirements as described in Specification COLD PLANING and that the surface is suitable to receive the bituminous binder .
Depending upon the anticipated pavement temperature medium curing cutting oil shall be added to the binder .
Assessment of pavement temperature shall take into account the presence of shaded areas .
Lm no cutter is required above a pavement temperature of C and the cutter content below C is reduced by C. Specification Polymer Modified Bituminous Surfacing Issued Document No DXXXXXX Page of Contract No XXXXX Contract Name .
No binder shall be applied whilst the pavement surface temperature is less than C. Weather Minimum Pavement Temperature .
The mechanical spreader shall be fitted with removable cutoff attachments to allow the aggregate spread width to match the required width on the pavement .
asphalt base course is one or more layers of asphalt within a full depth asphalt pavement immediately below the asphalt intermediate course .
asphalt course comprises one or more layers of a single asphalt type. . asphalt intermediate course is that part of a pavement which rests on the asphalt base course subgrade improved subgrade or subbase and is below the asphalt wearing courses. . asphalt layer comprises a single paving run of uniform asphalt. . asphalt pavement is a pavement the predominate structural strength of which is provided by asphalt layers. . asphalt wearing courses is that part of the pavement upon which the traffic travels including any dense graded asphalt course immediately below a course of open graded asphalt. . full depth asphalt pavement is a pavement in which asphalt is used for all courses above the subgrade improved subgrade or subbase. . reclaimed asphalt pavement RAP is the material reclaimed from an asphalt wearing or intermediate course by cold planning and reprocessed by crushing andor screening for recycling into new asphalt .
The asphalt shall incorporate aggregates binder filler and adhesion agent to produce an asphalt mix design that satisfies all specified requirements shall be resistant to segregation during handling and placing shall have low permeability and shall have adequate workability to achieve the specified levels of compaction in the asphalt pavement. . For the purpose of asphalt mix design Class bitumen shall be used for the design of both mm and mm dense graded asphalt .
Type C Production of asphalt at a lower temperature warm mix such as placement of multiple layers in an asphalt pavement in one shift of work .
The pavement layer below the first layer of asphalt shall have a uniform texture with a tightly bonded surface and be primed .
The Superintendent may direct the pavement area ahead of the spreader to be resprayed and may specify the time to be allowed between the spraying of tack coat and the placing of asphalt .
Asphalt placement shall not commence or continue upon a surface which is not clean and dry and only when the pavement temperature meets the requirements shown in Table .. Pavement Temperature Specification Asphalt Intermediate Course Issued Document No DXXXXXX Page of Contract No XXXXX Contract Name TABLE .
PAVEMENT TEMPERATURES FOR PLACEMENT Binder in Mix Minimum pavement temperature when wind speed kmhr Minimum pavement temperature when wind speed kmhr C Bitumen C C C Bitumen C C C bitumen with Sasobit C C Polymer Modified Binder C C Polymer Modified Binder with Sasobit C C Polymer Modified Binder C C Polymer Modified Binder with Sasobit C C . Where asphalt intermediate course is exposed to rainfall or surface water before the sprayed seal is applied to the mm mm asphalt intermediate course and the insitu air void content has an upper characteristic value greater than .
Where new pavement abuts an existing pavement the existing pavement shall be removed in steps to achieve an offset from layer to layer of not less than mm Position .
The outer mm in width from the top of the compacted asphalt layer shall be removed using a cutter or cold planer except for edges of the pavement that will not form a joint .
Rollers shall be kept in continuous operation as much as practicable and in such a manner that all parts of the pavement receive substantially equal compaction .
The Characteristic Insitu Air Voids shall be determined for each layer of intermediate course asphalt placed within an asphalt pavement in accordance with Specification QUALITY SYSTEMS .
The quantity of bitumen emulsion heated shall be that quantity that is to be applied to the pavement within six hours of the heating being carried out .
RAP shall not contain any of the following materials a. Granular pavement materials clay soil or organic matter b. Bricks concrete glass or building materials c. Laterite asphalt tar based products geotextile fabrics raised pavement markers or road surface treatments such as high friction surfacings or coloured pavement markings .
Retroreflective Materials and Devices for Road Traffic Control Purposes Retroreflective Devices Nonpavement Application .
Permanent road safety barrier systems shall not be erected until after all earthworks pavement and backfill works have been completed . .
they shall be erected perpendicular to the pavement unless specified otherwise on the Drawings .
For road safety barrier systems but not for traffic barriers for structures the foundation for barriers shall be a minimum mm thickness of pavement material compacted as a minimum to the density in accordance with the requirements for pavements as detailed in Specification PAVEMENTS as shown on the Drawings or unless otherwise detailed .
The work under this specification provides the minimum requirements for the supply installation and maintenance of road pavement markings and raised pavement markers. . REFERENCES .
Road pavement marking shall consist of a painting longitudinal road markings using white andor yellow road marking paint .
Painting b the installation of longitudinal lines transverse lines and other markings ie holding lines turn arrows chevron pavement markings using a long life thermoplastic or cold applied plastic material .
The paint shall be suitable for application by air assisted and airless road pavement line marking machines without the addition of thinning liquids .
Constituent s . Thermoplastic road marking material shall comply with AS .. . Thermoplastic used for audio tactile pavement markings shall comply with AS .
Retroflective raised pavement markers shall comply with AS .. Retro reflective Markers .. ADHESIVE FOR RAISED PAVEMENT MARKERS .
Temporary pavement markers shall be either Swarovski Mini star art .
Road marking materials shall not be applied during wet weather or when the road pavement is wet or when adverse weather conditions may prevail during the work .
Drop on glass beads shall be applied to all thermoplastic and cold applied plastic pavement markings at the rate of gmsm Application Rate for Thermo plastic .
Dropon glass beads shall be applied to all Thermoplastic and Cold Applied Plastic pavement markings at the rate of gmsm .
Raised pavement markers shall be fixed to the adhesive within five seconds of the adhesive being applied .
The lateral spread of adhesive after a raised pavement marker is fixed shall be within mm and mm of the outside extremities of the base of the marker .
Raised pavement markers shall be aligned such that the retroreflective surfaces of the marker are angled between º to º to the direction of oncoming traffic .
The lateral divergence of raised pavement markers shall be within mm .
The longitudinal spacing of raised pavement markers shall be within mm .
Where required raised pavement markers shall be removed by breaking the bond between the adhesive the road surface and the base of the raised pavement marker .
Where damage to the road surface occurs during the raised pavement marker removal process the resulting divot shall be repaired by the Contractor at no cost to the Principal .
All divots caused by the removal of the raised pavement markers on aggregate seal surfaces or greater than mm deep on asphalt surfaces and no larger than the area of the raised pavement marker itself shall be filled with either hot melt adhesive or epoxy adhesive to the level of the surrounding pavement to a tolerance of or mm .
Air blasting equipment shall be used to clean every deep divot. . Any divots of greater size or depth than in clause above or where any disturbance of the pavement basecourse occurs shall be repaired as for potholes .
To assist the management of traffic temporary pavement markers shall be installed on all areas of cold planed asphalt or spray seal surfaced prior to the areas being temporarily opened to traffic .
Traffic Managemen t . Temporary raised pavement markers shall be regarded as incidental to the control of traffic and shall be removed and replaced with permanent markers as soon as the final road surface is completed and ready to receive the permanent markers .
Temporary pavement markers shall be aligned such that the retroreflective surfaces of the marker are angled between to degrees to the direction of oncoming traffic .
Subject to Clause above the lateral divergence of temporary pavement markers shall be within mm .
The longitudinal spacing of temporary pavement markers shall be within mm .
For aggregate seal pavement surfaces existing road line and pavement markings no longer required shall be concealed by the application of a cutback bitumen and mm crushed aggregate overspray .
For other pavement markings the overspray area shall be the minimum rectangular area required to cover the existing marking .
The timing of this treatment shall be coordinated with the commissioning of the new works and application of new pavement markings to minimise the impact on road users .
The cover material shall be mm crushed aggregate applied at a rate of m²m³ and should match as far as possible the colour of the surrounding pavement surface .
Road markings shall be removed by grinding such that the road marking is removed without damage to the underlying road pavement. . Damage to the seal surface shall be repaired by the Contractor at no cost to the Principal .
Road markings designated in the Contract shall be removed by wet sandblasting such that the road marking is removed without damage to the underlying road pavement . .
All materials and application processes used for the maintenance of existing road pavement markings shall comply with this Specification . .
RESPONSE TIMES The Contract shall nominate minimum response times for the installation or modification to pavement markings .
Where existing pavement markings are to be removed or covered the Contract shall specify the required method to be used .
In all instances where removal or cover of existing pavement markings is required permanent removal by overlay of the road pavement is the preferred option as it provides a new surface for the new markings without compromising safety .
Unless there is a concentration of pavement markings in one area i.e .
When choosing an alternative method of pavement marking removal or cover the following points should be considered a Is the removalcover temporary or permanent b Will the chosen method achieve the desired result in both the short and long term without excessive maintenance c Will the safety of road traffic be compromised i.e .
Where a crossing is under the road pavement the crossing shall be installed by directional drilling .
Under no circumstances shall the pavement or surfacing be cut to install the crossing .
Disturbed pavement surfaces for nonmotorised traffic such as concrete or brick paved areas and pathways shall be reinstated to original condition to the satisfaction of the Main Roads Project Manager .
Where a crossing is under the road pavement the crossing shall be installed by directional drilling .
Under no circumstances shall the pavement or surfacing be cut to install the crossing .
When installed in paved areas pit lids shall be at the same level as the surrounding pavement surface and positioned flush with the surrounding pavement surface to avoid the edge becoming a tripping hazard .
Approved under road boring techniques shall be used for road crossings under existing road pavement and railway reserves .
Existing road crossings for cable conduits are at locations and at depths below the pavement as shown on the drawings .
Disturbed pavement surfaces for nonmotorised traffic such as concrete or brick paved areas and pathways shall be reinstated to original condition to the satisfaction of the Main Roads Project Manager .
Disturbed pavement surfaces for nonmotorised traffic such as concrete or brickpaved areas and pathways shall be reinstated to original condition to the satisfaction of the MAIN ROADS Representative .
Before any pavement excavation is commenced the limits of the trench shall be precut with a diamond concrete saw to a depth of not less than mm .
Backfill shall be excavated material free from rocks clay stones sections of pavement material or organic and perishable matter and shall be of uniform composition and moisture content .
The material shall be compacted to the bottom of the pavement under trafficable areas or natural surface in other areas to a Characteristic Dry Density Ratio CDDR of or blows using the Perth Sand Penetrometer .
Finished Surface If the final asphalt is not placed the same day as backfilling BSL shall be used laid to mm above the pavement surface .
The Traffic Signal Controller shall be installed on a concrete footing or smooth pavement material that matches the surrounding pavement .
c Smooth pavement material that matches the surrounding area .
The road pavement shall have slots cut to a depth of mm minimum using a single mm wide diamond saw .
Before cables are placed the slot shall be clean and dried so that no moisture detritus dust and other foreign matter remains in the slot. . A mm grey corrugated conduit shall be installed between the end of the saw cuts in the pavement and the loop pit behind the kerb .
The ends of the loops are brought into a Loop Pit located near the kerb. . A conduit must be installed between the end of the saw cuts in the pavement and the Loop Pit .
g All other traffic signal equipment excluding push buttons shall be mounted such that there is at least .m from MAIN ROADS Western Australia Specification Traffic Signals Page of Contract xxxxx Document Issue the underside of the traffic signal equipment to the final pavement or ground surface at the post or supporting structure .
The mounting heights set out above may be varied with the approval of the Superintendent but there must always be at least .m from the underside of the target board or any other traffic signal item to the final pavement or ground surface at the post .
Every vehicle lantern shall be attached to the post so as to enable it to be aimed at a point located at a height of .m above the pavement surface .
No part of any flexible exposed conduit shall be less than .m above pavement level .
The existing road pavement or concrete deck overlay shall be removed from one half of the bridge at a time .
Details of the machine proposed to strip the existing road pavement or concrete overlay and all structural checks shall be submitted to the Superintendent for approval at least weeks prior to intended use .
The Contractor shall arrange the adjustment of the road surface levels at the approach slabs and expansion joints prior to opening each half of the overlay to traffic. . A minimum m length of transition shall be applied beyond each end of the bridge as required to transition between the finished overlay or approach slab levels and existing road pavement levels .
Make up of road level shall made good by use of road pavement material similar to existing. . SITE CLEANUP .
