Fat Spot means an area of pavement substantially blacker than the surrounding pavement .
Segregation means a condition of the pavement characterized by areas with comparatively coarser or finer texture than that of the surrounding pavement. . SUBMISSION AND DESIGN REQUIREMENTS ..
SCOPE This specification covers the requirements for the construction of concrete pavement and concrete base. . REFERENCES This specification refers to the following standards specifications or publications Ontario Provincial Standard Specifications Construction OPSS Untreated Granular Subbase Base Surface Shoulder and Stockpiling OPSS Full Depth Repair of Concrete Pavement and Concrete Base OPSS Partial Depth Repairs in Concrete Pavement OPSS Sealing or Resealing of Joints and Cracks in Concrete Pavement OPSS Concrete Structures OPSS Steel Reinforcement for Concrete OPSS Waterproofing Bridge Decks with Hot Applied Asphalt Membrane OPSS Formwork and Falsework Ontario Provincial Standard Specifications Material OPSS Aggregates Concrete OPSS Water OPSS Moisture Vapour Barriers OPSS Burlap OPSS Joint Filler Concrete OPSS White Pigmented Curing Compounds for Concrete OPSS Concrete Materials and Production OPSS Load Transfer Assemblies OPSS Epoxy Coated Steel Reinforcement for Concrete Page Rev .
DEFINITIONS For the purposes of this specification the following definitions shall apply Concrete Pavement means a rigid pavement structure with an exposed concrete surface which may include concrete shoulders .
Concrete Base means a rigid pavement structure which is overlaid with asphaltic concrete on the same contract and may include concrete shoulders .
Standard Deviation means the square root of the value found by summing the squares of the difference between each test result and the mean of the test results divided by the number of test results minus one. . SUBMISSION AND DESIGN REQUIREMENTS Where concrete pavement or concrete base is to be placed from October to April the Contractor must submit a plan detailing curing and protection plans .
The coarse aggregate for concrete pavement and concrete base shall have a combined gradation of nominal maximum size .
c. For all concrete pavement and concrete base the air content shall be .
.. Diamond Grinder Where a diamond grinder is used it shall be powerdriven selfpropelled equipment specifically designed to grind and texture concrete pavement and concrete base .
Construction joints in adjacent lanes of pavement shall align with joints in the previously placed lane .
Position and Alignment Tolerances Dowel Bars The dowel bars shall be placed within a tolerance of mm in the vertical and horizontal planes of the pavement .
When an automatic dowel bar inserter is used the Contractor shall be required to remove a m x full paver width section of concrete pavement or concrete base within the first days paving .
Any excess concrete beyond the pavement edge shall be removed immediately .
For slipform pavers the concrete shall be consolidated by vibrators of sufficient number spacing and frequency to provide uniform consolidation to the entire pavement width and depth .
Date OPSS For concrete pavements where fixed forms are being used or where concrete is being placed against an existing pavement and before surface texturing the edge of the pavement shall be finished with an edging tool having a radius of not more than mm .
The finished pavement edge shall be left smooth true to line and grade .
Texturing of Surface After all finishing operations are completed on concrete pavements and before initial curing and protection of the concrete the plastic surface of the concrete shall receive an initial and final texturing .
Grooving shall extend to within mm mm of the pavement edge .
Surface Tolerance The surface of the concrete is to be such that when tested with a m long straightedge placed in any location and direction including the edge of pavement except across the crown or drainage gutters there shall not be a gap greater than mm between the bottom of the straightedge and the surface of the pavement .
The concrete pavement shall be protected from damage to the surface at all times when steeltracked equipment is used .
Cold Weather Concrete shall not be placed when the ambient air temperature is below C and shall not be placed against any material whose temperature is below C. The Contractor shall provide protection to ensure the minimum inplace temperature of the concrete pavement or concrete base is C for the first three days of curing and at C for the subsequent days .
Insulation Removal for Sawcutting When the concrete pavement or concrete base requires protection by insulation no more than linear metres of concrete pavement or concrete base shall be exposed for sawcutting operations at any one time .
In no case shall any concrete pavement or concrete base be exposed for more than one hour during sawcutting .
Concrete Base General The work required for concrete base includes the work required for concrete pavement except as modified by this subsection .
The cores shall be mm in diameter and shall be drilled through the complete depth of concrete pavement or concrete base perpendicular to the surface of the slab .
Acceptance Criteria for Strength and Thickness General Acceptance of the concrete pavement or concrete base for each lot will be based on the mean and standard deviation of the lot measurements for core compressive strength and slab thickness .
Lot Size Compressive Strength and Thickness A lot shall consist of the total quantity of concrete pavement or concrete base on the contract of the same specified thickness .
Date OPSS Removal of Unacceptable Concrete If individual sublot results for core compressive strength or thickness of concrete pavement or concrete base dictates removal and replacement of a sublot additional cores shall be taken by the Contractor to establish the extent of the deficient area .
The cores shall be taken at m intervals along the length of the pavement in both directions starting m from the location of the original core .
The area to be removed shall be bounded by the nearest contraction joint and longitudinal joint or concrete pavement or concrete base edge outside the deficient area so that there shall be no additional joints .
MEASUREMENT FOR PAYMENT .. Actual Measurement Concrete Pavement Concrete Base Measurement will be the surface area of concrete pavement or concrete base placed in square metres .
For concrete pavement and concrete base PF strength .
SCOPE This specification covers the requirements for inplace rubblizing of concrete pavement or concrete base and compaction of the rubblized concrete .
DEFINITIONS For the purpose of this specification the following definitions apply Concrete Base means a rigid pavement structure that is overlaid with asphaltic concrete on the same Contract and may include concrete shoulders .
Concrete Pavement means a rigid pavement structure with an exposed concrete surface that may include concrete shoulders .
Date OPSS Rubblizing means the thorough fracturing of plain or reinforced concrete slabs with or without dowels to produce an inplace material for use as a base or subbase. . MATERIAL .. Granular A Granular A shall be according to OPSS . . EQUIPMENT .. Rubblizing The rubblizing equipment shall be a selfcontained selfpropelled resonant frequency pavement breaking unit capable of producing high frequency low amplitude blows with a minimum impact energy of Newtons at a rate of not less than impacts per second .
The equipment shall be capable of rubblizing concrete pavement and concrete base inplace .
Operational Constraints All new and existing pavement drainage systems shall be fully operational for two weeks prior to rubblizing .
Construction traffic shall be limited on the rubblized surface and the compacted condition of the rubblized pavement shall be maintained prior to placing the overlying material .
A full depth saw cut shall be made along an existing joint at all ramps and mainline pavement where rubblized concrete abuts pavement that is to remain in place .
All dowels between the planned rubblizing and concrete pavement to remain in place shall be severed .
In areas where the roadway is to be overlaid with hot mix asphalt one lane at a time rubblizing shall extend a minimum of cm beyond the edge of pavement to be overlaid .. Compaction of Granular A Compaction of Granular A shall be according to OPSS .
MEASUREMENT FOR PAYMENT .. Actual Measurement Rubblizing of Concrete Pavement Rubblizing of Concrete Base Measurement of rubblizing of concrete pavement and concrete base shall be by area in square metres .
Designer ActionConsiderations Other concrete pavement rehabilitation treatments should be considered prior to specifying rubblizing .
This specification is written as a method specification identifying a unique process incorporating a resonant frequency pavement breaker .
When greater gradation control is required of the final product full depth removal of the concrete pavement and offsite crushing is recommended .
Operations should be staged so that the lateral pavement edge support remains in place until the rubblizing operations are completed .
Date OPSS a Remove existing curb and gutter and existing pavement by saw cutting to the limits shown in the Contract Documents .
d Adjustment of frame and grate to suit final pavement elevations shall be according to OPSS .
Cover in trenches and in other locations where pavements require controlled differential settlement shall be of a type and compaction level to control pavement differential settlement within acceptable limits for the specified type of pavement .
The surface course of the type specified in the Contract Documents shall be placed on the prepared base course to the dimensions specified in the Contract Documents in accordance as follows a Asphalt pavement shall be according to OPSS or OPSS as specified in the Contract Documents .
.. OPSS or OPSS for asphalt pavement .
When temporary watermains cross over the roadway the asphalt pavement shall be saw cut and removed and the temporary watermain shall be buried .
SCOPE This specification covers the requirements for the application of pavement markings onto bituminous or concrete pavement .
DEFINITIONS For the purpose of this specification the following definitions shall apply Durable Pavement Markings refer to pavement markings produced by either thermoplastics field reacted polymer or a preformed plastic tape of durable type .
Field Reacted Polymeric Pavement Marking Material refers to a pavement marking material consisting of two separate components a polymerizable component and a curing agent or a polymerization catalyst .
Pavement Markings refer to markings on pavements used to delineate vehicle operating limits on highways and streets conforming to the size and shape as specified in the MUTCD .
Permanent Pavement Markings refer to pavement markings placed other than Temporary Pavement Markings or short term pavement markings .
Premarking refers to the indicating marks required to identify the position of pavement markings .
Short Term Pavement Markings refer to the markings placed prior to the placement of permanent pavement markings on any milled levelling binder or top course pavements where existing lane widths arrangements and alignments are maintained .
Temporary Pavement Markings refer to pavement markings placed on temporary roadway surfaces or alignments during construction .
Temporary Pavement Marking Material refers to pavement marking materials designed to maintain a service life of a minimum of three months .
Temporary Pavement Markings Removable refer to pavement markings using materials designed to be removed after use .
Traffic Paint refers to a paint specifically formulated for use as a pavement marking .
DESIGN AND SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS .. General Onelitre samples of solvent based andor water borne paint g samples of thermoplastics g sample of field reacted polymeric materials with an adequate amount of catalyst or curing agent one metre section of preformed pavement marking tape and a g sample of reflectorizing glass beads to be used on the contract shall be supplied to the Authority one month prior to use prepaid by the Contractor .
.. Thermoplastic Pavement Marking Materials Thermoplastic pavement marking materials shall conform to OPSS .
.. Field Reacted Polymeric Pavement Marking Materials Field reacted polymeric pavement marking materials shall conform to OPSS .
.. Preformed Plastic Pavement Marking Tape Preformed plastic pavement marking tape shall conform to OPSS .
EQUIPMENT .. General The equipment to be used for application or installation of pavement markings shall be as recommended by the manufacturer of the respective pavement marking material .
Spray equipment shall be fabricated from materials that will not contaminate the traffic paint and other pavement marking materials .
The equipment shall have the capability to provide pavement markings conforming to the MUTCD .
Preformed plastic tape shall be installed conforming to the manufacturers recommendations. . CONSTRUCTION .. General As part of the work the Contractor shall supply pavement marking and symbols conforming to the applicable shapes and sizes as outlined in the MUTCD .
The Contractor shall apply the pavement marking and symbols conforming to the contract drawings when provided MUTCD and the manufacturers recommendations .
The work of pavement marking includes providing samples of materials for testing for conformity to the appropriate material specification surface preparation pavement marking obliterating premarking application of temporary short term and permanent pavement markings .
Where the pavement marking scheme is not shown in the contract drawings it shall conform to the MUTCD or be provided by the Authority .
Surface Preparation The pavement surface must be clean and dry .
Contaminants such as dirt loose asphalt particles and oily residue shall be removed prior to application of pavement marking .
.. Premarking The Contractor shall provide the necessary measurements required to establish the position of all pavement markings .
Temporary pavement marking shall be placed on temporary road surfaces prior to the opening to the general public conforming to MUTCD or as specified in the contract .
.. Short Term Pavement Marking Short term pavement marking is required when a paved roadway is to be opened to the general public prior to the application of permanent pavement markings .
As part of the work of pavement marking the Contractor shall apply short term pavement markings for the centreline and lane lines .
Short term pavement markings shall be applied conforming to MUTCD and as amended by Table .
Short term pavement markings shall not conflict with permanent pavement markings .
Short term pavement markings placed on final surface course shall be of the removable type .
A temporary raised pavement marker may be used in place of one .
Permanent Pavement Marking Permanent pavement marking includes surface preparation premarking short term pavement marking removal of short term pavement markings and placement of permanent pavement markings .
When permanent pavement markings can not be placed prior to the opening to traffic Freeways Major and Minor Roadways must have short term pavement markings conforming to Division C of the MUTCD and as amended by Table .
Permanent pavement markings must be in place and maintained prior to any winter shut down .
When the item Pavement Marking Durable or Pavement Marking Symbols Durable is called for the Contractors choice of material is restricted to durable preformed plastic tape field reacted polymeric pavement marking material thermoplastic pavement marking material When the item Pavement Marking Temporary or Pavement Marking Symbols Temporary is called for the Contractor may choose from all marking materials .
When the item Pavement Marking Temporary Removable or Pavement Marking Symbols Temporary Removable is called for the Contractors choice of material is restricted to temporary preformed removable pavement marking tape .
Selection of pavement marking material for use on a particular type of pavement surface shall conform to the manufacturers recommendations .
Application General All pavement markings shall be accurately spaced and present a cleancut uniform appearance during either the day or night .
The application of pavement marking materials shall conform to the following requirements and the manufacturers recommendations .
Date OPSS Formerly OPSS June Organic Solvent Based Traffic Paint Paint shall be applied when the pavement surface temperature is C and above unless otherwise approved in writing by the Authority .
The paint temperature shall be between C and C when applied to the pavement .
WaterBorne Traffic Paint Paint shall be applied as specified in clause except that the pavement surface temperature shall be C and above .
Thermoplastic Pavement Marking Material The material shall be applied when the pavement surface temperature is C and above .
At pavement surface temperatures below C the pavement shall be preheated immediately prior to material application .
Markings shall not be applied over pavement joints .
Field Reacted Polymeric Pavement Marking Materials Field reacted polymeric pavement marking materials which are recommended for screed application shall be applied at a rate which results in a uniform thickness of .
Markings shall not be applied over pavement joints .
The materials shall be applied when the pavement surface temperature is C and above .
Field reacted polymeric pavement marking materials recommended for spray application shall be applied at a uniform thickness of .
Date OPSS Formerly OPSS June Preformed Plastic Tape The tape shall be applied when the pavement surface temperature is C and above .
Preformed markings shall not be applied over pavement joints .
Pavement Marking Temporary Removable Temporary removable pavement markings shall be applied conforming to the manufacturers recommendation and shall be removed as indicated .
Raised Pavement Markers Temporary The Contractor shall supply and install temporary raised pavement markers conforming to the Authoritys requirements and the manufacturers recommendations .
Temporary raised pavement markers shall be removed as specified in the contract .
MEASUREMENT FOR PAYMENT .. Actual Measurement Pavement Marking Pavement Marking Durable Pavement Marking Temporary Pavement Marking Temporary Removable Pavement Marking Obliterating Measurement for pavement marking is by the horizontal length in metres of cm wide line excluding gaps .
Temporary pavement marking requirements .
DEFINITIONS Asymmetric refers to the barrier placed where the pavement elevations on each side of the barrier differ. . DESIGN AND SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS .. General Where the Contractor wishes to use a concrete barrier design other than as called for in the contract he shall request permission from the Authority at least four weeks prior to starting any work affected by his proposed change. . MATERIALS ..
Placement of asphaltic concrete pavement beneath and adjacent to the precast concrete barrier shall conform to OPSS .
This specification also covers the requirements for installation of restraint systems for temporary concrete barrier Type M connection only by the following three methods pinning to asphalt pavement strapping to concrete or bolting through concrete .
The above measurement also includes a Removal of asphalt pavement except where there is a separate tender item for pavement removal that includes pavement overlapping the area of structure excavation .
