The graded portion of a highway within the top and side slopes that is prepared as a foundation for the pavement structure and shoulders .
The material below the subgrade in cuts embankments and embankment founda tions that extends to a depth and width that affects the support of the pavement structure .
The top earthwork surface of a roadbed prior to application of Select or Stabilized material courses shaped to conform to the typical section on which the pavement structure and shoulders are constructed or the surface that must receive an additional material layer such as Topsoil Stone or other Select Material .
One or more top layers of a pavement structure designed to accommodate the trafﬁc load which is designed to resist skidding trafﬁc abrasion and disintegrating effects of weather .
See Surface course The top and ﬁnal layer of any pavement .
Proposed changes in the basic design of a bridge or pavement type or those changes that require different right of way limits will not normally be considered an acceptable VECP .
Permissible tolerances for the elevation of subgrade and ﬁnished grade and for the thickness of the var ious courses of pavement structure are speciﬁed in the Contract .
Typically on curves the Department will provide the distances and elevations to each edge of pavement and centerline through the transitions and the distances and elevations to the edge of pavement only straightline super through full super portions of the curve .
Radius points for pavement ﬂares at connections will be staked only if request ed by the Contractor .
Holes in hard surface pavements shall be ﬁlled with approved asphalt patching material .
Connections Connections that had an original paved surface shall be brought to a grade that will smoothly and safely accommodate vehicular trafﬁc through the inter section using temporary pavement as soon as practicable after connections are dis turbed .
If operations or obstructions placed by the Contractor damage an existing traveled roadway the Contractor shall cease operations and repair damages to the roadway at no additional cost to the Department. . Patching Operations Where existing hydraulic cement concrete pavement is to be patched the operation of breaking and excavating old pavement shall extend for a distance of not more than two miles .
In the absence of Contract prices covering the items of repair the repair work will be paid for in accordance with Section .. . Where the Contract speciﬁes placing a course on another course or subgrade of embankment base subgrade concrete asphalt pavement or other courses previously constructed the Contractor shall maintain the courses or subgrades previously constructed in accordance with the Contract requirements when placing such course .
. . Grading Operations When the Contractor elects to complete the rough grading operations for the entire project or exceed the length of one full days surfacing oper ations the rough grade shall be machined to a uniform slope from the top edge of the existing pavement to the ditch line .
When the surface is to be widened on both sides of the existing pavement construction operations involving grading or paving shall not be conducted simultaneously on sections directly opposite each other .
The surface of pavement shall be kept free from soil and other materials that might be haz ardous to trafﬁc .
Prior to opening of new pavement to trafﬁc shoulders shall be roughly dressed for a distance of feet from the edge of the paved surface .
The hauling or moving of material and equipment on the pavement structure or across any structure during .
b Partial Acceptance If at any time during the prosecution of the project the Contractor completes a unit or portion of the project such as a structure an interchange slopes pavement or a section of a roadway in its entirety he may ask the Engineer to make ﬁnal inspection of such work .
The Department reserves the right to evaluate and determine the acceptability of polishing characteristics of aggregate proposed for use in pavement and bridge deck surfaces . .
SECTION CRUSHER RUN AGGREGATE .Description These speciﬁcations cover crushed aggregate used for backﬁlling and bedding pipe and box culverts maintaining trafﬁc and repairing and constructing allweather private access pavements .
SECTION SUBBASE AND AGGREGATE BASE MATERIAL .Description These speciﬁcations cover material used to form a foundation for base or surface pavement .
Where segregation or nonuniformity is evident in the ﬁnished pavement the Engineer reserves the right to require the Contractor to discontinue the use of crusher run or aggregate blends and to furnish separate sizes of opengraded aggregate material .
g When using RAS Materials Tearoff or Tabs the Contractor shall submit material samples to include the RAS stockpiled tearoff shingles reclaimed asphalt pavement RAP and PG Binder .
Type E asphalt mixtures shall consist of mixes incorporating a neat asphalt material with polymer modiﬁcation complying with the requirements of PG E and have a rolling thin ﬁlm oven test residue elastic recovery at degrees F of a minimum of percent when tested in accordance with ASTM D procedure A. E designated mixtures shall not contain more than percent reclaimed asphalt pavement RAP material by weight or percent recycled asphalt shingles RAS by weight . .
.Tests The Department may sample materials entering into the composition of the asphalt concrete the mixture or the completed pavement .
When samples are obtained from the pavement by coring the resulting voids shall be ﬁlled and reﬁnished by the Contractor without additional compensation .
Class A A lowmodulus nonsag silicone for use in sealing horizontal and vertical joints in hydraulic concrete pavements and structures .
Tooling is required. . Class B A verylowmodulus selfleveling silicone used to seal horizontal joints in hydraulic cement concrete pavements and structures .
Tooling is not normally required. . Class C An ultralowmodulus selfleveling silicone used to seal horizontal joints in hydraulic cement concrete pavements and structures .
It can also be used to seal the joints between hydraulic cement concrete pavement and asphaltic concrete shoulders .
Lubricant adhesive shall be a onecomponent polyurethane compound with an aromatic hydrocarbon solvent and shall conform to the physical properties of ASTM D. Lubricant for pavement seals shall conform to ASTM D. . k Elastomeric Expansion Dam and Tooth Expansion Joint The elastomeric sheet gland material shall be virgin ethylene propylene diene monomer EPDM or virgin polychloroprene .
The Engi neer will not allow the use of mobile production plants to produce concrete used in bridges except overlays box culverts pavements except patching or retaining walls .
The Contractor shall have at least one VDOT Certiﬁed Concrete Field Technician present at each site during the placement of pavements bridge decks bridge piers and abutments box culverts and any placement of or more cubic yards .
Concrete shall be proportioned to secure the strength and durability required for the pavement or the part of the structure in which it is to be used . .
They shall not react with the components of concrete and shall not contain oils waxes or other materials that would prevent bonding of trafﬁc paints or applied pavement markings .
Longitudinal bars for continuous reinforced hydraulic cement concrete pavement shall be Grade . .
When used in continuously reinforced hydraulic cement concrete pavement wire fabric shall be deformed furnished in ﬂat sheets and shall conform to ASTM A high yield of pounds per square inch . .
The Contractor shall provide a written certiﬁcation that each batch of glass beads used in or on VDOT pavement markings conforms to AASHTO M including the total concentration limit of Lead and Arsenic .
Retroreﬂectors for delineators and pavement markers except temporary markers shall be molded of methyl methacrylate plastic conforming to Federal Speciﬁcation LP Type I Class .
Retroreﬂectors for temporary pavement markers shall have a surface consisting of reﬂective sheeting or a plastic prismatic element .
The housingbacking for temporary pavement markers shall be constructed of methyl methacrylate plastic conforming to Federal Speciﬁcation LP Type I Class .
Delineators and pavement markers shall be approved by reviewing performance data from one or both of the following test programs a AASHTOs National Transportation Product Evaluation Program AASHTONTPEP .
.Detail Requirements a Steel castings for snowplowable pavement markers shall conform to ASTM A hardened to RC and shall weigh approximately pounds .
The speciﬁc intensity shall be not less than the following values Entrance Angle Observation Angle Speciﬁc Intensity cdFC Clear Yellow . . e Raised recessed and snowplowable raised pavement markers shall have a retroreﬂective surface area not less than .
square inches and the slope of the reﬂective surfaces shall not be less than degrees or more than degrees when measured from the pavement surface .
The crushing strength shall not be less than pounds when tested in accordance with VTM. . Raised and recessed pavement markers shall be at least inches and not more than .
Retroreﬂectors for snowplowable raised pavement markers shall be installed in steel castings conforming to a herein and shall have a nominal width of inches excluding the castings .
f Temporary pavement markers shall have a retroreﬂective surface not less than .
The Contractor shall ensure polyacrylamidecontaining mixtures are not sprayed onto pavement .
e Prefabricated Geocomposite Pavement Underdrain Prefabricated geocomposite pavement underdrain shall consist of a polymeric drainage core encased in a nonwoven ﬁlter fabric envelope having sufﬁcient ﬂexibility to withstand bending and handling without damage .
Prefabricated geocomposite pavement underdrain shall conform to the following .
Core The drainage core shall be made from an inert polymeric material resistant to commonly encountered chemicals and substances in the pavement environment and shall have a thickness of not less than inch .
i Pavement Interlayer Paving geosynthetics shall be used as an interlayer between pavement layers .
SECTION PAVEMENT MARKING .Description These speciﬁcations cover material for use in various retroreﬂective pavementmarking applications .
Pavement marking and pavement marker materials shall conform to the speciﬁc requirements for the individual types as indicated hereinafter a Approval of Pavement Markings The Department will evaluate and approve pavement markings by reviewing performance test data from one or both of the following testing programs AASHTOs National Transportation Product Evaluation Program AASHTONTPEP Testing Test data values used for approval will be based upon the data generated per the NTPEP Pavement Marking Material Work Plan .
VDOT Test Facility VDOT may evaluate pavement marking performance from data generated at its own test facility .
When pavement markings are installed on the NTPEP test deck or the VDOT facility the ma terials thickness beadsreﬂective optic types and formulation shall be documented to ensure the equivalent thickness beadsreﬂective optic types and formulation are installed on VDOT roadways following approval .
Approved pavement marking products later found not meeting the batch testing requirements will be removed from the Materials Divisions Approved Products List .
Black contrast pavement markings of paint thermoplastic epoxy and polyurea shall be accepted based upon batch testing requirements listed herein as applicable .
Retroreﬂec tivity color luminanceY and road testing are not required for the black portion of the pavement markings .
Determination of conformance will include but not be limited to the evaluation of test data from AASHTOs NTPEP or other VDOT Test Facilities in accordance with the requirements for the respective pavement marking material types. . b Certiﬁcations The pavement marking material manufacturer shall certify each batch or lot of material sup plied and installed is the same product thickness reﬂective optic package and formulation that was tested and approved on the AASHTONTPEP or VDOT test facility in accordance with the Materials Division Manual of Instructions for Certiﬁcation I and II Materials .
War ranties shall be those commercially supplied or those unique to the Commonwealth in the case of certain products such as Type B Class VI preformed pavement marking tape as detailed herein .
Type B Class VI pavement marking tape shall be warrantied for six years against failure re sulting from material defects regardless of method of manufacturers prescribed application or pavement type .
The material shall be warranted to retain its Retroreﬂectivity Day and Night time Color and Luminance Y and durability including adherence to the pavement and shall be free of other obvious defects or failures .
All Type B Class VI pavement marking tape that has failed to meet the warranty conditions shall be replaced at no additional cost to the Department .
The warranty shall cover all pavement striping materials regardless of method of installation labor equipment mobilizationdemobilization tools incidentals required to remove eradi cate and replace the pavement striping including maintenance of trafﬁc during eradication and reinstallation operations .Pavement Marking Materials Pavement marking and pavement marker materials shall conform to the speciﬁc requirements for the individual types as indicated hereinafter a Paint Pavement Marking Material Type A Paint material shall be a fastdrying waterborne nonleaded acrylic or modiﬁed acrylic resin paint suitable for use on both asphalt and hydraulic cement concrete pavement surfaces and shall be selected from the Materials Divisions Approved Products List No .
b Thermoplastic Pavement Marking Material Type B Class I Thermoplastic material shall be suitable for use on asphalt and hydraulic cement concrete pavement surfaces and shall be selected from the Materials Divisions Approved Products List No . .
Thermoplastic marking materials shall be capable of application at pavement surface tem peratures of degrees Fahrenheit and above on all asphalt and hydraulic cement concrete pavement surfaces .
Thermoplastic material shall be capable of successfully fusing to itself and previously applied thermoplastic pavement markings . .
. . . . . . . . Min Yellow . . . . . . . . .. g. Nighttime Yellow Color with Dropon Beads The initial nighttime color of yellow thermoplastic pavement marking material shall conform to the following CIE chromaticity coordinate requirements when tested in accordance with ASTM D and VTM Color Yellow x y x y x y x y . . . . . . . . Night Time Color Chromaticity Coordinates with Dropon Beads Thermoplastic .
n. Flashpoint The material ﬂashpoint shall be no less than degrees F when tested in accordance with ASTM D. c Preformed Thermoplastic Pavement Marking Material Type B Class II Preformed thermoplastic material shall be suitable for use on asphalt and hydraulic cement concrete pavement surfaces and shall be selected from the Materials Divisions Approved Products List No. . Preformed thermoplastic shall be installed in strict accordance with the manufacturers in stallation instructions .
Upon cooling to normal pavement temperatures these materials shall produce an adherent retroreﬂective pavement marking capable of resisting deformation by trafﬁc .
Day and Nighttime Color and Luminance Y Refer to initial requirements b. Thickness Refer to initial requirements c. Nighttime Yellow Color with Dropon Beads The initial night time color of yellow preformed thermoplastic pavement marking material shall conform to the following CIE chromaticity coordinate requirements when tested in accordance with ASTM D and VTM .
Color Yellow x y x y x y x y . . . . . . . . Night Time Color Chromaticity Coordinates with Dropon Beads Preformed Thermoplastic d EpoxyResin Pavement Marking Material Type B Class III Epoxyresin is a twocomponent pavement marking material suitable for use on both asphalt and hydraulic cement concrete pavement surfaces and shall be selected from the Materials Divisions Approved Products List No . .
. . . . . . . . Min Yellow . . . . . . . . .. g. Nighttime Yellow Color with Dropon Beads The initial nighttime color of yellow epoxy pavement marking material shall conform to the following CIE chroma ticity coordinate requirements when tested in accordance with ASTM D and VTM Color Yellow x y x y x y x y . . . . . . . . Night Time Color Chromaticity Coordinates with Dropon Beads Epoxy h. Hardness Hardness Shore D determined in accordance with ASTM D shall be to .
l. NoPickUp Epoxy marking materials when mixed in proper ratio and applied at a wet ﬁlm thickness of mils with surface ambient and material temperatures being . . degrees Fahrenheit shall reach a nopickup time in less than minutes when tested in accordance with ASTM D. m. Weight per epoxy equivalent The weight per epoxy equivalent of Part A of the epoxy pavement marking material shall be within of the target value provided by the manufacturer when tested in accordance with ASTM D. n. Abrasion resistance The wear index shall be no greater than gmcycle when tested in accordance with ASTM D. e Polyurea Pavement Marking Material Type B Class VII Polyurea is a twocomponent pavement marking material suitable for use on both asphalt and hydraulic cement concrete pavement surfaces .
Polyurea pavement marking material shall be selected from the Materials Divisions Approved Products List No . .
Flat Tape Type B Class IV Flat tape shall be capable of being surface applied to asphalt cement or hydraulic cement concrete pavement following paving operations on new dense or open graded asphalt concrete and shall be ready for trafﬁc immediately after application Patterned Preformed TapeType B Class VI Pattered preformed tape shall be capable of being surface applied to asphalt cement or hydraulic cement concrete surfaces following pav ing operations or inlaid during paving operations on new asphalt concrete and shall be ready for trafﬁc immediately after application .
f. Skid Resistance Refer to initial requirements g Temporary Pavement Marking Materials Construction temporary pavement markings shall consist of Type D removable tape Type E removable black nonreﬂective tape and Type .
F temporary pavement marking material .
Removable black nonreﬂective tape shall be suitable for use on asphalt concrete pavement surfaces and shall be selected from the Materials Divisions Approved Products List No. . a .
Temporary Pavement Marking Material Type F Temporary pavement marking material waterborne paint shall be suitable for use on both asphalt and hydraulic cement concrete pavement surfaces and shall be selected from the Materials Divisions Approved Products List No. . a .
b. Batch Testing Temporary pavement marking paint materials batch testing will be performed by the Department on samples obtained from the point of manufacture or from the ﬁeld .
SECTION STONE MATRIX ASPHALT CONCRETE .Description These speciﬁcations cover the materials used to produce stone matrix asphalt SMA concrete pavement .
The Contractor shall remove stumps roots other perishable material and nonperishable objects that will be less than feet below the top of earthwork within the area directly beneath the roadway pavement and shoulders .
Material and objects that will be feet or more below the top of earthwork within the area directly beneath the roadway pavement and shoulders and all such material and objects beneath slopes of embankments shall be left in place unless removal is necessary for installation of a structure .
The submission shall include complete details for dewatering soil stabilization jacking and receiving pits jacks reaction blocking boring equipment sheeting shoring and bracing for protecting the roadbed pavement surface settlement monitoring installation sequence materials and equipment proposed for use .
Construction shall be performed in such a manner that the pavement surface above the pipe line does not have more than .
d. When precast units are to be located adjacent to the subbase or base pavement course the Contractor shall furnish units with chambers having weep holes inches in di ameter and hardware cloth .
The throat and top sections shall have positive restraints such as adjacent concrete pavement or soil on all sides to prevent displacement and shall have a positive interlock such as dow els with the chamber section .
The post installation inspec tion shall be performed no sooner than days after completion of the pipe installation and placement of ﬁnal cover except for pavement structure .
d Baled Straw Silt Barriers Baled straw silt barriers may be substituted for temporary ﬁlter barriers with the approval of the Engineer in noncritical areas such as pavement areas and rock locations where ﬁlter barriers can not be installed in accordance with the plans and spec iﬁcations and locations where the Engineer determines that streams and water beds will not be affected .
The Engineer may require materials in existing pavement structures to be salvaged for use in trafﬁc maintenance .
The surface area directly beneath the pavement and shoulders on which embankments of less than feet in depth are to be constructed shall be denuded of vegetation .
Hydraulic cement concrete and asphalt concrete pavement structures within the pro posed roadway prism shall be demolished in accordance with Section .a .
.Procedures The subgrade or pavement structure course upon which a control strip is constructed shall be approved by the Engineer prior to construction of the control strip .
Subgrade consisting of material in place The subgrade area shall be scariﬁed to a depth of inches for a distance of feet beyond the proposed edges of the pavement on each side .
Rolling of the asphalt mixture shall continue until roller marks are eliminated and a density of at least percent of the theoretical maximum density has been obtained. . Stabilized and paved shoulders shall be constructed in accordance with the applicable speci ﬁcations for pavement stabilization .
The area of shoulders inches adjacent to the pavement shall be rolled simultaneously with the course being deposited .
Temporary ramps constructed adjacent to existing pavements bridges culverts and similar items shall be removed to the depth necessary to provide the required thickness of pavement structure .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit Lime Ton Fly ash Ton Manipulation Depth Square yard Aggregate material Type Cubic yard or ton SECTION HYDRAULIC CEMENT STABILIZATION .Description This work shall consist of stabilizing roadbed material as speciﬁed or as directed by the Engineer and constructing one or more courses of the pavement structure using a mixture of soil or approved aggregates and hydraulic cement on a prepared surface in accordance with these speciﬁcations and in conformity with the lines grades typical sections and cross sections shown on the plans or as established by the Engineer. . .Materials a Cement shall conform to Section Type I IP or II .
The Contractor shall protect the stabilized material from freezing for days or shall cover the stabilized surface with the next pavement course within hours after the cement stabilization has been ﬁnished as speciﬁed when material may be exposed to freezing temperatures during the ﬁrst hours of curing .
If the next pavement course is not placed immediately the cementtreated aggregate course shall be moist cured continually or covered by the application of liquid asphalt to pre vent surface drying until the next pavement course is placed .
The Contractor shall endeavor to place the next pavement course within days after cement stabilization is ﬁnished .
the cementstabilized layer with approved cover material or continually maintain the surface of the cementstabilized course with moisture until the next pavement course can be successfully applied .
The Contractor shall clean the edges of exist ing pavements that are to be adjacent to new pavement to permit adhesion of asphalt .
Tack for the adjacent pass shall completely cover the vertical face of the pavement mat edge so that slight puddling of asphalt occurs at the joint and extend a minimum of foot into the lane to be paved .
The asphalt tack shall be applied to the pavement surface in such a manner that it will bond the overlay and the underlying surfaces together . .
Adjacent concrete or asphalt concrete surfaces shall show minimal visible evidence and white or yellow pavement markings shall show no visible evidence of the asphalt tack material tracking at the end of the production shift .
Tracking of the tack material on pavement mark ings will require the Contractor to immediately restore the marking to their original pretack condition .
The Contractor shall remove Buildup of the tacking material on existing pavement surfaces .
c Asphalt cement shall be PG E. d Reclaimed asphalt pavement shall not be used as component material .
The Engineer may permit low areas to be ﬁlled with the next pavement course in the same operation in which the pavement is placed provided the next pavement course is provided at no additional cost to the Department .
The Engineer will not permit placement of the next higher pavement layer if any damage to the stabilized opengraded material is visible .
The Engineer will not allow the use of equipment that results in excessive crushing of aggregate or marring of the pavement surface .
If the Contractors equipment mars the surface of the pavement during construction to the extent that imperfections can not satisfactorily be corrected or produces permanent blemishes the Engineer will require the Contractor to discontinue the use of that particular equipment and replace that equipment with satisfactory units .
d Rotary Saw The Contractor shall supply a gasolinepowered rotary saw with a carbide blade for cutting test samples from the pavement .
pavement prior to sawing the sample .
The Contractor shall not place the ﬁnal asphalt pavement ﬁnish course until temporary pavement mark ings will no longer be required .
The Contractor shall grade and compact the course to the required proﬁle upon which the pavement is to be placed including the area that will support the paving equipment .
When speciﬁed in the Contract prior to placement of asphalt concrete the Contractor shall seal longitudinal and transverse joints and cracks by the application of an approved crack seal ing material in accordance with the special provision for Sealing Cracks in Asphalt Concrete Surfaces or Hydraulic Cement Concrete Pavement. . Priming and Tacking The Contractor shall paint contact surfaces of curbing gutters manholes and other structures projecting into or abutting the pavement and cold joints of asphalt with a thick uniform coating of asphalt prior to placing the asphalt mixture .
Tack for the adjacent pass shall completely cover the vertical face of the pavement mat edge so that slight puddling of asphalt occurs at the joint and extend a minimum of foot into the lane to be paved .
The Contractors equipment and placement operations shall properly control the pavement width and horizontal alignment .
The Contractor shall use an asphalt paver sized to distribute asphalt concrete over the widest pavement width practicable .
The joint in the wearing surface shall be offset inches to inches from the centerline of the pavement if the roadway comprises two trafﬁc lanes .
The ﬁnished pavement shall be uniform and smooth .
Edges of pavement shall be ﬁnished true and uniform. . TABLE III Cold Weather Paving Limitations Asphalt concrete SUPERPAVE pavement courses shall be placed in layers not exceeding four times the nominal maximum size aggregate in the asphalt mixture .
The minimum thickness for a pavement course shall be no less than .
The Contractor may place base courses in irregularly shaped areas of pavement such as transitions turn lanes crossovers and entrances in a single lift .
The Contractor shall construct the ﬁnal riding surface to tie into the existing surface by an approved method which shall include the cutting of a notch into the existing pavement .
In ad dition to notching the Contractor may use an asphalt mix design containing a ﬁnegraded mix to achieve a smooth transition from the new asphalt concrete overlay to the existing pavement with the approval of the Engineer .
Prior to application of tack coat and commencement of paving operations if in the opinion of the Engineer the existing pavement surface condition may detrimentally affect or prevent the bond of the new overlay the Contractor shall clean the existing pavement surface of all accu mulated dust mud or other debris .
Rolling shall be a continuous process insofar as practicable and all parts of the pavement shall receive uniform compaction .
The sequence of rolling oper ations and the selection of roller types shall provide the speciﬁed pavement density .
Rolling shall begin at the sides of the placement and proceed longitudinally parallel with the center of the pavement each pass overlapping at least inches gradually progressing to the crown of the pavement .
Edges of ﬁnished asphalt pavement surfaces shall be true curves or tangents .
If the Con tractor and the Engineer mutually agree that the required density can not be obtained because of the condition of the existing pavement structure the target control strip density shall be determined from the roller pattern that achieves the optimum density and this target control strip density shall be used on the remainder of the roadway that exhibits similar pavement conditions .
The Contractor shall num ber sublot test sites sequentially per lot mark these on the pavement ﬁll them with the paving mixture and compact them prior to the completion of each day of production .
Joints adjacent to curbs gutters or adjoining pavement shall be formed by hand placing suf ﬁcient mixture to ﬁll any space left uncovered by the paver .
The application temperature shall be between degrees F and degrees F. Shoulder rumble strip overspray shall not extend more than inches beyond the width of the cut depressions and shall not come in contact with pavement markings .
Waste material resulting from the operation shall be removed from the paved surface and shall not be disposed of where waterways may be at risk of contamination. . h SawCut Asphalt Pavement This work shall consist of sawcutting the existing asphalt pavement to a depth as shown on the plans or as directed by the Engineer .
.Pavement Samples The Contractor shall cut samples from the compacted pavement for depth and density testing .
The removed pavement shall be replaced with new mixture and reﬁnished .
.Pavement Tolerances a Surface Tolerance The Engineer will test the pavement surface by using a foot straight edge .
foot of the elevations indicated in the plans after placement of the ﬁnal pavement layer unless otherwise speciﬁed provided the actual cross slope does not vary more than .
Corrections for deﬁcient base course depth shall be made in a manner to provide a ﬁnished pavement that is smooth and uniform .
When the Contract provides for the construction or reconstruction of the entire pavement structure the surface and intermediate courses shall be placed at the rate of application shown on the plans within an allowable tolerance of percent of the speciﬁed application rate for application rates of pounds per square yard or greater and within pounds per square yard for application rates of less than pounds per square yard .
When the Contract provides for the placement of surface or intermediate courses over existing pavement over pavements constructed between combination curb and gutter or in the con struction or reconstruction of shoulders such courses shall be placed at the approximate rate of application as shown on the plans .
Rumble strips will be measured in linear feet and will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot of mainline pavement or shoulder where the rumble strips are actually placed and accepted excluding the test site .
This distance will be measured longitudinally along the center line of pavement mainline or edge of pavement shoulders with deductions for bridge decks accelerationdeceleration lanes sur face drainage structures and other sections where the rumble strips were not installed .
Sawcut asphalt concrete pavement will be measured in linear feet for the depth speciﬁed and will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot which price shall be full compensation for sawcutting the asphalt pavement to the depth speciﬁed cleaning up debris and disposal of waste material .
Pay Item Pay Unit Liquid asphalt cement Ton Rumble strip Asphalt Linear foot Liquid asphalt coating Rumble strips Square yard Sawcut asphalt concrete depth Linear foot SECTION HYDRAULIC CEMENT CONCRETE PAVEMENT .Description This work shall consist of constructing reinforced nonreinforced or continuously reinforced hydraulic cement concrete pavement and approach slabs composed of hydraulic cement concrete with or without reinforcement as speciﬁed on a prepared subgrade or base course in accordance with these speciﬁcations and within the speciﬁed tolerances for the lines grades thicknesses and cross sections shown on the plans or as established by the Engineer .
Concrete for placement by the slipform method shall be sufﬁciently cohesive to prevent detrimental sloughing at the pavement edges as the forms advance .
Transit mixed concrete may be furnished for use in constructing approach slabs ramps transitions connec tions crossovers and other miscellaneous pavement .
Aggregate used in concrete for pavement and approach slabs that are used as riding surfaces shall be nonpolishing aggregate .
c Wide ﬂange beams used in the anchor slab of continuously reinforced pavement shall conform to ASTM A. d Joint sealer and ﬁller shall conform to Section .
The Contractor shall provide the equipment and tools speciﬁed herein or their approved equivalent and they shall be of such capacity that the rate of placing concrete and ﬁnishing pavement will be continuous .
Builtin forms shall not be used except where the total area of pavement on the project is less than square yards .
f Mechanical Spreader The mechanical spreader shall be a selfpowered selfpropelled unit capable of placing the concrete mechanically on the subgrade over the full width and depth of the pavement .
g Vibrators Vibrators for fullwidth vibration of concrete pavements shall be internal vibrators with multiple spuds .
Vibration shall be controlled by the forward movement of the spreader so that vibration auto matically ceases when the forward movement of the spreader is stopped. . h Spraying Equipment The Contractor shall provide mechanical spraying equipment mounted on movable bridges when liquid membraneforming compound is used for curing concrete pavement .
j Slipform Paver The paver shall be designed to consolidate screed and ﬂoat ﬁnish the freshly placed concrete in one complete pass of the machine and in a manner so that a minimum of hand ﬁnishing shall be necessary to provide a dense and homogeneous pavement .
The paver shall be equipped to vibrate the concrete thoroughly for the full width and depth of the strip of pavement being placed .
The course upon which the concrete pavement will rest including the area that will support the paving equipment shall be graded and compacted to the required proﬁle .
The Contractor shall ensure the ﬁnished grade is maintained in a smooth and compacted condition until pavement is placed .
Longitudinal bars shall be positioned in the ﬁnished pavement within inch of the speciﬁed vertical position and inch of the speciﬁed horizontal position with a cover of at least inches .
The Contractor may install prebent deformed tie bars Grade or in the joint between the mainline and ramp pavement to facilitate the use of the slipform paver .
between the edge of the pavement and the inside face of the trailing forms as the paver advances .
If the Contractor elects to place the reinforced concrete pavement in two layers he shall ensure the entire width of the bottom layer is vibrated and struck off to such length and depth that the sheet of fabric or bar mat may be placed full length on the concrete in its ﬁnal position without further manipulation .
The Contractor shall ensure forms on any section of pavement are staked into place with a sufﬁcient number of pins of sufﬁcient length to hold the form at the correct line and grade .
Test specimens for this purpose shall conform to ASTM C and shall be tested in accor dance with ASTM C. The Engineer will not permit equipment that will damage the surface of the existing pavement . .
Concrete for continuously reinforced pavement shall be placed through the openings in the steel in one lift and vibrated with an internal vibrator for the entire width and depth of the placement .
Following concrete placement concrete shall be struck off to conform to the cross section shown on the plans and to an elevation such that when the concrete is properly consolidated and ﬁnished the surface of the pavement shall conform to the tolerances speciﬁed herein for the elevation and grade shown on the plans or as established by the Engineer .
Beams shall be cured by a designated method as speciﬁed for the pavement in accordance with ASTM C. g Jointed Pavement Joints shall be installed in a manner and at such times and temperatures to prevent random or uncontrolled cracking .
When adjacent lanes of pavement are constructed separately approved twopiece connectors shall be used .
Formed joints Formed joints shall consist of a groove extending downward from and normal to the surface of the pavement and shall be formed by an approved nonmetallic or removable device that consistently demonstrates its ability to produce in fresh concrete a joint having the dimensions and line indicated on the plans .
Strip insert joints A longitudinal weakened plane joint may be furnished at trafﬁc lane lines in multilane monolithic concrete pavement in lieu of forming or sawing such joints .
The alignment of the ﬁnished joint shall be uniformly parallel with the centerline of the pavement and free from local irregularities in alignment that are more than inch in feet .
Preformed joint ﬁller shall be furnished in lengths equal to the pavement width or the width of one lane .
If joint ﬁller is assembled in sections there shall be no offsets between adjacent units. . Transverse contraction joints Transverse contraction joints shall consist of planes of weakness created by cutting grooves in the surface of the pavement and when shown on the plans shall include load transfer assemblies .
. . Transverse construction joints a. Jointed pavement Unless speciﬁed expansion joints occur at the same points transverse construction joints shall be constructed at the end of each days work or when there is an interruption of more than minutes in the concreting operations .
Continuously reinforced concrete pavement Transverse construction joints shall be formed by the use of an approved header board in accordance with .a .
At any location where a leave out is necessary for a detour at least feet shall be maintained between transverse construction joints. . Load transfer devices Plain dowels shall be held in position parallel with the surface and centerline of the slab by a metal device that is left in the pavement .
In lieu of using dowel assemblies at contraction joints dowel bars may be placed in the full thickness of pavement by an approved device . .
Isolation joints at structures Isolation joints shall be formed by placing a strip of inch preformed expansion joint ﬁller around each structure that extends into or through the pavement before concrete is placed at that location .
Concrete under and around load transfer devices joint assembly units and other features designed to extend into the pavement shall also be mechanically vibrated. . a .
The machine shall be oper ated over each area of pavement as many times and at such intervals as are necessary to result in proper consolidation and develop a surface of uniform texture .
If a uniform and satisfactory density of concrete is not obtained at joints along forms at structures and throughout the pavement the Contractor will be required to furnish equipment and use methods that will produce pavement conforming to the requirements speciﬁed herein .
Mechanical method A mechanical ﬂoat shall be adjusted so that its full length will be in continuous contact with the surface of the pavement .
If necessary longhandled ﬂoats having blades at least feet in length and inches in width may be used to smooth and ﬁll in opentextured areas in the pavement .
Longhandled ﬂoats shall not be used to ﬂoat the entire surface of the pavement in lieu of or supplementing the prescribed method of ﬂoating .
The straightedge shall be held in contact with the surface in successive positions parallel with the pavement centerline and the entire area shall be gone over from one side of the slab to the other as necessary .
Advancement along the pavement shall be in successive stages of not more than the length of the straightedge .
Final ﬁnish texture Prior to grooving multiply damp fabric shall be dragged over the pavement surface to provide a gritty texture on ridges between grooves .
The roadway pavement riding surface shall be textured with uniformly pronounced grooves ap proximately inch in depth and inch in width on approximately inch centers and transverse to the pavement centerline or a combination of uniformly pronounced grooves approximately inch in depth and inch in width on approximately inch centers and longitudinal to the pavement centerline and additional grooves inch in depth and inch in width on grooves inch in depth and inch in width on approx imately inch centers and transverse to the pavement center line .
Membraneforming compounds The entire surface of the pavement shall be sprayed uniformly with a whitepigmented membraneforming compound immediately following the texturing operation .
If the slipform method of paving is used edges of pavement shall be cured in the same manner and at the same time as the surface. . PE ﬁlm When PE ﬁlm is used for curing it shall be white .
Concrete damaged by the action of frost or by freezing shall be removed and replaced at the Contractors expense. . Curing in hot lowhumidity or windy weather Care shall be taken in hot dry or windy weather to protect the concrete from shrinkage cracking by applying the curing medium at the earliest possible time after ﬁnishing operations and after the sheen has disappeared from the surface of the pavement .
k Surface Test As soon as concrete has hardened sufﬁciently the pavement surface will be tested by the Engineer with a foot straightedge .
Areas showing high spots of more than inch on mainline pavement and approach slabs but not exceeding inch in feet shall be marked and after the concrete has attained the design compressive strength cut down with an approved cutting tool to an elevation where the area or spot will not show surface deviations in excess of inch .
If the slipform method of paving is used a straightedge tolerance of inch in feet will be permitted for the area within inches of the slipformed edge except for pavement adjacent to connections and ramps .
Equipment for cutting shall be designed to cut the surface of the pavement in a longitudinal direction parallel with the centerline and in a uniform planing action .
However the cutting operation shall not produce a polished pavement surface .
percent on mainline pavement the pavement shall be removed and replaced by and at the expense of the Contractor .
Forms shall be removed carefully to avoid damage to the pavement .
When it is necessary to remove and replace a section of pavement any remaining portion of the slab adjacent to the joints that is less than feet in length shall also be removed and replaced .
m Sealing Joints Before pavement is opened to trafﬁc including the Contractors equipment and as soon after completion of the curing period as practicable joints required to be sealed .
The check shall consist of installing sealer in ﬁve joints the full width of the pavement and removing the sealer immediately after installation and checking the length .
For joints with vertical sides seals or sealant shall be installed at a depth of inch inch below the level of the pavement surface. . Hotpoured sealer shall be applied to a completely dry joint .
Immediately after application sealer shall be tooled to form a recess below the pavement surface in accordance with the standard drawings .
Excess material on the surface of the concrete pavement shall be removed immediately and the pavement surface cleaned .
n Protecting Pavement The Contractor shall protect the pavement and its appurtenances against public trafﬁc and trafﬁc caused by his employees and agents .
This shall include furnishing watchpersons and ﬂaggers to direct trafﬁc and erecting and maintaining warning signs lights pavement bridges or crossovers .
Protective materials shall consist of standard metal forms or wood planks having a nominal thickness of at least inches and a nominal width of at least the thickness of the pavement at its edges .
The Engineer will carefully consider any damage to the pavement occurring prior to ﬁnal ac ceptance and may allow the Contractor to repair such damage or require the damaged pavement to be replaced .
o Opening to Trafﬁc The Contractor shall not open pavement to trafﬁc until specimen beams conforming to f herein have attained a modulus of rupture strength of pounds per square inch when tested by the third point loading method in accordance with ASTM C. The Contractor may use the Maturity Test Method in accordance with ASTM C to conﬁrm the development of satisfactory strength gain to open the pavement to trafﬁc provided the maturity test results are based upon the same concrete mix design as used in the pavement as approved by the Engineer .
In the absence of such tests The Contractor shall not open the roadway pavement to trafﬁc until days after the concrete is placed .
Prior to opening to trafﬁc the Contractor shall clean the pavement seal and trim all joints and install all permanent trafﬁc markings and messages .
p SawCut Hydraulic Cement Concrete Pavement This work shall consist of sawcutting the existing hydraulic cement concrete pavement to a depth shown on the plans and as directed by the Engineer. . .Thickness and Finished Grade Tolerances The Engineer will determine the thickness of pavement by average caliper measurements of cores taken from the pavement in accordance with VTM .
The Engineer will calculate the deﬁcient area as the product of the full width of the slab or lane of pavement multiplied by the sum of the distances in each direction from the deﬁcient core along the centerline of the pavement to the ﬁrst actual cores found not deﬁcient in thickness by more than .
The Contractor shall ﬁll cored test holes with the same type of concrete as in the pavement .
After placement of the ﬁnal pavement layer ﬁnished grade elevations shall be within .
percent from the design cross slope indicated in the plans and the pavement thick ness conforms to the thickness tolerances speciﬁed herein .
.Measurement and Payment Hydraulic cement concrete pavement will be measured in square yards of concrete pavement and will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard .
This price shall include furnishing and placing materials including dowels reinforcement and joint material provided that for any pavement found deﬁcient in average thickness as described in VTM by more than .
The width of measurement will be the width of the pavement shown on the typical cross section of the plans additional widening where called for or as otherwise directed in writing by the Engineer .
Concrete entrance pavement concrete launching ramps and anchor slabs will be measured in square yards of surface area and will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard .
No additional payment over the contract unit price will be made for any pavement that has an average thickness in excess of that speciﬁed on the plans. . Resealing joints when a pay item will be measured in linear feet and will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot .
Sawcut hydraulic cement concrete pavement will be measured in feet for the depth speciﬁed and will be paid for at the contract unit price per foot .
This price shall include sawcutting the hydraulic cement concrete pavement to the depth speciﬁed .
Price adjustments Where the average thickness of pavement is deﬁcient by more than .
When the thickness of pavement is deﬁcient by more than .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit Hydraulic cement base course Depth Square yard Plain hydraulic cement concrete pavement Depth Square yard Reinforced hydraulic cement concrete pavement Depth Square yard Continuously reinforced hydraulic cement concrete pavement Depth Square yard Concrete Class A bridge approach slab Cubic yard Reinforcing steel bridge approach slab Pound Bridge approach expansion joint Linear foot Concrete entrance pavement Depth Square yard Concrete launching ramp Standard Square yard Anchor slabs Type Square yard Resealing Type joints Material Linear foot Sawcut hydraulic cement concrete pavement depth Linear foot SECTION STONE MATRIX ASPHALT CONCRETE PLACEMENT .Description This speciﬁcation covers the furnishing installation and acceptance criteria for constructing stone matrix asphalt SMA concrete pavement .
b Crack Repair Type A V grooving Crack Repair Type B Epoxy injection Crack Repair Type D Sealing Linear Cracks In Concrete Decks And Overlays Using Epoxy And Carbon Fiber Mesh The cost of repairing cracks not identiﬁed as requiring repair within days from completion of casting the segment under consideration shall be paid for at the contract unit price for Crack Repair Type in accordance with Section .. Bridge decks shall not be recessed cut or otherwise permanently altered to facilitate the instal lation of pavement marking devices .
Snowplowable raised pavement markers or any marking requiring physical modiﬁcation to the surface of the bridge deck shall not be installed on ex isting or new concrete bridge decks .
When pavement markers are required on concrete bridge decks the Contractor shall install raised pavement markers conforming to Section which shall be bonded to the surface of the deck using an adhesive in accordance with the manufac turers recommendations .
The formed face of the following concrete items shall be given a Class ﬁnish bridge items wheel guards the inside and outside faces of parapet walls and concrete posts and rails and other items curbs raised medians steps and retaining walls that lie within feet of the edge of the pavement .
Tarpaulins shall cover all pavements and surfaces un derneath removal and recycling operations including equipment or other equipment handling hazardous materials and storage during active and inactive operations such as retention or storage until characteri zation analysis and disposal .
d. Backwall reconstruction and Backwall reconstruction HES shall consist of removing and disposing of existing concrete and any existing joint armor repairing and replacing existing reinforcing steel as may be required by this Section preparing the contact surfaces and furnishing and placing new concrete and reinforcing steel and restoring backﬁll and disturbed pavement in accordance with the details and requirements herein or shown on the plans .
.Measurement and Payment Adhesive based joint sealer class width when a pay item will be measured in linear feet along the pavement surface from out to out of the deck slab completeinplace and will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot .
.Measurement and Payment Tooth expansion joint assembly will be measured in linear feet measured along the pavement surface from out to out of the deck slab for the tooth thickness speciﬁed and will be paid for at the contract unit price per foot .
b Installation Existing pavement andor existing joints shall be saw cut to the full depth required for installation of the new plug joint and removed in accordance with the plan details or as directed by the Engineer in order to form the joint blockout .
Existing pavement and or existing joints shall be removed with pneumatic hand tools .
This price shall include removing and disposing of existing overlay or pavement material and existing joints and membranes repairing small areas of concrete deterioration in the blockout area preparing contact surfaces plac ing asphalt binder material and aggregate furnishing and placing backer rod antiskid material steel backing plates sealing joints in curbs or parapets working drawings and services of the manufacturers representative. . Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit Furnish Asphalt Plug Joint Cubic Foot Place Asphalt Plug Joint Linear Foot SECTION RIGID CONCRETE BRIDGE DECK OVERLAYS .Description This work shall consist of preparing bridge deck surfaces and furnishing and placing rigid concrete overlays on concrete bridge decks .
.Measurement and Payment Silicone joint sealant when a pay item will be measured in linear feet along the pavement surface from out to out of the deck slab completeinplace and will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot for the width speciﬁed .
b Testing for Types I II and III The Contractor shall determine the waterprooﬁng effective ness of the membrane pavement system after completion of the asphalt concrete overlay .
Those areas determined by the Engineer to be detrimental to the effectiveness of the system shall be repaired by removing the asphalt concrete overlay replacing or repairing the defective membrane and replacing the asphalt concrete overlay in a manner that will yield a neatappearing smoothriding pavement at the Contractors expense .
If more than per cent of the bridge deck area is shown defective by tests and is determined by the Engineer to be detrimental to the effectiveness of the system the entire asphalt concrete pavement and membrane system shall be removed and the deck cleaned in a satisfactory manner .
The entire membranepavement system shall then be replaced in accordance with these speciﬁcations at the Contractors expense .
SECTION UNDERDRAINS CROSSDRAINS AND EDGEDRAINS .Description This work shall consist of constructing underdrains crossdrains edgedrains and prefabricated geo composite pavement edgedrains PGPE including outlet pipe collectively underdrains using pipe aggregate and geosynthetics in accordance with these speciﬁcations the VDOT Road and Bridge Standards and in conformity to the lines and grades shown on the plans or as designated by the Engineer .
d Geosynthetics including geotextile drainage fabrics and prefabricated geocomposite pavement edge drains shall conform to Section .
Any pavement settlement above the underdrain installation shall be repaired in kind to the satisfaction of the Engineer at the Contractors expense The following deﬁciencies are examples of unacceptable underdrain installations that require corrective action by the Contractor .
The contract unit price shall in clude removing and replacing pavement in kind when underdrains or crossdrains are to be installed under pavement that is not constructed under the Contract .
Where concrete curb or curb and gutter is placed over existing pavement it shall be an chored to the existing pavement either by placing steel dowels and reinforcing steel or by using a Department approved adhesive designed and manufactured for such use .
Steel dowels shall be ﬁrmly mortared with Portland cement and sand mortar in holes drilled in the pavement .
If the Contractor uses an adhesive the surface of the pavement shall be thoroughly cleaned according to the adhesive manufacturers recommendations before the adhesive is applied .
The surface area of the pavement shall be cleaned by either blast cleaning or wire brushing so that the prepared surface is free of dust loose material oil or any other material that may prove deleterious to bonding .
The price shall include modifying curbs or curb and gutters to transition with standard entrance gutters standard street connection pavement and standard median strips .
Where excavation is nec essary for the roadway the part of excavation within the limits of the curb gutter combination curb and gutter or median barrier section will be paid for as regular excavation in accordance with Section .. Standard radial entrance and grouted rubble gutters paved ditches paved ﬂumes street connec tion pavement and bridge drainage aprons and chutes will be measured in square yards of surface area and will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard for the type andor Standard speciﬁed .
When there is no excavation or construction other than that necessary for constructing median strips sign islands or directional island curbs the contract unit price shall include excavating removing existing pavement disposing of surplus and unsuitable material backﬁlling and compacting .
When excavation or demolition of pavement is necessary for the adjoining roadway that portion within the limits of the median strip sign island or directional island curb will be paid for as regular excavation or demolition of pavement as appropriate in accordance with Sections .
Pay Item Pay Unit Gutter Type and standard Square yard Paved ditch Standard Square yard Pipe drain ditch liner Standard Linear foot Paved ﬂume Standard Square yard Energy dissipator Standard Each Entrance gutter Standard Square yard Street connection pavement Standard Square yard Median barrier Standard Linear foot Bridge drainage apron and chute Standard Square yard Median strip Standard width Square yard or Linear foot Sign island Standard Each or Square yard Directional island curb Standard Linear foot Cattle guard Standard Each Ditch ﬂume connector Standard Each Saw cut hydraulic cement concrete items Depth Linear foot SECTION CONTRACTOR BOUNDARY SURVEYING .Description This work shall consist of the Contractor providing boundary surveying and right of way monumentation performed in accordance with Section the VDOT Road and Bridge Standards the VDOT Survey Manual and this speciﬁcation for property affected by this Contract .
Damage to pavement markings and rumble strips as a result of the Contractors operations including but not limited to shoulder restoration removing salvaging and installing guardrail shall be replaced or repaired by the Contractor .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit Fence Standard Linear foot Corner brace unit Standard Each Line brace unit Standard Each Pedestrian fence Height Linear foot Gate Standard and length Each Water gate Standard Each or Linear foot High visibility fence feet Linear foot SECTION DEMOLITION OF PAVEMENT AND OBSCURING ROADWAY .Description This work shall consist of demolishing existing pavement and obscuring roadway to restore areas that are no longer needed for highway use in accordance with these speciﬁcations and in conformity to the lines and contours shown on the plans or as established by the Engineer .
Hydraulic cement concrete pavement The Contractor shall demolish such pavement according to the following a. Pavement shall be broken into pieces and either used in ﬁll areas as rock embankment in accordance with Section or disposed of at locations selected by the Contractor and approved by the Engineer .
Material within the proposed roadway prism and more than feet below the subgrade may be broken into pieces not more than inches in any dimension sufﬁciently displaced to allow for adequate drainage and left in the roadway prism. . Asphalt concrete pavement The Contractor shall remove asphalt concrete pavement that does not overlay or underlie hydraulic cement concrete pavement as follows .
When approved by the Engineer pavement shall be removed and disposed of at loca tions selected by the Contractor. . Cementstabilized courses underlying pavement designated for demolition shall be disposed of in accordance with a.a. or a.b .
Aggregate underlying pavement designated for demolition except hydraulic cement concrete pavement disposed of in accordance with a.b .
Areas outside construction limits consisting of asphalt concrete or hydraulic cement concrete pavement demolished in accordance with a herein shall be conditioned in accordance with the following a .
c. The Contractor shall clear and grub such areas in accordance with Section . . Areas outside construction limits consisting of pavement structures other than as phalt concrete or hydraulic cement concrete that are designated for obscuring roadway shall be conditioned in accordance with b. herein .
The Contractor shall remove pavement structures in accordance with the applicable requirements of a herein prior to beginning obscuring activities .
.Measurement and Payment Demolition of hydraulic cement concrete pavement and shoulder structure courses or a combina tion thereof will be measured as demolition of pavement rigid in square yards and will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard based on the width of the widest course of this pavement type as designated .
This price shall include performing all demolition removing and disposing of pavement base subbase and stabilized subgrade materials .
Demolition of asphalt concrete pavement and shoulder structure courses or a combination thereof will be measured as demolition of pavement ﬂexible in square yards and will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard based on the width of the widest course of this pavement type as designated .
This price shall include performing all demolition removing and disposing of pavement base subbase and stabilized subgrade materials. . Demolition of a combination of hydraulic cement concrete pavement and asphalt concrete pavement and shoulder structure courses or a combination thereof will be measured as demolition of pavement combination in square yards and will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard based on the width of the widest course of this pavement type as designated .
This price shall include performing all dem olition removing and disposing of pavement base subbase and stabilized subgrade materials .
Removing pavement structures other than hydraulic cementstabilized hydraulic cement concrete and asphalt concrete pavement structures in accordance with b . herein will be measured as regular excavation in accordance with Section or as lump sum grading on minimum plan and no plan projects .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit Demolition of pavement Type Square yard Obscuring roadway Unit SECTION FLOWABLE BACKFILL PLACEMENT .Description This work shall consist of furnishing and placing ﬂowable ﬁll for use as backﬁll material in pipe instal lations or in other uses at locations as designated on the plans or as designated by the Engineer and as backﬁll material for plugging designated abandoned pipes and culverts .
The Contractor shall plan and prosecute the work so as to expedite completion of the pavement structure or other dust generating activities as soon as is practicable .
b Signalization barricades channelizing devices safety devices and pavement markings shall conform to the applicable speciﬁcation requirements in Division VII of the Speciﬁcations .
c Temporary pavement markers shall conform to Section .
d Flexible temporary pavement markers FTPMs shall consist of products from the Materi als Division Approved Products List .
e Temporary Construction pavement markings shall conform to Section .
Material that is spilled or tracked onto the traveled pavement during prosecution of the work shall be promptly removed . .
The Contractor shall maintain trafﬁc control devices throughout construction requiring their use which shall include but not be limited to repositioning displaced devices including trafﬁc barrier service re placing due to inadequate structural integrity including trafﬁc barrier service replacing due to loss of reﬂectivity repairing defaced sheeting and legend replacing broken supports repositioning leaning signs so they are plumb and the sign face is perpendicular to the pavement edge cleaning dirty devices replac ing and repositioning due to weather related conditions and replacing stolen vandalized or damaged de vices .
Replacing and correcting temporary construction pavement markings and markers shall conform to the requirements herein . .
The color of the delineator shall match the color of the pavement marking edge line .
The Contractor shall delineate and maintain normal pavement alignment at the barrier opening with Type D pavement marking .
An impact attenuator will not be required at the exposed end of egress openings in barrier service provided the deﬂec tion angle between the pavement edge and ends of the barrier service openings is degrees or more .
This plan shall depict Intersection conﬁguration including the locations of lanes curbs sidewalks pavement areas stop lines and other geometric features The location of trafﬁc signal supports including trailers for portable trafﬁc control signals Vehicular andor pedestrian signal heads Controllers andor cabinets Detection areas including type of detection Signal phasing and phase sequencing b .
f. be a trailer mounted type with at least one of the two trafﬁc signal heads positioned over the travelway with a minimum feet of clearance from the pavement to the lowest point of the signal head assembly .
k Temporary Construction Pavement Markings Temporary construction pavement mark ings shall be installed at locations shown on the plans in the Virginia Work Area Protection Manual and at other locations as directed by the Engineer .
Temporary construction pavement markings shall conform to Section and be selected from the Materials Divisions Approved Products Lists and .
Temporary construction pavement markings are classiﬁed as Type A or B temporary construction markings Type D Classes II and III removable tape and Type E nonreﬂective black removable tape.Temporary construction pavement markings shall be used as follows .
Type A or B pavement markings shall be used where the roadway is to be resurfaced before changes in the trafﬁc pattern or where pavement is to be demolished and trafﬁc patterns will not change before demolition . .
Type D Class II or III pavement markings shall be used on ﬁnal roadway surfaces or in areas where trafﬁc patterns are subject to change before pavement is resurfaced .
Type D Class III pavement markings shall be used on Limited Access highway projects or other locations as shown on the plans .
Type D Class II pavement markings may be used on all other roadways except Limited Access highways when speciﬁed on the plans .
Type D Class III pavement markings may be used in place of Type D Class II pavement markings at the contract price for Type D Class II pavement markings . .
The Contractor may install Type A or B pavement markings when the surface temperature of the pavement is below the manufacturers minimum application temperature for a Type D Class II or III pavement marking except on ﬁnal pavement surfaces .
When a Type A or B pavement marking is used instead of a Type D pavement marking due to the surface temperature being below the manufacturers min imum application temperature the Contractor will be paid the contract price for Type D Class II or Class III pavement marking which shall include the Type A or B markings and any necessary eradication of the Type A or B pavement markings . .
Type E pavement markings shall be used to cover existing markings in accordance with l herein .
The Contractor shall install temporary construction pavement markings in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
The Contractor shall maintain the temporary construction pavement markings and shall correct any deﬁcient markings by reapplying markings as directed or needed .
The Depart ment considers deﬁcient temporary construction pavement markings as any markings that do not provide adequate guidance to motorists due to inadequate retroreﬂectivity color qualities or adherence to the pavement .
The Engineer will make a visual night time inspection of all temporary construction pavement markings to identify areas of markings that have inadequate retroreﬂectivity qualities .
Those markings that no longer adhere to the pavement which will cause guidance prob lems for motorists or that are inadequately retroreﬂective as determined by the Engineer shall be replaced by the Contractor with the following exceptions a. Reapplication of skip line temporary construction pavement markings is not required unless the pavement marking does not adhere or inadequate retroreﬂectivity qualities are present for at least two consecutive skip lines .
b. Reapplication of centerline except skip lines or edge line temporary construction pavement markings is not required unless the pavement marking does not adhere or inadequate retroreﬂectivity qualities are present for a continuous section of at least seventy feet .
c. Reapplication of transverse markings is not required unless the pavement marking does not adhere or inadequate retroreﬂectivity qualities are present for a continuous section of at least three feet .
All Type A or B pavement markings that no longer adhere to the roadway that may cause guid ance problems for motorists shall be removed and replaced by the Contractor . .
The Contractor may take retroﬂectivity readings to counter visual observations by the Engineer as the basis for replacement of temporary construction pavement markings .
The Engineer will grant addi tional time to the Contractor when inclement weather prevents accurate measurement of the temporary construction pavement markings .
Removable Type D temporary construction pavement markings shall be replaced within the time frames recommended by the markings manufacturer to prevent the need for eradication .
Temporary construction pavement markings found in need of reapplication in accordance with these requirements shall be reapplied by the Contractor at no additional cost to the Department with the following exceptions Type D markings that have been under trafﬁc for more than ninety days will be paid for at the contract unit price when reapplied unless the manufacturers war ranty coverage is still applicable .
Temporary construction pavement markings shall be replaced in accordance with the time requirements of Section .
Eradication for reapplication of Type A or B pavement markings is not required if allowed by the marking manufacturer provided the existing marking is well adhered and the total thickness of the existing and reapplied marking combined will not exceed mils .
Temporary pavement markers shall be installed with temporary construction pavement mark ings in accordance with paragraph m herein. . l Eradicating Pavement Markings Markings that may conﬂict with desired trafﬁc movement as determined by the Engineer shall be eradicated as soon as practicable either immediately before the shifting of trafﬁc or immediately thereafter and before the conclusion of the work day during which the trafﬁc shift is made .
Grinding shall be limited to removal of material above the pavement surface except when re moving thermoplastic and preformed tape markings which may be removed by grinding alone .
Blasting shall be used on both asphalt concrete and hydraulic cement concrete pavements to remove all other types of pavement markings .
The Department will not permit obscuring existing pavement markings with black paint or asphalt as a substitute for removal or obliteration .
The Contractor shall repair the pavement as directed by the Engineer if eradication of pavement markings results in damage to or deterioration of the roadway presenting unsafe conditions for road users including but not limited to motorcyclists and bicyclists .
The Contractor shall ensure workers are protected in conformance with Occupational Safety and Health Administrations OSHA standards as detailed in CFR or whichever is the most stringent when eradicating pavement markings .
Eradication residue from the removal of any pavement markings is considered to be a nonhazardous waste material and shall be disposed of in a prop erly permitted waste disposal facility in accordance with applicable state and federal laws and regulations .
When markings are removed for lane shifts transitions or other areas or conditions required in the VWAPM percent of the pavement marking shall be removed .
Nonreﬂective removable black temporary construction pavement marking Type E may be used to cover existing markings instead of eradication on asphalt concrete surfaces when its use will not be required for more than days or when speciﬁed as a pay item .
Nonreﬂective removable black temporary construction pavement marking shall be applied in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
m Temporary Pavement Markers Temporary pavement markers shall be installed with tem porary construction pavement markings in merging lane drop or shifting lane shift tapers of work zones that will encroach upon the traveled roadway for more than three days and in other areas as required by the Engineer .
Temporary pavement markers shall not be required on Type E removable markings or Type D Class III removable markings .
Temporary pavement markers shall installed on foot centers in merging and shifting tapers in accordance with the VWAPM .
When temporary pavement markers are required in other areas they shall be installed on foot centers unless otherwise required by the Engineer .
Temporary construction pavement markers shall be located between and in alignment with broken lines and beside solid line pavement markings opposite trafﬁc .
pavement markings separating trafﬁc are installed twoway markers shall be installed between the lines .
Temporary pavement markers shall be installed with a hot applied bitumen adhesive except epoxy may be used on hydraulic cement concrete roadways and nonﬁnal surfaces of asphalt concrete roadways .
The Contractor shall replace damaged ineffective or missing temporary pavement markers upon notiﬁcation by the Engineer at no additional cost to the Department except those markers damaged by the Departments snow removal operations or other maintenance and construction operations which will be paid for at the contract unit price .
Temporary pavement message and symbol markings shall be installed using Type A or Type D material as speciﬁed on the plans .
The pavement message or symbol shall have clean and welldeﬁned edges without running bleeding or deformation and shall be uniform in appearance throughout .
Temporary pavement message marking material including maintenance of the markings shall comply with the requirements for temporary pavement markings .
Retroreﬂective measure ments shall be taken out of the wheel path locations and each separate entity of a pavement message marking shall be replaced when the average of the three readings for the entity is below millicandelas per square foot per footcandle .
Temporary Construction pavement markings will be measured in linear feet and will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot for the type class and width speciﬁed .
Temporary Construction pavement message markings will be measured in units of each and will be paid for at the contract unit price per each .
Temporary pavement markers will be measured in units of each and will be paid for at the contract unit price per each .
This price shall include temporary markers surface preparation adhesive maintain ing and replacing lost or damaged markers and removing the pavement markers and adhesive when no longer required .
Eradication of existing pavement markings will be measured in linear feet of a inch width or por tion thereof as speciﬁed herein .
Measurement and payment for eradication of existing pavement markings speciﬁed herein shall be limited to linear pavement line markings .
This price shall include removing linear pavement line markings cleanup and disposing of residue .
Eradication of existing nonlinear pavement markings will be measured in square feet based on a the oretical box deﬁned by the outermost limits of the nonlinear pavement markings as deﬁned in Standard PM of the VDOT Road and Bridge Standards .
Nonlinear pavement markings shall include but not be limited to arrows images symbols and messages .
Eradication of existing nonlinear pavement markings will be paid for at the contract unit price per square foot .
This price shall include removing nonlinear pavement markings cleanup and disposing of residue .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit Flagger service Hour Automated Flagger Assistance Device Hour Pilot vehicle Hour Electronic arrow board Hour Warning light Type Day Group channelizing device Day Group longitudinal channelizing device Linear foot Pedestrian barricade device Linear foot Trafﬁc barrier service Type andor Standard Linear foot Trafﬁc barrier service Guardrail terminal Standard Each or Linear foot Impact attenuator service Type Each Temporary trafﬁc control signal Location Lump sum Modify Signal Location Lump sum Temporary pavement marking Type and width Linear foot Temporary pavement message marking Type and message Each Eradication of existing pavement marking Linear foot .
Pay Item Pay Unit Eradication of existing nonlinear pavement marking Square foot Temporary pavement marker way Each Temporary Diversion Standard and type Linear foot Aggregate material No .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit Field Ofﬁce Type Month SECTION PLANING OR MILLING PAVEMENT .Description This work shall consist of mechanically planing rigid or ﬂexible pavement to the designated depth speciﬁed in the Contract in preparation for pavement repair or pavement overlay and disposing of milled cuttings in accordance with Section .
Rigid pavement will mean hydraulic cement concrete pavement or hydraulic cement concrete surfaced pavements and ﬂexible pavement will mean asphalt concrete or asphalt concrete surfaced pavements herein .
Planing as used in this section may also be referred to as milling or grinding. . .Equipment The Contractor shall perform planing with a pavement planing or pavement grinding machine of a capacity and type that has operated successfully on work comparable to that speciﬁed in the Contract .
Milling or cold planing equipment shall be capable of accurately cutting to the depth width length and typical section speciﬁed in the Contract in ﬂexible pavement or rigid pavement while leaving a uniform ly cut or ground roadway surface capable of safely handling trafﬁc prior to pavement repair or overlay placement .
The milling equipment shall not damage the underlying pavement surface or structure .
The milling machine shall be equipped with an automatic grade control system that will control the longi tudinal proﬁle and cross slope of the milled pavement surface as the milling operation proceeds .
The finished surface for regular pavement planing and perfor mance planing shall have a tolerance of plus or minus inch per foot between any two contacts of the resultant surface and the testing edge of a foot straightedge unless the Engineer directs otherwise .
No application of pavement overlay shall decrease the vertical clearance under a bridge .
In situations where the existing pavement under the overpass can not be planed in direct proportion to the proposed overlay the Contractor shall tie down the new pavement to the existing pavement under the overpass no less than feet from the outer edges of the overpass in accordance with Std .
The ﬁnished surface macrotexture for performance planing shall have a pavement macrotexture MTD mean texture depth of less than .
Testing for performance pavement planing shall be as described hereinafter .
Irregularities and high spots of existing pavement shall be eliminated .
The pavement surface shall be planed milled or ground to the designated grade or gradient speciﬁed on the plans or when not speciﬁed as a grade shall parallel that of the existing roadway .
Where the pavement is to be resurfaced by means of the application of an overlay on curb and gutter roadways a inch shoulder shall be cut along the gutter line to eliminate the necessity of feathering the edge of the new surface .
The Contractor shall construct temporary transverse pavementwedge tieins where planed existing pave ment is to remain temporarily without overlay to the extent allowed or required herein in Section elsewhere in the Contract or by the Engineer .
Each tiein shall be constructed no less than feet in length for every inch of depth of pavement planing performed and shall consist of a mix that is suitable as a riding surface to provide a smooth transition between planed existing pavement and undisturbed existing pavement or bridge decks .
.Performance Pavement Planing Testing The Contractor shall perform mean texture depth MTD testing of the macrotexture surface on performance planed pavement in accordance with ASTM E. Testing shall be accomplished by using a volumetric technique after planing operations have been completed and prior to opening a section of performance planed pavement to public traffic on roadways with posted speed limits of mph or greater .
.Measurement and Payment Flexible pavement planing will be measured in square yards of pavement surface area removed to the depths speciﬁed in the Contract of the designated pavement type .
The planed area is deﬁned as the area resulting from actual length and width of the planed pavement surface visually veriﬁed and approved by the Engineer for payment .
If scabbing or laminations still exist and the Contractor has uniformly planed the pavement to the max imum potential depth of the initial pass as deﬁned by the pay item depth inch the Engineer may direct the Contractor to perform additional passes to increase the depth to eliminate the scabbing or delamination .
Flexible pavement tiein planing used to tie into existing structures such as curbs combination curb and gutters and bridge terminal walls will be measured in square yards of surface area removed within the variable depth range designated .
Measurement will be based on the full surface area the actual length and width of the planed pavement surface visually veriﬁed and accepted by the Engineer for payment within the range of depth speciﬁed in the Contract .
If scabbing or laminations still exist after the Contractor has uniformly planed the pavement to the maximum potential depth of the initial variable pass as deﬁned by the pay item variable depth inch the Engineer may direct the Contractor to perform additional passes to increase the depth to eliminate the scabbing or delamination .
Rigid pavement planing will be measured in square yards of pavement surface area removed to the uniform depth speciﬁed in the contract and will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard for the range of depth designated .
Rigid pavement tiein planning will be measured in square yards of pavement surface area removed to the variable depth speciﬁed in the contract and will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard for the range of depth designated .
Planing performed to tiein overlaid pavement to existing pavement or bridge decks that is determined by the Engineer to be a part of the mainline planing operations will not be measured for separate payment the cost of which shall be included in the price bid for the appropriate depth range of ﬂexible or rigid pavement planing .
Pavement planing will be paid for at the contract unit price of the speciﬁed pavement type and depth or range of depths designated . .
These prices shall include removing and disposing of existing pavement .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit Flexible pavement planing depth Square yard Flexible pavement planing Above depth Square yard Flexible pavement planing Above depth Square yard Flexible pavement tiein planing depth Square yard Flexible pavement tiein planing Above depth Square yard Flexible pavement planing over depth Square yard Rigid pavement planing depth Square yard Rigid pavement tiein planing depth Square yard SECTION DEMOLITION OF BUILDINGS AND CLEARING PARCELS .Description This work shall consist of disconnecting utilities closing wells demolishing buildings removing materials from the right of way and removing improvements and material unsuitable for use in roadway embankments from vacant parcels and other areas within the right of way .
Typically on curves the Contractor shall provide the distances and elevations to each edge of pavement and centerline through the transitions and the distances and eleva tions to the edge of pavement only straightline super through full super portions of the curve .
Ra dius points for pavement ﬂares at connections shall be staked by the Contractor .
Typically on curves the Contractor shall provide the distances and elevations to each edge of pavement and centerline through the transitions and the distances and eleva tions to the edge of pavement only straightline super through full super portions of the curve .
Radius points for pavement ﬂares at connections shall be staked by the Contractor .
Where adjacent pavements are to be retained pavement removed for pipeline trenches shall be replaced in kind with equal or better material or as otherwise speciﬁed or directed by the Engineer .
The Contractor shall maintain a smooth riding surface until pavement repairs are completed after backﬁlling .
j Valves Valve Boxes and Manholes Valve boxes shall not transmit shock or stress to the valve and shall be centered and plumbed over the wrench nut of the valve with the box cover ﬂush with the surface of the ﬁnished pavement .
The Contractor shall reconstruct by using existing units and pavement rings or new units and adjustment rings to attain the proposed ﬁnished grade .
.Measurement and Payment Excavation and replacement of pavement removed for pipe trenches will not be measured for separate payment unless otherwise speciﬁed .
Surfacemount ﬂexi ble post delineators shall contain an anchoring system for attaching the ﬂexible post delineator to the pavement median or island .
.General Requirements Retroreﬂectors for road edge ﬂexible post barrier and guardrail delineators shall be the same color as the adjacent pavement marking unless otherwise speciﬁed on the plans .
Delineators shall be installed on all barriers and guardrails that are within feet of the edge of the pavement .
All materials returned for warranty repairs shall be made through the product distributor at no added charge to the Department. . Wireless vehicle detection system shall consist of batterypowered sensors installed in the pavement in each trafﬁc lane digital radios mounted on the side of the roadway and contact closure interface cards to provide sensor information processing and support the interface between the digital radio and a standard trafﬁc controller using contact closure signals .
the pavement the mounting height may be reduced to no lower than the vertical clearance of that structure .
Slots shall be sawed into the pavement at the depth and width speciﬁed in the Stan dard Drawings for concrete or asphalt concrete as applicable cleaned with pres surized potable water at least psi and then dried with ﬁltered compressed air before loop conductors are installed and sealed .
Loop detectors shall not be installed in pavement that has been open cut repaired or rebuilt in a manner where the pavement structure is not sound and continuous in the area of the proposed loop installation .
When loop detectors are to be installed in existing pavement the Contractor shall ﬁrst ﬁeld inspect the loop locations and advise the Engineer of any such locations that have been opencut repaired or rebuilt .
When loop cable crosses pavement joints an inch section of ﬂexible plastic sleeve shall be installed to prevent damage from pavement shifts .
This price shall include the inroadway sensor cutting pavement and sealing cut with epoxy programming testing technical support and warranty .
Pay Item Pay Unit Remove existing controller Each Remove existing manholejunction box Each Relocate existing signal head Each Local controller Type Each Master controller Type Each Auxiliary detector rack Each Flasher Each Flashing beacon Standard Each Trafﬁc signal head section Size and type Each Pedestrian signal head Standard Each Lane use control signal Each Hanger assembly Standard way Each Illuminated trafﬁc control sign Each Loop Detector ampliﬁer Type Each Loop saw cut width Linear Foot Video detection system Each Video detection camera Each Video detection cable Linear Foot Wireless detection sensor Each Wireless detection system Each Wireless detection repeater Each Emergency vehicle preemption detection system Way Each Emergency vehicle preemption detector cable Linear Foot Auxiliary preemption optical detector Each Pedestrian actuation Standard Each Uninterruptible power supply Type Each Uninterruptible power supply battery pack Each Uninterruptible power supply cabinet Type Each Span wire Size Linear foot Tether wire Size Linear foot SECTION PAVEMENT MARKINGS AND MARKERS .Description This work shall consist of establishing the location of retroreﬂective pavement markings and installing pavement markings and pavement markers in accordance with the MUTCD the Virginia Supplement to the MUTCD these Speciﬁcations the Plans and as directed by the Engineer .
c Pavement Markers shall conform to Section . . All pavement marking materials shall be selected from the Materials Divisions Approved Products List .
For Type B Class VI pavement marking materials that are to be applied to latex emulsion or slurry seal surfaces .
The Contractor shall have a certiﬁed Pavement Marking Technician present during all temporary pavement marking permanent pavement marking and pavement marker operations .
All pavement markings and markers shall be installed on new roadways prior to opening the roadways to trafﬁc .
Temporary or permanent pavement marking installation including edge lines and message markings shall be completed within the time limits stated herein on existing roadways where the pavement markings have been removed or obscured and the roadway is to be reopened to trafﬁc unless otherwise directed by the Engineer .
The Engineer will only authorize exceptions to these time limits for weather conditions preventing installation when pavement surface conditions required by the manufacturer or these speciﬁcations such as cooling curing or aging limit application prior to the installation of permanent markings or when Type B Class VI marking material is to be inlaid into the freshly paved asphalt concrete roadway surface .
Epoxy resin and polyurea pavement markings shall be installed on new pavement in accordance with the manufacturers instructions .
Pavement markings shall not be installed on new asphalt concrete pavement until the pavement mat has cooled sufﬁciently to support the pavement marking equipment without deformation .
Time limits for installation are as follow Pavement marking installation on interstates other freeways fully limitedaccess divided roadway with two or more lanes per direction with posted speed limit of mph or great er and interstatefreeway ramps where the corresponding pavement markings were removed eradicated or obscured shall be completed prior to opening the lane to trafﬁc .
Pavement marking installation on nonfreeway roads having trafﬁc volumes of ADT or more shall be completed within hours after the end of the workday when the corresponding existing pavement markings were removed eradicated or obscured .
Pavement marking installation on nonfreeway roads having trafﬁc volumes between and ADT shall be completed within hours after the end of the workday when the corresponding existing pavement markings were removed eradicated or obscured. . Pavement marking installation on nonfreeway roads having trafﬁc volumes of less than ADT shall be completed within hours after the end of the workday when the corresponding existing pavement markings were removed or obscured .
If the Contractor can not have permanent pavement markings installed within the time limits speciﬁed the Contractor shall install temporary pavement markings within the same time limits and maintain such markings until the permanent pavement markings can be installed .
The cost of installing maintaining and removingeradicating temporary pavement markings shall be at no additional cost to the Department unless otherwise indicated in the Contract or directed by the Engineer .
Premarkings may be accomplished by installing Type D removable any class tape chalk or lumber crayons except pavement markings such as stop lines crosswalks messages hatching etc .
Premarkings shall be of the same general color as the pavement markings being premarked .
At locations where the pavement marking will switch colors e.g .
When the Contractor uses chalk or lumber crayon as a premarking the entire length of the proposed pavement marking may be premarked .
When Type D tape is used as the premarking material and the lateral location of such premarkings to location of the ﬁnal pavement markings exceeds inches the Type D premarkings shall be removed at no additional cost to the Department .
Permanent pavement markings shall not be installed over temporary paint if the paint exceeds the maximum allowable speciﬁed thickness in Table VII or is not fully dry .
The Contractor shall exercise caution and protect the public from damage while performing pavement marking operations .
compounds concrete laitance residues from eradication and other foreign matter immediately prior to installing pavement markings .
The pavement surface shall be clean and dry at the time of pavement marking installation and shall be tested in accordance with VTM prior to permanent installation .
If a vehicle crosses a pavement marking and tracks it or if splattering or overspray occurs the affected marking and resultant tracking overspray or splattering shall be completely removed and new markings applied at the Contractors expense .
Truck mounted equipment tanks shall be equipped with a mechanical agitator to keep the pavement marking materials thoroughly mixed at all times .
Equipment shall be capable of applying two pavement lines either solid or skip at the same time when double line markings are required .
Markings shall not be installed directly over longitudinal pavement joints except to cross the joint perpendicularly or at an angle .
The widths of pavement markings shall not deviate more than inch on tangent nor more than inch on curves from the required width .
Glass beads and retroreﬂective optics shall be applied at the rate speciﬁed herein or as speciﬁed in the Materials Divisions Approved Products List for the speciﬁc pavement marking product .
Approximately seventy percent of beads shall be buried in the marking and the remaining percent shall be to percent embedded in the markings surface unless otherwise speciﬁed by the pavement marking .
The Engineer will make a visual evaluation of the pavement marking material to assess the condition retroreﬂectivity and color after its installation and again prior to ﬁnal acceptance .
The Contractor shall maintain a daily log Form C for both temporary and permanent pavement markings and markers .
Type A markings shall be applied to asphalt concrete and hydraulic cement concrete pavements in accordance with the manufacturers installation instructions .
Paint shall not be applied over existing pavement markings of other materials unless the existing mark ing is percent worn away or eradicated .
Glass beads and retroreﬂective optics shall be applied to the entire surface of the marking at the minimum rate of pounds per gallon of paint unless speciﬁed otherwise in the Ma terials Divisions Approved Products List for the selected pavement marking product . .
Type B markings shall be applied to asphalt concrete and hydraulic cement concrete pavements in accordance with the manufacturers installation instructions .
Type B mark ings shall not be applied over existing pavement markings materials unless the existing marking is percent removed .
Thermoplastic shall not be applied over existing pavement markings of other mate rials unless the existing marking is percent percent worn away or eradicated or over previously applied temporary paint that is fully dry and is at a thickness of mils or less .
Preformed thermoplastic shall not be applied over existing pavement markings of other materials unless the existing marking is percent worn away or eradicated or over previously applied temporary paint that is fully dry and is at a thickness of mils or less .
Additional glass beads and retroreﬂective optics shall be evenly applied at a rate of pounds per square feet unless another rate is speciﬁed in the Materials Divisions Approved Products List for the selected pavement marking product to ﬂood the entire surface immediately after installation while the material is molten .
c. Epoxy resin Class III material shall be applied in accordance with the manu facturers installation instructions and shall not be applied over existing pavement markings unless the existing marking is percent worn away or eradi cated .
Tape may be applied to asphalt con crete and hydraulic cement concrete pavements .
Tape shall not be applied over existing pavement mark ings of other materials unless the existing marking is percent worn away or eradicated .
Tape for pavement line markings shall be applied by an application cart as recom mended by the manufacturer .
Type B Class VI markings applied to new plant mix asphalt surfaces shall be installed as per manufacturers installation instructions except that nonem bedded adhesive surface application will not be permitted the markings shall be inlaid in the freshly installed asphalt surface before the pavement mat has cooled .
Markings that are improperly inlaid during the pavement operations shall be completely eradicated and reapplied via nonembedded surface application at the Contractors expense .
Polyurea marking material shall not be applied over existing pavement markings unless the existing marking is percent worn away or eradicat ed or over previously applied temporary paint that is fully dry and is at a thickness of mils or less .
Type D and E temporary pavement markings shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturers installation instructions and will be paid for in accordance with Section .
at Time of Application Note Note Note Note Note Note Note Note Note Note Note Film Thickness mils when wet when dry when wet min Note min Note Note Note Note Pavement Surface AC HCC AC HCC AC HCC AC HCC AC HCC AC HCC AC HCC AC HCC AC HCC AC HCC AC Application Limitations May be applied directly after paving operations May be applied directly after paving operations Do not apply less than days after paving operations Manufacturers installation instructions Manufacturers installation instructions Manufacturers installation instructions Note Manufacturers installation instructions Temporary pavement marking Temporary pavement marking Temporary pavement marking for covering existing markings Appr .
The pavement message or symbol shall have clean and welldeﬁned edges without running bleeding or deformation shall be uniform in appearance throughout and free of overlaps .
c Eradication Eradication of existing pavement markings shall be in accordance with Section except only percent removal is required where the new markings will completely cover existing markings .
d Pavement markers Retroreﬂectors for pavement markers shall conform to Section and be the same color as the adjacent pavement marking except the backsides of the markers shall be as follows Oneway markers The backside shall be red and the front side white .
Twoway markers The backside shall match the adjacent pavement marking. . Snowplowable raised pavement markers shall be installed by cutting two parallel grooves into the pavement at the depth and dimensions recommended by the marker man ufacturer .
Grooves shall be parallel to the adjacent pavement marking .
Snowplowable raised pavement markers shall not be installed on existing or new bridge decks .
When pave ment markers are required on concrete bridge decks raised pavement markers shall be used and bonded to the surface using an adhesive in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
Snowplowable raised pavement markers shall be installed at least inches from any joint crack or seam .
Front and rear keel tips of the casting shall be installed ﬂush with or below the pavement surface .
The installed height of the raised pavement marker shall be approximately inch to inch above the pavement surface .
The ambient air temperature ambient moisture condition and pavement surface condition shall be in accordance with the manufacturers installation instructions at the time of installation .
If the snowplowable raised pavement marker retroreﬂector becomes soiled or damaged during installation including dirtying from duct tape or similar adhesive residue the retroreﬂector shall be replaced by the Contractor at no additional cost to the Department. . Raised pavement markers shall be bonded to the pavement surface in accordance with the manufacturers installation instructions .
This price shall include surface preparation furnishing installing prismatic retroreﬂectors pavement cutting adhesive castings quality control tests and daily log .
Eradication of pavement markings will be measured and paid for in accordance with Section .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit Pavement line marking Type andor class and width Linear foot Pavement message marking Message Each or linear foot Type Pavement marker type pavement Each SECTION LIGHTING SYSTEMS .Description This work shall consist of furnishing installing and testing proposed lighting systems and removing modifying or relocating existing systems in accordance with these speciﬁcations and in conformity to the lines and details shown on the plans or established by the Engineer .
Luminaires shall be adjusted for maximum illumination and uniform dispersion on the pavement or sidewalk as directed by the Engineer .
Structures for walkin signs shall be designed to include landings with toe stops adjacent to entry doors handrails harness clipons and other design features to provide OSHA compli ant access to the entry of the walkin sign cabinet from the edge of pavement .
Roadway sensors located in above or under the pavement Temperature Subsurface temperature Precipitation data that includes precipitation type percent of ice and precipitation depthamount. . Atmospheric sensors mounted on towers or poles that are installed along the roadway or on bridges Temperature Relative humidity Barometric pressure Precipitation data including type and intensity Visibility as affected by fog smoke or a combination thereof Wind data including direction and average speed Solar radiation optional unless speciﬁed on the plans .
Roadway sensors located in above or under the pavement .
Mechanical Speciﬁcations Furnish an RPU that supports a minimum of four pavement sensors four subsoil sensors and eight atmospheric sensors .
Locate pavement and subsoil sensors as speciﬁed on the Plans .
from towerpole to roadway edge of pavement .
Install roadway pavement sensors lead in cable in the pavement according to the manufacturers instructions or as directed by the Engineer .
A minimum distance of feet shall be maintained from the edge of pavement unless .
Conduits shall be installed by directional boring for any locations where the conduit will cross existing pavement or other existing facilities unless otherwise shown on the plans or approved by the Engineer .
INDEX Abbreviation deﬁnitions Acceptance of work Acronym deﬁnitions Admixtures used in hydraulic cement concrete Advertisement Notice of Aggregates acceptance procedures certiﬁcation base course base material coarse crusher run ﬁne handling storing lightweight nonpolishing penetration surface courses subbase Aggregate material maintenance of trafﬁc Air pollution Allaying dust Alteration of character of work Alteration of quantities Aluminum alloy Anchor bolts installation procedures materials Anchorage assemblies intermediate Anchors fabrication Materials and Fabrication see Bearing devices anchors Antennas Archeological ﬁndings Arches ﬁlled spandrel Arrows electronic Asphalt concrete SUPERPAVE acceptance adjustment system aggregates binders handling Handling and Storing Aggregates inspection plant jobmix formula materials mixture prepartion mixtures payment adjustment system plant requirements Asphalt Concrete Mixing Plant production initial referee system storage system tests testing Asphalt concrete curbs construction procedures materials Asphalt concrete pavement base density requirements compacting equipment ﬁnishing materials mixtures pavement samples pavement tolerances paving limitations cold weather paving technician placement limitations placement procedures Placing and Finishing plant Asphalt Concrete Mixing Plant plant technician priming procedures rumble strips sidewalks tolerances Asphalt materials cement coating ability curb backup material cutback curing asphalts emulsions liquid asphalt materials non tracking tack shipping storing VAAP requirements pay adjustments test reports used in hydraulic cement stabilization Attenuators impact Authority Engineer Inspector Contractor Contractors Superintendent INDEX Award cancellation Award of contract Backﬁll culvertsstorm drains ﬂowable ﬁll porous replacing undercut excavation structures Baled straw Bar chair supports Bar mats Barricades responsibility to public Barricades and warning Signs Barrier delineators service trafﬁc silt sound walls steel median trafﬁc barrier service see also Median barriers Base course Basements demolition Batcher certiﬁcation of Beads glass Bearing areas bridge seats Bearing devices anchors materials placement procedures Bearing pads Bearing piles Bearing plates Bedding material culvertspipes box culverts drop inlets manholes spring boxes junction boxes etc .
registration EVerify general information irregular bids material proposal content proposal guaranty proposal quantities Interpretation of Quantities in Proposal public opening Public Opening of Bids requirements Bidding Requirements and Conditions submission of bid standard withdrawal worksiteproposal examination Examination of Site of Work and Proposal Bolts Bond requirements bid performancepayment contract Borrow subgrade shoulders Box culverts Breakaway support systems Brick Bridge approach slabs asphalt overlay removal asphalt plug joints concrete surface penetrant sealers conduit systems construction over navigable waters cover depth survey deck construction deck grooving deck overlays Repairs deck repair Widening Repairing and Reconstructing Existing Structures drainage aprons chutes elastomer expansion joint sealing system epoxy overlay expansion joints ﬁnishing concrete guardrail attachments high earlyvery high early strength concrete joints joint sealants latex concrete lighting systems median barriers NBIS inspection opening to trafﬁc INDEX repairing existing steel structures seat bearing areas silica fume concrete deck waterprooﬁng membrane systems widening Bronze alloy Buildings demolition use by Contractor Bull nose barrier Bulletin boards and posting ofﬁcial notices Burning Cable aerial barricades color coding conductor guardrail interconnect lighting conductor lighting systems loop detector lead in materials signal splicing Caissons Calcium chloride Cameras CCTV Camera poles Carrier rates common Casing pipe Casting frames covers drainage structures Castings Catch basin masonry unit CCTV ITS analogue digital encoderdecoder equipment poles procedures retroﬁt Cement hydraulic admixtures Cement hydraulic stabilization types Cementstabilized select borrow Central mix aggregate technician Certiﬁcates permits licenses Certiﬁcations batcher technician herbicidepesticide applicator SSPC welder Channel diversion preservation of Channelizing devices Check dams erosion control Cisterns Cited specs material Claims certiﬁcation compensation content disposition of extension of time Notice of Intent responsibility for damage review submission time limit to ﬁle Class I backﬁll material Cleanup Clearing grubbing area connecting substructure units Clearing of parcels Closing wells Cofferdams Cold weather paving limitations Combining pipe of one size Combustibles disposal of Common carrier rates Communicationdecision making Communications hub ITS Compaction see Density Compensation for altered quantities Completion date Completion failure to on time Concrete corrugated metal bridge deck forms curing box storage chamber curing materials cylinders encasement ﬁeld technician foundations prestressed Tolerances INDEX slope protection steps testing see Asphalt concrete see Hydraulic cement Concrete pavement see Asphalt concrete pavement see Hydraulic cement concrete pavement Conductor cables Conduit systems bridges trafﬁc control ITS Construction joints hydraulic cement concrete overor adjacent navigable waters safety health standards signs surveying Construction Stakes Lines Grades Contract alteration in work audit award bond requirements cancellation of award concurrent Cooperation Among Contractors contract time Determination and Extension of Contract Time Limit default of documents eliminated items execution approval extension of contract time failure to execute failure to complete on time failure to furnish bondsinsurance ﬁxed date liquidated damages Notice to Proceed provisions quantities ranking of elements subcontracting termination time limit unbonded Contract documents afﬁdavits documents ambiguity in bonds contract deﬁnition see Contract hierarchycoordination insurance liability insurance workers comp progress schedule Contract Engineer authority of Contract intent Contract requirements Contractor character of workers work methods equipment cooperation among contractors cooperation of critical materials failure to complete on time gratuities insurance RR limitation of operations liquidated damages Notice to Proceed progress schedule prosecution of work responsibility for utility property services responsibility for Work separate contracts subcontracting suspension of work ordered by the Engineer termination of responsibilities time limit determination time limit extension work responsibility Contractor companies payment of Control centers lighting systems Control strips density Controllers trafﬁc signals Convenience safety public Copper alloy Corps of Engineers permits Crack repair Crib walls Crushed gravel Crushed hydraulic cement concrete Culverts see Box culverts see Pipe Curb gutter Curbcut ramps INDEX Curing materials Cut see Excavation Damages liquidated Dampprooﬁngwaterprooﬁng materials Debarred suppliers Default of contract Deﬁnitions abbreviations acronyms terms Delineators materials installation procedures Delivery of bid Demolition basements buildings foundations pavement structures Density aggregate base course asphalt concrete pavement cementstabilized courses control strips embankments hydraulic embankments limestabilized courses pipe backﬁll shoulders subbase courses subgrade Density control strip construction constructing equipment materials procedures Density requirements aggregate base course Density requirements aggregate subbase course Department furnished construction signs materials Departmentrailway provisions Detectors see trafﬁc signals Determination of bearing piles capacities lengths Detours during construction temporary Direct tension indicators Directional island curbs Disinfecting water mains Dismantling existing structure Disposal areas Contractor furnished material coal valuable material organicinorganic material surplus material unsuitable rock excavated site plan Disposal of material bridge painting Disposal of structure obstruction Disqualiﬁcation of bidder Documents contract Drainage aprons chutes bridge Drainage structures materials procedures Drawings working general Drop inlets Drop inlet sediment trap Dry riprap Dumped riprap Dust allaying Dynamic Message Signs DMS equipment general equipment DMS retroﬁt sign structure software testing Earth berms Earthwork construction procedures erosion siltation control hydraulic materials shrinkageswell slopes surplus material tolerances Easements Elastomeric expansion dams Elastomeric pads bridges materials sound barrier walls Electrical components Electrical service INDEX bridge lighting systems roadway trafﬁc controls temporary signalization trafﬁc control devices Electronic arrows Eliminated items Embankments see Earthwork Encasement pipe End sections installation procedures materials Endwalls Energy dissipators Engineer deﬁnition duties authority Authority of Engineer Entrance gutter Environmental protection air pollution erosionsiltation control forest ﬁres noise pollution stipulations water pollution Environmental sensor stations data collection remote processor software testing warranty Epoxy mastic coating Epoxycoated reinforcing steel Epoxymortar patching Epoxyresin systems Equal Employment Opportunity Equipment aggregate base course asphalt concrete pavement character of constructing density control strips hydraulic cement concrete pavement hydraulic cement concrete mowing penetration surface courses rental retained in signal modiﬁcations seal coat stabilized opengraded material trafﬁc signals warranties guaranties Eradication of exist .
pavement markings pavement markings markers Erosion Siltation control Department certiﬁed person inspection items part of SWPPP Etherner Terminal server equipment installation procedures testing warranty eVA Excavation borrow drilledin caisson minor structure overhaul presplitting regular retaining walls rock slopes structure undercut within limits of curbgutter combinationmedian barrier see also Earthwork Expansion dams elastomeric Explosives use Extra work Fabric geotextile drainage installation procedures materials Falsework installation procedures working drawings Fastening devices to keep reinforcing bars in position Federal aid provisions Fences construction procedures materials Fertilizer application procedures materials Fiber optic cable material distribution center installation splicing INDEX testing warranty Fiber Reinforced Polymer Wrap System Field ofﬁces Fill procedures see also Embankment Filter cloth see Fabric geotextile Final acceptance Final payment Fire hydrants Fires forests Fixed Completion Date Fixed object attachments FOA Flaggers automated AFAD to protect new concrete pavement measurement payment railway service Floors plank steel grid Flowable ﬁll Flumes paved Fly ash used in concrete used in lime stabilization Force account work Forest ﬁres Forgings steel Forms concrete corrugated metal bridge deck prestressed deck panel removal Foundations retaining walls seals sound barrier walls structures trafﬁc control devices Frames covers installation procedures materials Furnishing erecting precast structures Furnishing placing backﬁll Furshing right of way Gabions Galvanized surfaces painting Galvanizing Geosynthetics installation procedures materials Geotextile bedding bedding material drainage fabric drainage fabric underdrains fabric erosion control materials Girders concrete steel Glass beads for pavement marking Grades lines stakes Grading operations DTMs Gratuities Gravel crushed Grid ﬂoors steel Group channelizing devices GroutGrouted hydraulic cement material riprap rubble gutters paved ditches paved ﬂumes street connection pavement bridge drainage apronschutes Grubbing Guaranty forfeiture of proposal guaranty material plants proposal Guardrail certiﬁed installer delineators installation procedures materials Guardrail steel median barriers Gutters Handling storing shipping materials epoxyresin systems hydraulic cement concrete steel structures Handrails Hauling overhaul public roads rates route sizeweight limits Health standards INDEX Herbicides applicators materials Highmast luminaire assemblies Historic sites Holidays Hydraulic cement mortar grout Hydraulic cement concrete acceptance admixtures batcher consolidation construction joint bonding construction joint exposure to tidal waters curing equipment ﬁnishing surfaces forms handling latex modiﬁed materials materials measurement of mixing mixture classiﬁcation mixture proportion placement limitations placement procedures pneumatic placement prestressed protection sidewalks silicone treatment storing tremie widening repair Hydraulic cement concrete operations bridge deck construction bridge seat bearing areas expansion ﬁxed joints ﬁnishing concrete surfaces materials procedures Hydraulic cement concrete pavement cold weather protection consolidation curing depth dowels equipment ﬁnishing forms form removal grade preparation joints materials opening to trafﬁc placement procedures reinforcing steel placement slipforming straightedging test beam texturing tolerances Hydraulic cement concrete conformance with joints technician waterprooﬁng Hydraulic cement stabilization ﬁeld laboratory Hydroseeding Impact attenuators temporary permanent attenuator service Incidental concrete items materials procedures Inspection authorityduties of inspector by others for project acceptance RR right to Contractors insurance storage of materials SWPPP materials material technicians work Insurance bodily injury liability property damage failure to furnish force account cost of home ofﬁce overhead HOOH railroad required for contract execution workers compensation Intake boxes Items eliminated ITS conduit installation procedures INDEX materials RFID ballpegs testing Jacked pipe Jacking blocking of beams Joint sealer preformed elastomeric Joints see Asphalt concrete pavement see Bridges see Construction joints see Hydraulic cement concrete pavement materials Junction boxes drainage electrical removal of trafﬁc control devices Jute twine Labor wages Landscape protection of Latex modiﬁed concrete Latex modiﬁer Laws to be observed Legal relations certiﬁcates claims damage responsibility contractor work utility propertyservice responsibility Corps of Engineers permits Environmental stipulations erosion siltation control laws observed licenses nationwide federal permits other restoration work performed by others Legal rights construct method approval RR construct on R.O.W .
construction beginning contractors insurance contractors property damage insurance policy copies Insurance property damage legal rights no waiver of liability public insurance no waiver of patented devices materials processes protection of property landscape public ofﬁcials personal liability railroad insurance railwayhighway provisions Licenses Lighting structures poles steel for Lighting systems bridge Lights navigation Lime stabilization types seeding use in asphalt concrete Limestone Limitation of operations Lines grades stakes Liquid asphalt Liquidated damages Local material sources Lumber structural Luminaires arms poles Mailboxes Maintaining trafﬁc Maintenance during construction connections delays detours entrances ﬂagging grading operations haul route patching operations signs structure obstruction removaldisposal structures failure to maintain structures temp work suspension Major contract items Manhole masonry units Manholes drainage materials Manipulation Managed ﬁeld ethernet switches installation procedures ports testing warranty Markers pavement Markings pavement INDEX glass beads for materials procedures Masonry units catch basins manholes Materials acceptance cited specs control of critical delivery found on project furnished by Contractor furnished by Department handling local sources cited specs patented payment on hand quality requirements rights uses sampling source of supply storage testing unacceptable warranties Measurement units cubic yard lump sum weight Measurement asphalt borrow compensation for altered quantities compensation concrete cubic yard eliminated items embankment equipment rental equipment excavation extra force account work ﬁnal payment insurance items excluded labor lump sum materials materials inventory materials other measurement payment miscellaneous partial payment payment for material on hand payment plan quantities quantities measurement scope of payment speciﬁc items statements storage subcontractor tax timber weight Median barriers bridge concrete steel Median strips Milling Type A Mineral ﬁller Mineralogical ﬁndings Minimum wage Minor structure excavation drainage structures earthwork gabions Mobilization Modifying exist .
panels trafﬁc signs Overruns Overseeding Paint Painting of metal see Protective coating of metal timber structures Paleontological ﬁndings Parapets Parcel clearing Partial payment Patching bridges Patents devices materials processes Paved ditches ﬂumes Pavement demolition patching during construction planing see also Asphalt concrete pavement see also Hydraulic cement concrete pavement Pavement markers installation procedures materials Pavement markings eradicating installation procedures materials Pavement message markings construction material Payment accepted quantities changes bonds escrow account ﬁnal materials on hand partial retainage scope withholding Pedestrian fences Penetration surface courses Performance bond Permits Piles bearing bearing capacity determination cast in place driving length determination loading tests materials order list penetration pile types points preboring procedures protection restrike retaining walls sheet splicing steel piles or pile shells timber tip elevation tolerances Pilot vehicle Pipe combining pipe of one size elbows reducers tees endwalls extended pipelines not speciﬁed grate post installation inspection structural plate temp stream relocation tunneling types of underdrains Pipe arch installation procedures materials structural plate Pipe culvert jacked methods INDEX Pipe installation drainage underdrains water sewer Pipe types Pipe spillouts Pit materials Placement limitations asphalt concrete pavement hydraulic cement concrete stabilized opengraded material Placing latex silica fume hydraulic cement concrete Plan quantities earthwork Planing ﬂexible pavement ridgid pavement Plans speciﬁcations conformity with working drawings Plant inspection material Planting acceptance criteria care and maintenance of plants Establishment Period installation procedures guarantee herbicide application payment schedule personnel qualiﬁcations pruning procedures substituteddeleted by Engineer from Contract unacceptable plant criteria vegetation control watering Plants for roadside development materials planting Pneumatic placement of concrete Poles Pollution Posting ofﬁcial notices Posts fence guardrail sign Precast drainage structures structures furnishing erecting PreConstruction conference Preformed elastomeric joint sealer Prequaliﬁcation of bidders Preservatives wood Prestressed concrete concrete controls materials piles plant review procedures structural units Prestressing tendons Primary networkLayer Aggregation switches equipment installation procedures testing warranty Prime coat asphalt Progress of work Progress schedule Property protection of Proposal combination or conditional content contractor value engineering examination of forfeiture of guaranty guaranty quantities interpretation Prosecution progress of work Protection restoration of property landscape Protective coating of metal in structures certiﬁcations coating galvanized surfaces environmental protection existing structures galvanized surfaces general surface preparation and application standards health and safety worker materials new structures zone coating of existing structure Protective coverings soil retention coverings Pruning Establishment Period guarantee materials Public INDEX convenience safety ofﬁcials personal liability use of roads opennot open Quantities alteration compensation for altered in scope measurement of plan quantities proposal Quarry materials Railing Railway contractors insurance construction method approval on R.O.W .
ﬂaggerwatchperson services highway tests railroad protective railwayhighway provisions railroad tests restoration of property landscape starting construction warning signs watchperson Rank of contract documents Reconstruct existing structures manholes Recycled materials asphalt pavement asphalt shingles crushed glass ﬂy ash hydraulic cement concrete Reﬂective sheeting Regular excavation Reinforced concrete crib walls Reinforcing steel installation procedures materials Reinstalled pipe Relocating or modifying exist .
items Removal asphalt concrete overlay unacceptable unauthorized work portion of an existing structure Removal disposal of structures obstructions Removing resetting relaying adjusting installing modifying reconstructing or relocating existing items Repairing existing structures Restoration property Retainage Retaining walls concrete Retroreﬂectors Reuse guardrail terminal Right of way construction method approval on railway furnishing Rightofway monuments installation procedures materials Riprap materials placement procedures Road edge delineators Roadside development construction materials Rolled Erosion Control Products RECP Rootmat Route map Rubble gutter grouted Safety health standards during construction public Salt sodium chloride calcium chloride Samples tests cited material specs Sanitary provisions Sanitary sewer facilities Scales Scope of payment Seal coat Sediment basins Seed application procedures materials Seeding materials erosion control Select material Selective tree removal trimming cleanup Septic tanks Settlement plates embankments Sewer brick masonry units Sewer facilities sanitary testing Sheet piles temporary Sheeting INDEX warranty requirements reﬂective Shop drawings see Working drawings Shotcrete Shoulder material opengraded materials procedures Shoulders Sidewalk Signal components Signal poles trafﬁc control devices Signalization temporary Signals trafﬁc trafﬁc equipment trafﬁc procedures see Trafﬁc Signals Signs erection fabrication islands overlayment panels posts sheeting protecting storage transportation structures temporary trafﬁc transporting Silt barriers Siltation control Site conditions differing Site of work examination Size weight limitations Slag aggregates use in hydraulic cement concrete Slides removal Slope drains Slope protection Sod materials placement procedures Sodium chloride Soil retention coverings Soil stabilization mats installation procedures materials Sound barrier walls Source of supply Special provision copied notes Special provisions Specialty items Speciﬁcations coordination with contract documents contract rank highway materials conformance with cited specs railroad supplemental Spraying herbicide Spring boxes Stabilization hydraulic cement lime materials procedures weather limitations Stabilized opengraded material acceptance equipment materials placing limitations procedures proportioning Stakeout Stakes lines grades Standard combination curb gutter Standard drawings Standard retaining walls Steel corrosionresistant forgings grid ﬂooring grid ﬂoors median barriers piles reinforcement reinforcing materials reinforcing procedures shafting structural Steel structures bolt holes bolt tension erection of expansion joints fabrication procedures falsework handling storing shipping materials INDEX materials painting pedestals shear connectors straightening curving structures girders welding working drawings Steps Stone bedding Storage of materials Storm drains Structural plate Structural steel working drawings Structure excavation Structures existing dismantling reconstructing removaldisposal repairing timber widening Stud shear connectors Stumps Subbase acceptance grading materials placement procedures Subcontracting Subgrade Subsurface data Suppliers debarred Supply sourcequality material requirements Surcharge Surface course penetration aggregates cover material equipment liquid asphalt materials procedures weather limitations Surplus material disposal of Surveying construction Surveying state forces Suspension of work SWaM Switches Layer aggregation Managed Field Ethernet Primary network Tack coat Technicians certiﬁcation classiﬁcation Temporary structures Termination of contract Termination of Contractors responsibilities Terms deﬁnitions Tests of material general Tests Testing SystemsOperations Field Acceptance Test FAT System Operations Test SAT Trafﬁc Operations Center Intergration Test TOCIT local intersection trafﬁc signal equipment Testing Speciﬁc material adhesive joint sealant systems anchor bolts anodes bearings conduit FRP systems grounding electrodes piles loading silicone joint sealants structure coatings welds Timber disposition merchantable preservatives structures Time limit contract Topsoil application procedures materials stockpile Trafﬁc barrier service guardrail terminal Trafﬁc control devices construction of delineators materials pavement markings markers signs temporary INDEX working drawings see also Trafﬁc signals Trafﬁc opening project sections Trafﬁc signals controllers cabinets detectors magnetic inductive loop ﬂashers signal heads testing demonstration Trafﬁc maintaining materials procedures Trafﬁc signs materials erection fabrication transporting storing warranty Trainees on construction projects Transplanting Tree cleanup herbicide planting transplanting removal replacement selective cuttingdisposal trimming pruning wallswells Truck mounted attenuators Unacceptable unauthorized work Unacceptable materials Undercut excavation Underdrains installation procedures materials post construction inspection Outlet pipe Underruns Unions Unsuitable material material removal of Uninterruptible Power Supply Trafﬁc Engineering batteries cabinet warranty Uninterruptible Power Supply ITS batteries equipment testing warranty Utilities adjustment Contractors responsibility cooperation regarding Value engineering proposals Contractor VECP Vehicle Detection System ITS detector performance testing warranty Video Detectors Trafﬁc Engineering loop detectors pedestrian detectors video cameras wireless Virginia Asphalt Acceptance Program compliance requirements binder testing cutback testing emulsiﬁed asphalts testing nontracking tack noncompliance pay adjustment Virginia Test Methods VOC emission areas Wages Walls retaining sound barrier tree Warning lights Warning signs responsibility to public Warranties general CCTV Dynamic Message Signs environmental sensor stations ﬁber optic cable ITS ITS components L Aggregation switches managed ﬁeld ethernet switches pavement markings primary network switches trafﬁc control devices Uninterruptible Power Supply UPS video detection system Watchperson railway Water cement use gate INDEX lime use pollution supply protection of Water sanitary sewer facilities disinfecting water mains materials placement procedures testing Watering Waterprooﬁng installation procedures materials procedures Water stops Weather limitations penetration surface courses prime coat seal coat stabilized opengraded material stone matrix asphalt tack coat Weed killer herbicides applicators materials spraying procedures Weight size limitations Welded wire fabric Welder certiﬁcation Welds reinforcing steel structural steel Wells Widen repair reconstruct existing structures Wire mesh Wireless transceivers antennas broadband radio ethernet radio leased services modem Work alteration of character authority to begin conditions for default of contract examination of site extra failure to complete on time ﬁxed completion date force account gratuities inspection of limitation of operations liquidated damages materials critical methods character of Notice to Proceed progress schedule prosecution of removal of unacceptable unauthorized responsibility Contractors subcontracting suspension suspension ordered by Engineer termination of contract termination of Contractors responsibilities time limit extension of contract Work control of claims submissiondisposition construction surveying construction D.T.M .
