RightofWay A general term denoting land property or interest therein usually but not required to be in a strip acquired for or devoted to a highway and its appurtenant structures. . Roadbed The graded portion of a highway within top and side slopes prepared as a foundation for the pavement structure and shoulder . .
Structures Bridges culverts catch basins drop inlets retaining walls cribbing manholes endwalls buildings sewers service pipes underdrains foundation drains and other features that may be encountered in The Work and not otherwise classified herein. . Subbase The layer or layers of specified or selected material of designed thickness placed on a subgrade to support a base course. . Subcontractor Any individual firm corporation or combination thereof to which the Contractor with the written consent of the Department sublets any part of the Contract. . Subgrade The top surface of a roadbed upon which the pavement structure and shoulders are constructed generally the top in mm within cuts and fills. . Subgrade Treatment Modification of subgrade material by stabilization. . Stabilization Modification of soils or aggregates by incorporating materials which will increase load bearing capacity firmness and resistance to weathering or displacement. . Substructure All of that part of the bridge structure below the bearings of simple and continuous spans skewbacks of arches and top of footings of rigid frames including backwalls wingwalls and wing protection railings . .
This includes signing pavement markings and traffic control devices as outlined in the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices Section Project Plans and Special Provisions for Traffic Control .
All existing guard rail signs pavement pavement markings bridge handrail and other safety appurtenances shall also be maintained in a safe and satisfactory condition .
Proposed changes in the basic design of a pavement type e.g .
rigid to flexible or vice versa or pavement thickness will not be considered as an acceptable VEP .
Within Project Limits No hauling equipment which is loaded beyond those limits provided by State Law shall be permitted on any portion of the new or existing pavement structure except that such loads will be permitted on nonstabilized bases and subbases prior to placing roadway paving subject to the provisions of Subsection .. Axle loads and gross weight limits will be evaluated in accordance with current Georgia Law .
When it becomes necessary to cross existing pavement with excessive loads the Contractor shall provide and remove at his own expense proper cushioning by means of earth blanket or otherwise as directed .
Widening and Reconstruction Before beginning construction where existing pavement is to be retained either for widening or for reconstruction .
Take threepoint levels of the pavement throughout the length to be retained .
Threepoint levels are not required on asphalt shoulder widening projects and earth shoulder reconstruction projects. . From the threepoint levels prepare a graphic grade plot that best fits the existing pavement to minimize the leveling requirements if any of the existing roadway .
Cross slopes may be varied within the ranges shown on the Plans or adjusted by the Engineer to produce the best fit. . On passing lane or widening Projects where existing pavement is not to be overlaid a .
Profile and plot the outside edge of the existing pavement to obtain a smooth profile grade .
On asphalt shoulder widening and earth shoulder reconstruction projects use the offset to the edge of pavement on the stakes .
Traffic Markings When traffic markings are to be placed by either the Contractor or others furnish the layout and clean and preline the surface to allow the placement of permanent pavement markings on the Project .
Grubbing also includes removing and properly disposing of parking lots abandoned pavements sidewalks driveways catch basins drop inlets pipes manholes curbing retaining walls utilities foundations paved floors underground tanks for removal of underground tanks see Section and other structures within the RightofWay unless the work or portions of the work are Obstructions removed as one of the excavation items Shown in the Proposal as separate Pay Items Removed by others To be incorporated in the project .
Removing loading hauling stockpiling as designated and sawing pavement when payment is included under Item .
Cut surfaces at structure trenches to prevent damage to the adjacent pavement when existing paved areas will be retained .
Saw pavements deep enough to cause the edges to break in straight lines .
D. Pavement Replaced Replace pavement removed at structure trenches in kind where adjacent pavements will be retained .
d. Embankments Over Existing Roads Parking Areas and Floors Thoroughly plow or scarify all portions of existing unpaved roads and flexible pavements .
Remove the old pavement with rigid surfaces if the new embankment is not more than ft m high .
Break remaining rigid pavements that are within ft m of the finished grade so that no section larger than ft² m² remains intact. . Embankment Formation Use the following requirements when constructing the embankment formation a. Layer Construction Except as noted in Subsection B .. d construct the embankments in parallel layers .
All Classes Place mixtures of the above classes together with random material such as rock gravel sand cinders slag and brokenup pavement so that coarse particles are dumped near the outer slopes and finer particles near the center of the roadway .
General Description This work includes Excavating of all materials including ditches undesirable material including removal and replacement and borrow if required Hauling Forming embankments Constructing shoulders and subgrades Finishing dressing and disposing of undesirable or surplus material Clearing and grubbing according to Section and Section unless these items are established as Pay Items in the Contract Removing and disposing of miscellaneous roadway items including but not limited to curbs drainage structures and pavements unless established as separate contract items Ensure that the completed grading work conforms to the horizontal and vertical alignment and typical cross sections shown on the Plans or as directed by the Engineer .
.. Equipment Use equipment approved by the Engineer that will not damage base pavement or other appurtenances to be retained .
The Engineer will not permit tractors with treads or equipment that damage existing base surfacing or pavement .
General Shape and compact shoulders in sequence as required for the type of base or pavement being constructed .
Promptly repair damage to an existing base surface or pavement due to shoulder construction .
Promptly repair excessive erosion to prevent damage to the adjacent base or pavement. . Repair and dress adjacent slopes and remove excess material from adjacent ditches when shaping dressing and compacting shoulders .
Hot Mix Asphaltic Concrete Pavement Construct shoulders adjacent to hot mix asphaltic concrete pavement according to the following case scenarios a .
Before constructing the base or pavement place loose shoulder material to construct the compacted width of shoulder shown on the Plans .
Place the loose shoulder material at a proper distance outside the proposed edge of base or pavement .
After initially manipulating and compacting the base or paving material use the blade grader to pull the shoulder up to but not inside of the proposed edge of the base or pavement .
c. When constructing multiple courses construct the shoulders base or pavement using the same number of courses .
Prevent excessive erosion from concentrated water at weep holes by keeping the distance from the base or pavement construction to the shoulder construction to a minimum .
c. Enforcing Construction Limitations When trenching out or rebuilding the shoulders on opposite sides of the pavement simultaneously separate the two operations by at least mile m leaving at least one usable shoulder to protect passing traffic .
Extent of Rolling Test roll on all portions of the subgrade under the proposed base subbase or pavement plus a ft mm width on each side .
Type II Aggregate Drainage Course Use as a drainage blanket under sidewalks curbs and gutter and beneath the pavement system or shoulders .
c. After placing the pavement make the subbase outside of the pavement flush with the outside pavement edge .
d. When necessary cover a shoulder drainage course with a second layer of shoulder pavement to prevent contaminating the aggregate drainage material . .
Section SoilLime Construction Reconstruct areas at no cost to the Department on which limetreated soil was constructed but not covered with a layer of pavement base or other construction material during the same construction season .
Section General Specifications for Base and Subbase Course Ensure that the auxiliary wheel or roller operates on the surface of the pavement adjacent to the area to be compacted and at a distance from the edge of the pavement that no damage occurs .
When widening pavement on which there is traffic on both sides stagger operations to keep the widening trench open in one lane of traffic at a time. . Compaction Compact the entire thickness of all bases and subbases to the specified maximum dry weight per cubic foot meter as determined by the method specified in the Section for each base or subbase .
Finegrade the surface of the cementstabilized subbase for Portland cement concrete pavement or the cementstabilized base for asphaltic concrete pavement .
Correct any failures caused by traffic at no additional cost to the Department. . Protection of Course Maintain the base subbase or shoulder course constructed under these Specifications until the Engineer determines that it has sufficiently cured and is ready to be covered with the next base or pavement course .
Apply the same density requirements as stated above in Subsection B. C. Finishing Finish the surface of the subbase for Portland cement concrete pavement or the base of asphaltic concrete pavement with automatically controlled screed equipment when required by Subsection H Fine Grading Machine of the Specifications .
E. Priming the Base Apply bituminous prime according to Section unless using Graded aggregate base under Portland cement concrete pavement Graded aggregate base under asphaltic concrete in mm or more in total thickness .. Quality Acceptance A. Compaction Tests .
General Description This work includes reconstructing base courses by Reshaping the existing road surface Section Reconstructed Base Course Adding the required amount of new material Compacting materials to form a foundation course for other base courses surface courses or pavements Construct base courses according to these Specifications and to the lines grades and typical crosssections shown on the Plans or established by the Engineer .
Payment will be full compensation for Removing and disposing asphalt pavements base materials and unsatisfactory subgrades Furnishing all material Loading hauling and unloading material Mixing Compacting Finishing Watering Payment will be made under Item No .
Operate the paver from a string grade control or a combination of string control and existing pavement control .
Section Portland Cement Concrete Subbase Ensure that the grade immediately under the subbase does not contribute to deficient thicknesses of either the subbase or pavement .
Apply a second application of curing compound just before placing the pavement to act as a bond breaker .
G. Preserving the Subbase Maintain the subbase until it is covered by the succeeding pavement course. . Place the pavement course on the subbase only after the mixture has cured for days .
The Engineer may base the decision to remove or correct the area on a Plan submitted by the Contractor detailing how to obtain the final pavement profile and grade . .
Section Hot Mix Asphaltic Concrete Construction This section includes the requirements for all bituminous plant mixtures regardless of the gradation of the aggregates type and amount of bituminous material or pavement use .
.. Definitions Segregated Mixture Mixture lacking homogeneity in HMA constituents of such a magnitude that there is a reasonable expectation of accelerated pavement distress or performance problems .
Include the following on the paving plan Proposed starting date Location of plants Rate of production Average haul distances Number of haul trucks Paver speed feet meterminute for each placement operation Mat width for each placement operation Number and type of rollers for each placement operation Section Hot Mix Asphaltic Concrete Construction Sketch of the typical section showing the paving sequence for each placement operation Electronic controls used for each placement operation Temporary pavement marking plan If staged construction is designated in the Plans or contract provide a paving plan for each construction stage .
Before applying hot mix asphaltic concrete pavement clean the existing surface to the Engineers satisfaction. . Patch and Repair Minor Defects Before placing leveling course a .
The calculated mean pavement air voids result in an adjusted pay factor less than .
or any single sub lot result in mean pavement air voids exceeding .
This will cause the color of the finished pavement to vary .
Ensure the outside edges of the pavement being laid are aligned and parallel to the roadway center line. . For New Construction or Resurfacing Contracts containing multiple lifts or courses arrange the width of the individual lifts so the longitudinal joints of each successive lift are offset from the previous lift at least ft mm .
in mm along curbs gutters raised pavement edges and areas where drainage characteristics of the road must be retained .
Protect the Pavement Protect sections of the newly finished pavement from traffic until the traffic will not mar the surface or alter the surface texture .
If directed by the Engineer use artificial methods to cool the newly finished pavement to open the pavement to traffic more quickly .
Calculate Pavement Mean Air Voids The Department will calculate the pavement air voids placed within each lot as follows a .
If the mean air voids of the pavement placed within a lot exceeds of the maximum target air voids if established and the Engineer determines that the material need not be removed and replaced the lot may be accepted at an adjusted unit price as determined by the Engineer . .
C. Surface Tolerance In this Specification pavement courses to be overlaid with an OpenGraded Friction Course or PEM are considered surface courses .
C. Calculate Pavement Mean Air Voids The Department will determine the percent of maximum air voids for each lot by dividing the pavement mean air voids by the maximum pavement mean air voids acceptable .
as described in Subsection B .. D. Asphaltic Concrete for Temporary Detours Hot mix asphaltic concrete placed on temporary detours not to remain in place as part of the permanent pavement does not require hydrated lime .
Hot mix asphaltic concrete placed as temporary mix shall meet requirements established in Subsection F. Where the Contract Price of the asphaltic concrete for permanent pavement is let by the ton megagram the Contract Price for the asphaltic concrete placed on temporary detours is adjusted by subtracting .ton .mg of mix used .
Where the Contract price of the mix in the permanent pavement is based on the square yard meter obtain the adjusted price for the same mix used on the temporary detour by subtracting .yd² .
If the pavement mean air voids exceed the tolerances established in the Air Voids Acceptance Schedule Table remove and replace the materials at the Contractors expense .
General Description This work includes producing and placing hot mix recycled asphaltic concrete that incorporates reclaimed asphalt pavement RAP reclaimed asphalt shingles RAS virgin aggregate hydrated lime and neat asphalt cement .
C. Calculate Pavement Mean Air Voids The Department will determine the percent of maximum air voids for each lot by dividing the pavement mean air voids by the maximum pavement mean air voids acceptable .
as described in Subsection B .. D. Asphaltic Concrete for Temporary Detours Hot mix asphaltic concrete placed on temporary detours that will not remain in place as part of the permanent pavement does not require hydrated lime .
Hot mix asphaltic concrete placed as temporary mix shall meet requirements established in Subsection F. Where the Contract Price of the asphaltic concrete for permanent pavement is let by the ton megagram the Contract Price for the asphaltic concrete placed on temporary detours is adjusted by subtracting .ton .mg of mix used .
Section Hot Mix Recycled Asphaltic Concrete Where the Contract price of the mix in the permanent pavement is based on the square yard meter obtain the adjusted price for the same mix used on the temporary detour by subtracting .yd² .
If the pavement mean air voids exceed the tolerances established in the Air Voids Acceptance Schedule Table remove and replace the materials at the Contractors expense .
Heating and Milling Units Ensure the heating unit meets the following requirements Capable of heating the asphaltic concrete pavement to a temperature high enough to remove excess moisture and allow hot milling of the material to the designated plan depth without breaking aggregate particles Controls the heating process to prevent charring the existing surface avoid producing undesirable pollutants and prevent differential softening of the pavement Confine the heat application under a shielded or enclosed hood Make all efforts to protect adjacent landscape from heat damage .
Milling heads shall remove the heated existing pavement to the depth specified in the Plans for the full transverse width even if additional virgin aggregate or asphaltic concrete mixture is added at no cost to the Department .
Remove all metal raised pavement markers and thermoplastic paint markings prior to recycling .
Heat Remove and Blend Materials Evenly heat the pavement at full lane width plus a minimum in mm overlap onto adjacent pavement materials .
Hot mill and rework the pavement to the width and depth shown in the plan typical section .
Control the depth of loosened pavement to within in mm of the depth specified .
Do not use scrappers scarifiers or any mechanical means of removing the softened pavement other than milling heads .
Ensure the pavement does not exceed a target smoothness index of .
Payment also includes removal of raised pavement markers and thermoplastic striping if applicable heating and hotmilling adding rejuvenator performing the mix design performing project sampling and testing and other incidentals necessary to complete the work .
General Description This work includes placing a hot asphaltvulcanized rubber seal treatment on an existing pavement surface according to the Specifications .
Spread the AsphaltRubber Composition Before applying the hot asphaltrubber composition clean and patch the existing pavement surface and treat with a bituminous tack coat as specified in Section .
General Description This work includes filling Type M or sealing Type S joints and cracks in existing pavements with rubber asphalt mixtures .
A polymermodified asphalt rubber PMAR blend may be used in lieu of both Type M and Type S. .. Definitions Type M Used to fill joints and cracks in Portland cement concrete or asphaltic concrete pavements when required by the Plans before placing an overlay .
Type S Used to seal joints and cracks in Portland cement concrete and asphaltic concrete pavements and shoulders when not placing an overlay .
Produce a mixture with the following properties A. Workability The mixture pours readily and penetrates a in mm pavement joint or crack to a depth of at least in mm when the application temperature of the fully reacted mixture is ºF ºC and the air temperature is ºF ºC or higher .
E. Adhesion When cooled the mixture bonds strongly to both asphalt and concrete pavement surfaces .
Clean the pavement surface and check the joints and cracks to ensure that they are free of vegetation dirt dust moisture and other foreign material .
General Description This work includes removing portions of existing asphaltic concrete pavement removing base and subgrade as shown on the Plans or as directed by the Engineer and sawing joints in the existing asphaltic concrete pavement .
Remove Pavement After sawing the joints begin removing the isolated pavement .
Use removal methods that will not damage the pavement edges that will remain in place or impede the proposed construction .
C. Protect Remaining Edges After removing the pavement protect the pavement edges that will remain in place. . Do not allow traffic or equipment to cross the remaining edges. . Repair or restore the damaged edges to the Engineers satisfaction at no additional cost to the Department .
.. Construction Prime the following bases and other areas Cement or lime stabilized bases or subbases regardless of pavement thickness Soil or aggregate bases or subbases on which bituminous surface treatment will be placed Soil or aggregate bases or subbases on which less than in mm total thickness of hot mix asphaltic concrete will be placed Prime is not required on driveway construction and paved shoulders .
F. Limitations and Areas Coated Apply only enough tack coat to the prepared road surface that can be covered with the new pavement course the same working day the tack coat is applied .
General Description This work includes placing one or more applications of bituminous material and aggregate on a previously prepared base or pavement .
NOTE When the relative humidity exceeds the ambient temperature exceeds ºF ºC the pavement temperature exceeds ºF ºC or the weather is windy or overcast application of bituminous surface treatment will be at the discretion of the Engineer .
Do not apply the bituminous material to the full width of the pavement unless the aggregate spreader can immediately cover the full width of the applied material .
Remove loose material silt spots vegetation and other objectionable material from the pavement .
If the pavement has considerable cracks do not flush it with water . .
Observe Weather Limitations Do not apply slurry seal if the pavement or ambient temperature is F C or below and falling .
If both the ambient and pavement temperatures are F C or above and rising the slurry seal may be applied .
If the coarse aggregate settles to the bottom of the mix remove the slurry from the pavement. . Place longitudinal joints on twolane roadways as close to the center of the pavement as possible .
Section Micro Surfacing Formulate the emulsified asphalt to allow the paving mixture to cure at a rate that will permit traffic on the pavement within hour after application without damaging the pavement surface .
Weather Limitations Spread the microsurfacing mixture only when The ambient temperature for hours immediately prior to placement has been at least F C. The current pavement surface and the ambient temperature is at least F C and rising .
Take care when filling ruts to restore the designed profile of the pavement cross section .
Joints are acceptable if there is no more than a inch mm vertical space for longitudinal joints nor more than inch mm for a transverse joint between the pavement surface and a ft . m straightedge placed perpendicular on the joint. . Areas the Mixing Machine Can not Reach Surface these areas using hand tools to provide complete and uniform coverage .
NOTE Do not place strips on wet or frozen pavement .
General Description This work includes constructing pavement composed of Portland cement concrete with or without reinforcement as specified on a prepared subgrade or subbase course .
Standard Specifications Section Control of Materials Section Portland Cement Concrete Pavement Section Field Laboratory Building Section Grind Concrete Pavement Section Sealing Roadway and Bridge Joints and Cracks Section Concrete Structures Section Coarse Aggregate Section Fine Aggregate Section Portland Cement Section Admixtures Section Curing Agents Section Joint Fillers and Sealers Section Reinforcement and Tensioning Steel Section Water Section Epoxy Resin Adhesives B. Referenced Documents AASHTO T AASHTO T AASHTO T AASHTO T ACI ASTM C Requirements for Uniformity ASTM C Method A GDT GDT GDT GDT GDT GDT GDT SOP Report form furnished by the Engineer Requests for certification .. Submittals A. Profilograph Equipment and Operator Certification Include in the Contract Unit Bid Price the cost to furnish and operate a Rainhart Model Profilograph to measure pavement profile deviations .
or for plain Portland cement concrete pavement .
or coarse aggregate for continuous reinforced concrete pavement .
D. Protective Materials Provide materials to protect the concrete edges and surface from rain including Standard metal forms or wood planks to protect the pavement edges Covering material such as burlap or cotton mats curing paper or plastic sheeting material to protect the pavement surface ..
C. Paving Equipment Ensure that equipment operating on the pavement has rubbertired wheels or flat steel wheels .
Wait to operate concrete or shoulder paving equipment on the pavement until the concrete slab is days old or has psi MPa compressive strength .
Prepare the Road Bed Prepare the roadbed as required by the Plans and Specifications before placing concrete pavement .
Ensure that the surface immediately under the concrete pavement allows proper pavement thickness and yield . .
Arrange operations to prevent leaveouts in continuous reinforced concrete pavement .
F. Construct the Ramps Prevent pavement slab stress by constructing a ramp of compacted earth or other material for movement on and off the pavement .
Do not allow equipment that exceeds legal load limits on the pavement .
Consolidation Perform vibration for the full width and depth of the pavement as follows a .
d. If appropriate use surface vibrators exclusively on pavements less than in mm thick .
f. Obtain uniform consolidation and density throughout the pavement .
If it is not uniform stop the operation and provide methods or equipment that will produce pavement that conforms to the Specifications. . Finishing After striking off and consolidating the concrete follow these steps a .
Ensure that the pavement surface final finish is true to grade uniform in appearance and free of irregular rough or porous areas .
c. Prevent the surface within in mm of the pavement edge to deviate more than .
e. Have the Engineer determine the texture depth by conducting pavement surface tests such as GDT at selected locations .
Numbering Stations Cast station numbers with a die in the pavement every ft m and ft mm from the right edge of the travel lane. . Protection From Rain Section Portland Cement Concrete Pavement Protect the unhardened concrete from rain .
When rain is imminent stop paving operations and place forms against the sides of the pavement .
Remove forms carefully to avoid damaging the pavement. . After removing the forms immediately cure the sides of the slab using the same method used to cure the pavement surface . .
Remove and replace plain concrete pavement that cracks during construction with no additional cost to the Department at the Engineers discretion . .
When removing and replacing a pavement section remove an area at least ft . m long and the full width of the lane .
Thoroughly clean the drilled holes of contaminants and set the dowels into the hardened concrete face of the existing pavement with a Type VIII epoxy bonding compound .
Longitudinal Sawed Joints Cut longitudinal sawed joints with a mechanical saw within three days after the concrete is placed and before traffic or equipment enters the pavement. . Transverse Joints Transverse joints consist of construction joints contraction joints or expansion joints constructed at required locations .
Place the board so that it conforms to the full cross section of the pavement .
f. When using plain Portland cement concrete pavement place dowel bars in construction joints .
Do not disturb the dowels. . Contraction Joints Create planes of weakness in plain Portland cement concrete pavement by cutting joints in the pavement surface .
Saw transverse contraction joints before the pavement cracks .
Form expansion joints by securing a removable bulkhead that conforms to the full cross section of the pavement .
c. Furnish and install preformed joint filler in lengths equal to the pavement width or the width of one lane .
Impervious Membrane Method To use this method a. Spray the entire surface of the pavement with white pigmented curing compound immediately after finishing the surface and before the concrete has set .
If the pavement is cured initially with cotton mats burlap or cotton fabric apply the compound after removing the mats .
Cover the top surface and sides of the pavement with polyethylene sheeting .
c. Extend the sheeting beyond the edges of the slab at least twice the thickness of the pavement .
Burlap Cotton Fabric or Other Methods Contractors may cure the pavement with burlap cotton fabrics or other materials if the section remains wet for the duration specified by the Engineer . .
Immediately after completing the curing period fill in the joints with joint sealing material before opening the pavement to traffic .
N. Open Pavement to Traffic Wait to open the pavement slab to traffic except for joint sawing vehicles until the concrete is days old unless representative compressive tests show that the slab has a compressive strength of psi MPa .
Protect the pavement against traffic from the public employees and agents . .
Employ watchmen to block traffic from the newly constructed pavement for the period required in this Specification . .
If traffic must go across the pavement construct crossings satisfactory to the Engineer to bridge over the concrete .
Construct the crossing without additional compensation. . Repair or replace pavement damaged by traffic or other causes before Final Acceptance without additional compensation .
Do not use concrete for Portland cement concrete pavement with a slump value greater than .
F. Concrete Strength Acceptance The concrete strength of Portland cement concrete pavement is accepted based upon the compressive strength development at a specific time .
The pavement is subdivided into separate concrete lots of approximately yd² m² placed continuously except for required work stoppages . .
The Unit Price of concrete pavement will be reduced for areas represented by each lot that does not meet the specified compressive strength at days according to the following schedule Pay Factor Schedule for Strength Determinations at Days Acceptance Limits for Pay Factor Levels .
Cure one set for hours under conditions similar to those under which the pavement is cured .
At this time the Engineer may require the immediate removal of the pavement in question .
If the Engineer does not require immediate removal of the pavement select removal or acceptance on the basis of the day strength development .
The completed pavement including corrective work must meet the applicable profile index value requirements .
in mm from the blanking band at no additional expense to the Department. . Take pavement profiles that are ft . m away from and parallel to the new pavement edges on pavements greater than ft. m wide and up to ft . m wide .
Test pavement to ft . to .
m wide parallel to and at the center line of the pavement section . .
Combine pavement sections less than ft m long that approach a bridge .
Provide results no later than the end of the second work day following placement. . For mainline pavement correct .
d. Retest pavement segments containing corrective slab replacements for Final Acceptance . .
H. Thickness The Engineer shall determine the pavement thickness using average core measurements tested according to GDT .
If appropriate include small irregular areas as part of another unit. . Take one core for each yd² m² of pavement or fraction of pavement in each unit where the Engineer selects .
Consider pavement more than .
Determine the pavement thickness in the affected location by taking additional cores at no less than ft m intervals parallel to the center line in each direction .
Remove deficient areas and replace with concrete pavement of the thickness shown on the Plans if the Engineer requires .
Measurement The area that will be paid for under this Item is the number of square yards meters of concrete pavement accepted as measured complete in place .
The pavement width measured is shown on the typical cross section of the Plans including additional widening as required or widening directed in writing by the Engineer .
The length is measured along the pavement surface .
.. Limits General Provisions through . . Payment Concrete pavement completed and accepted that meets the Specification requirements will be paid for at the full Contract Unit Price per square yard meter .
Payment for other accepted concrete pavement will be based on an adjusted Unit Price per square yard meter .
This price will be adjusted for payment for concrete pavement accepted but deficient in depth or compressive strength at days .
No additional payment over the Contract Unit Price will be made for pavement units with an average thickness greater than on the Plans .
Plain Portland cement concrete pavement class no .
Plain Portland cement concrete pavement class no .
Plain Portland cement concrete pavement class HES concrete _____ in mm thick Per square yard meter Item No .
Continuously reinforced concrete pavement class no .
Continuously reinforced concrete pavement class no .
Continuously reinforced concrete pavement class HES concrete ______ in mm thick Per square yard meter ..
Adjustments The Contract Unit Price per square yard meter of concrete pavement will be adjusted for concrete pavement accepted but deficient in thickness or compressive strength at days .
Adjusted Unit Prices per square yard meter of concrete pavement are based on one or both of the following conditions A .
Where the average pavement thickness is deficient by more than .
in mm but not more than in mm payment will be made at a portion of the Unit Price per square yard meter of concrete pavement as shown in the following table Concrete Pavement Deficiency Deficiency in Thickness Determined by Cores in mm Proportional Part of Contract Price Allowed .
percent c. When the thickness of pavement is deficient by more than in mm and the Engineer determines that the deficient area should not be removed or replaced percent of the Contract Unit Price will be paid. . No payment or compensation for cost will be made for removing concrete according to this provision .
B. Compressive Strength Deficiency When the compressive strength at days expressed as an average strength X for a lot of concrete pavement is less than the values established by the Pay Factor Table payment will be made at a reduced Unit Price per square yard meter as shown in the Pay Factor Table .
C. Combined Deficiencies When a pavement section is deficient in thickness and compressive strength the Contract Unit Price will be adjusted by the total reduction from applying the percentages in Subsections A and Subsection B above .
For combined deficiencies of percent or more the Engineer may leave the pavement in place at the combined payment reduction or order the deficient areas removed and replaced at no additional cost to the Department .
If the Engineer orders removal of the pavement payment will not be made for the original pavement or removal .
General Description This work includes grinding existing Portland cement concrete pavement to eliminate joint faulting or to restore proper drainage and riding characteristics to the pavement surface .
.. Equipment A. Grinding Equipment Use power driven selfpropelled grinding equipment with these characteristics Diamond blades designed to smooth and texture Portland Cement concrete pavement Effective wheel base of at least ft . m Pivoting tandem bogey wheels at the front of the machine Rear wheels arranged to travel in the track of the freshly cut pavement Grinding head with the center no further than ft mm forward from the center of the back wheels Ensure that the equipment Section Grind Concrete Pavement Cuts or planes at least ft mm wide Operates without encroaching on traffic movement outside the work area Grinds the surface without causing spalls at cracks joints or other locations Periodically check the equipment to ensure that it is in proper working order especially the wheel roundness on the grinding equipment .
B. Rainhart Profilograph Use the Rainhart Profilograph to test ground pavement surfaces on ramps acceleration and deceleration lanes and other areas not suitable for testing with the Road Profiler for Pavement Profile Index value .
.. Construction Grind the pavement surface areas designated on the Plans .
Grind the entire area designated on the Plans until the pavement surfaces of the adjacent sides of transverse joints and cracks are in the same plane . .
Eliminate the faulting at joints and cracks and ensure that the overall riding characteristics are within the limits specified. . Texture the pavement surface but do not grind extra depth to eliminate minor depressions . .
Ensure that the operation produces pavement that conforms to the typical cross section and requirements in Subsection .. Quality Acceptance .
.. Quality Acceptance Produce a pavement surface that is true to grade and uniform with a longitudinal linetype texture .
A. Texture Ensure that the linetype texture contains corrugations that are parallel to the outside pavement edge and have a narrow ridge corduroytype appearance .
This includes but is not limited to Pavement corrugation due to out of round wheels on grinding equipment Improper cutting head operations that cause the head to ride in and out of the pavement when encountering light and heavy cuts Depressions created from improper starting and stopping during the cutting operation Unground ridges left in the pavement from defective blades in the grinding head Closely check the ground pavement surface during grinding and take corrective action if any of the above deficiencies occur .
The finished pavement surface will be measured for riding quality using the Laser Road Profiler according to test procedure GDT .
Ensure that the ground pavement surfaces on the mainline meet a pavement ride index value not exceeding on each .
E. Pavement Transverse Slope Ensure that the pavement transverse slope is uniform and that depressions or slope misalignments are not greater than in .
Measurement Pavement grinding on existing pavements is measured by the square yard meter .
Determine the quantity of pavement grinding by multiplying the finished ground width by the total length ground .
.. Limits General Provisions through . . Payment The Contract Price per square yard meter for grinding concrete pavement is full compensation for furnishing labor materials tools equipment and incidentals grinding the existing surface removing residue and cleaning the pavement according to these Specifications and as shown on the Plans .
Grind concrete pavement Per square yard meter ..
General Description This work includes milling existing asphaltic concrete pavement to restore proper grade andor transverse slope removing structurally unsound material providing clearance for overlay in curb and gutter sections or other purposes deemed necessary due to existing conditions .
Also use equipment that is Designed to mill and remove a specified depth of existing asphalt paving Equipped with grade and slope controls operating from a stringline or ski and based on mechanical or sonic operation Capable of removing pavement to an accuracy of in mm Furnished with a lighting system for night work as necessary Provided with conveyors capable of side rear or front loading to transfer the milled material from the roadway to a truck B .
Provide positive drainage to prevent water accumulation on the milled pavement as shown on the Plans or directed by the Engineer .
The reclaimed asphaltic pavement becomes the Contractors property unless otherwise specified .
.. Quality Acceptance Ensure that the milling operation produces a uniform pavement texture that is true to line grade and cross section .
Milled pavement surface acceptance testing will be performed using the Laser Road Profiler method in GDT .
Milled pavement will be evaluated on individual test sections normally mile km long .
When the milled surface is to be left as the final wearing surface ensure that indices do not exceed on milled pavement surfaces on interstates when the milled surface will be the final wearing surface for other onsystem routes when the milled surface will be the final wearing surface on Interstates and for other onsystem routes if the milled surface will be overlaid Remill mile kilometer areas to meet the specified limits when the indices are exceeded .
Milled pavement surfaces are subject to visual and straightedge inspection .
Keep a ft m straightedge near the milling operation to measure surface irregularities of the milled pavement surface .
Measurement Milling existing asphaltic concrete pavement is measured by the square yard meter as described in Subsection .
.. Limits General Provisions through . . Payment Milling asphaltic concrete pavement measured as specified will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price bid per square yard meter .
Mill asphaltic concrete pavement ___ in mm depth Per square yard meter Item No .
Mill asphaltic concrete pavement variable depth Per square yard meter ..
Concrete Use concrete specified as Class A concrete see Section or pavement concrete see Section .
Ensure that the finished rapidsetting cement concrete surface is the same elevation and cross slope as the adjacent pavement .
When placing the curb on existing pavement thoroughly remove dirt and objectionable matter from the area receiving the curb . .
Payment is full compensation for furnishing materials including bituminous material preparing the subgrade or pavement surfaces cleaning hauling mixing placing and replacing if required and maintaining the curb to complete the Item .
General Description This work includes constructing pavement composed of Portland cement concrete with or without reinforcement as specified on a prepared subgrade or subbase course .
or for plain Portland Cement concrete pavement .
or coarse aggregate for continuous reinforced concrete pavement .
D. Protective Equipment Provide materials to protect the concrete edges and surface against rain including Standard metal forms or wood planks to protect the pavement edges Covering material such as burlap or cotton mats curing paper or plastic sheeting material to protect the pavement surface E. Auxiliary Vibrator Keep one auxiliary vibrator available in case of mechanical malfunctions .
Prepare the Roadbed Prepare the roadbed as required by the Plans and Specifications before placing concrete pavement .
Ensure that the surface immediately under the concrete pavement allows proper pavement thickness and yield . .
Consolidation Perform vibration for the full width and depth of the pavement as follows a .
d. Obtain uniform consolidation and density throughout the pavement .
If the pavement is not uniform stop the operation and provide methods or equipment that will produce pavement that conforms to the Specifications .
Ensure that the surface within in mm of the pavement edge shows no more than a ¼ in mm deviation in ft m when tested with a ft m straightedge in both transverse and longitudinal directions .
When rain is imminent stop paving operations and place forms against the sides of the pavement .
Remove forms carefully to avoid damaging the pavement. . After removing the forms immediately cure the sides of the slab using the same method used to cure the pavement surface . .
G. Provide Joints Ensure that joints are designed configured and located as shown on the Plans or required by the Specifications. . At the Engineers discretion remove and replace plain concrete pavement that cracks during construction with no additional cost to the Department . .
When removing and replacing a pavement section replace an area at least ft . m long and the full width of the lane .
Thoroughly clean the drilled holes of contaminants and set the dowels into the hardened concrete face of the existing pavement with a Type VIII epoxy bonding compound .
Use methods and equipment that locates the joint reinforcement properly without disrupting it during construction. . Longitudinal Sawed Joints Cut longitudinal sawed joints with a mechanical saw within three days after the concrete is placed and before traffic or equipment enters the pavement. . Transverse Joints Transverse joints consist of construction joints contraction joints or expansion joints constructed at required locations .
Place the board so that it conforms to the full cross section of the pavement .
f. When using Plain Portland cement concrete pavement place dowel bars in construction joints .
Grease coating is not required on plastic coated dowels. . Contraction Joints Create planes of weakness in plain Portland cement concrete pavement by cutting joints in the pavement surface .
Saw transverse contraction joints before the pavement cracks .
Form expansion joints by securing a removable bulkhead that conforms to the full cross section of the pavement .
c. Furnish and install preformed joint filler in lengths equal to the pavement width or the width of one lane .
Immediately after completing the curing period fill in the joints with joint sealing material before opening the pavement to traffic .
Impervious Membrane Method To use this method Section Portland Cement Concrete Pavement Special a. Spray the entire surface of the pavement with white pigmented curing compound immediately after finishing the surface and before the concrete has set .
If the pavement is cured initially with cotton mats burlap or cotton fabric apply the compound after removing the mats .
Cover the top surface and sides of the pavement with polyethylene sheeting .
c. Extend the sheeting beyond the edges of the slab at least twice the thickness of the pavement .
d. Unless otherwise specified maintain the covering in place for hours after placing the concrete. . Burlap Cotton Fabric or Other Methods Contractors may cure the pavement surface with burlap cotton fabrics or other materials if the section remains wet for the duration specified by the Engineer . .
K. Open Pavement to Traffic Wait to open the pavement slab to traffic except for joint sawing vehicles until the concrete is days old unless representative compressive tests show that the slab has a compressive strength of psi MPa .
Prevent pavement slab stress by constructing a ramp of compacted earth or other material to move on and off the pavement .
Do not allow equipment that exceeds legal load limits on the pavement .
Protect the pavement against traffic from the public employees and agents . .
Employ watchmen to block traffic from the newly constructed pavement for the period required in this Specification . .
If traffic must go across the pavement construct crossings satisfactory to the Engineer to bridge over the concrete .
Construct the crossing without additional compensation. . Repair or replace pavement damaged by traffic or other causes before Final Acceptance without additional compensation .
Do not use concrete for Portland cement concrete pavement with a slump value greater than .
Class Portland cement concrete pavement strength will be accepted based on compressive strength development at days .
After curing the OMR will test the cylinders according to AASHTO T . The test frequency is outlined in the Departments Sampling and Testing information. . Class HES High early concrete strength pavement may be accepted based on compressive strength development at hours .
Cure specimens fabricated for hour strength for hours under conditions that are similar to those under which the pavement will be cured .
Cure specimens fabricated for day evaluation per AASHTO T . c. Test all specimens per AASHTO T . G. Depth Measurement The Engineer will designate pavement areas to be examined for depth measurement compliance with the Plan and Specifications .
H. Final Finish Ensure that the final finish produces a pavement surface that is true to grade uniform and free of irregular rough or porous areas .
I. Texture Depth Testing Test the pavement surface to determine the texture depth by using GDT at locations selected by the Engineer .
Sawgroove the areas to meet these dimensions Width in mm Depth in mm Spacing in centertocenter mm J. Smoothness Profile Include in the Contract Unit Bid Price the cost to furnish and operate a Rainhart Model Profilograph to measure pavement profile deviations .
Measure and correct pavement profile deviations as follows .
in mm from the blanking band at no additional expense to the Department. . Take pavement profiles ft . m from and parallel to the new pavement edges for pavements greater than ft . m wide and up to ft . m wide .
Test pavement to ft . to .
m wide parallel to and at the center line of the pavement section . .
Combine pavement sections less than ft m approaching a bridge with the previous .
K. Pavement Tolerances For Projects that include weighinmotion truck scales follow these pavement tolerances .
Provide results no later than the end of the second work day following placement. . For mainline pavement correct .
d. Retest pavement segments containing corrective slab replacements for Final Acceptance . .
The completed pavement including corrective Work meets the applicable profile index value requirements .
Measurement Portland cement concrete pavement special complete inplace and accepted is measured by the square yard meter .
Section Portland Cement Concrete Pavement Special .. Limits General Provisions through . . Payment Concrete pavement completed and accepted will be paid for at the full Contract Unit Price per square yard meter .
Plain Portland cement concrete pavement Class Concrete _____ in mm thick Per square yard meter Item No .
Plain Portland cement concrete pavement Class HES Concrete _____ in mm thick Per square yard meter Item No .
Continuously reinforced concrete pavement Class Concrete _____ in mm thick Per square yard meter Item No .
Continuously reinforced concrete pavement Class HES Concrete _____ in mm thick Per square yard meter ..
Materials for Portland cement concrete pavement or Subsection .. for graded aggregate .
If the vibrator does not produce uniform consolidation and density stop the operation to furnish methods or equipment that will produce pavement according to the Specifications .
D. Finishing Finish the concrete pavement as follows .
If the Engineer requires removal remove and replace the shoulder pavement in full cross sections according to Plan requirements .
If the Engineer requires shoulder pavement removal the original pavement nor its removal will be paid for .
General Description This work includes placing Portland cement concrete as follows As slope paving on end rolls cut slopes paved ditches spillways and ditch slopes In median pavement As sidewalks In concrete curbs gutters curb and gutters and valley gutters As nonreinforced headwalls As velocity dissipators and concrete slope drains As concrete spillways Curb cut wheel chair ramps At other locations designated on the Plans or as directed This work includes subgrade preparations including Fine grading and backfilling Forming furnishing placing and finishing concrete Constructing weep holes and furnishing and placing the coarse aggregate Furnishing and placing preformed joint fillers as shown on the Plans Section Miscellaneous Concrete Placing driveway concrete as shown on the Plans .
Nominal in mm or in mm thick as specified or to match existing pavement .
When fitting spillways to concrete pavement set the specified dowel bars into the pavement when it is laid .
Deposit concrete within forms or against other pavements on a compacted and wetted subgrade to the depth to produce the specified thickness .
Use a straightedge to test the edge of the gutter and top of the curb and median to conform to the requirements for the adjacent pavement .
Separate slope paving from the masonry of structures sidewalks curbs and rigidtype roadway pavements of preformed joint filler that are .
Place expansion joints only where the paved ditch joins the roadway pavement or some other structure .
For curbs gutters and medians adjacent to pavement other than concrete contraction joints shall be as follows For header curb and combination curb and gutter install contraction joints spaced no more than ft m apart .
Ensure that they coincide with the expansion joints in the adjoining pavement or gutter .
D. Concrete Curbs Gutter Median Pavement and Combination Curb and Gutter The following are measured by the linear foot meter along the face of the curb Concrete curb and gutter Concrete curb Concrete header curb The following are measured by the square yard meter or by the linear foot meter whichever is specified Concrete gutter Concrete valley gutter Concrete valley gutter with curb Concrete median pavement Concrete gutter with raised edge The length used to compute the square yards meters or linear foot meter is measured along the center line of the gutter .
Concrete Driveways Driveway pavement is measured along the surface from the paving edge or back of the curb to where old and new concrete join .
General Description This work includes sawing joints in existing Portland cement concrete pavements such as roadway pavements intersections driveways parking areas and sidewalks when removing existing pavements is shown on the Plans or required by the Engineer .
Saw the joints at least in mm deep or deeper if the Engineer directs to remove pavement along true lines and to prevent spalling or overbreaking of pavement that will remain in place .
Removal of Pavement After joints have been sawed to completely isolate a pavement to be removed .
Begin removing the pavement . .
Protect the edges of the pavement that will remain .
C. Traffic Control After removing the pavement do not allow traffic or other equipment to cross the exposed edges of the remaining pavement until new pavement is constructed in its place .
Sawed joints in existing pavements Per linear foot meter ..
General Description This work includes waterproofing joints and cracks in the pavement by cleaning the existing surface and placing a membrane over joints and random cracks as shown on the Plans .
mm in diameter that will prevent the material from bonding to the pavement or that will leave a cavity under the material .
Placing the Membrane Place the membrane on joints and cracks over concrete pavements on interstate mainline and ramps and designated state routes that will be surfaced with asphaltic concrete unless otherwise noted on the Plans. . Place the membrane only when the temperature is above ºF ºC and the pavement surfaces are dry and free of dirt or debris . .
Install the membrane in widths of at least in mm and center them over the joint or crack within a in mm tolerance. . Seal joints as follows a. Seal transverse joints and cracks first starting at the outside edge of the pavement and extending the full length of the joints .
Fill joints or cracks flush with the pavement if they are wider than .
Comply with the shortterm pavement marking requirements of Section .
The length for longitudinal joints and random cracks waterproofed are measured in place along the center line of the joint on the surface of the pavement .
Waterproofing pavement joints and cracks width Per linear foot meter ..
General Description This work includes installing Type II pavement reinforcement fabric and high strength pavement reinforcement fabric over cracks joints and patches in existing asphaltic concrete pavement .
Install high strength pavement reinforcement fabric on asphaltic concrete interstate projects .
Mechanical Device Use a mechanical device approved by the Engineer when placing the fabric full width on the pavement to ensure the fabric is placed smooth free of wrinkles and with no uplifted edges .
Section Placement of Pavement Reinforcement Fabric C. Roller Place the fabric in total contact with the underlying pavement .
Roll the fabric with a static drum or pneumatic roller to ensure adequate adhesion to the pavement surface .
Preparation Before an existing pavement surface is milled mark the location of joints and cracks with an offset reference so that they can be located after milling has been completed .
Cleaning the Pavement Immediately before applying the bituminous tack coat clean the pavement surface to remove rocks dirt debris and other materials that may prevent a clean bonding surface .
Applying Bituminous Binder Use a bituminous tack coat to bond selfadhesive fabric to the pavement and apply the bituminous tack coat at a rate of .
Use bituminous tack coat to bond nonselfadhesive fabric to the pavement and apply at a rate of .
Placing the Fabric For selfadhesive reinforcement fabric remove the release liner of the fabric and place the adhesive side to the pavement .
Place selfadhesive reinforcement fabric no more than hours in advance of the paving operation to ensure proper adhesion of the fabric to the pavement .
Section Placement of Pavement Reinforcement Fabric Place nonselfadhesive reinforcement fabric at least hour but no more than hours in advance of the paving operation to ensure proper adhesion of the fabric to the pavement .
Place fabric on the pavement immediately after the bituminous tack coat has been applied to the pavement .
Place the nonwoven polyester side of the fabric on the pavement .
When placed full width use a mechanical device approved by the engineer to place the fabric on the pavement .
Immediately after the fabric is placed on the pavement ensure that the fabric is in total contact with the underlying pavement .
Roll the material with a static drum or pneumatic roller to ensure adequate adhesion to the pavement surface .
When shortterm pavement markings are required the markings shall meet the requirements of Section .
Payment is full compensation for the work specified in this section including cleaning the surface and furnishing and placing the pavement reinforcement fabric .
General Description This work includes pumping a slurry type grout mixture through holes drilled in the pavement into voids underneath the slabs to stabilize and underseal Portland cement concrete pavement .
Use a grout mixture that can form a hard and durable mass to fill voids under the pavement .
in mm or other approved diameter holes through the concrete pavement .
Operate the equipment so as to prevent damage to the pavement being drilled .
c. Position one set of gauges with one gauge referenced to the corner of each slab on both sides of the joint near the pavement edge .
d. Move the test truck into position and stop it with the center of the test axle about ft mm behind the joint and the outside test wheel approximately ft mm from the pavement edge .
If the Engineer believes the pavement system readily drains the water poured into the test hole pressure grout the slab .
When edge drains are near the shoulder or pavement interface take precautions to minimize the amount of grout that flows into the edge drain system .
Drill one or more observation holes in the asphaltic concrete shoulder as close as possible to the shoulder or pavement interface .
F. Cleaning Up Before permitting traffic on the section remove grout deposits on the pavement or shoulders and clean the surface .
General Description This work includes partial depth patching of spalls and potholes in Portland cement concrete pavement by removing the broken damaged or disintegrated concrete pavement .
This work also includes removing asphaltic concrete patches from spalled or damaged areas of the pavement surfaces and patching them with approved patching materials according to this Specification and the existing pavement crosssections .
Standard Specifications Section TwentyFour Hour Accelerated Strength Concrete Section Coarse Aggregate Section Fine Aggregate Section Joint Fillers and Sealers Section Epoxy Resin Adhesives Section Rapid Setting Patching Materials for Portland Cement Concrete B. Referenced Documents QPL .. Submittals General Provisions through . . Materials Ensure that the materials used to repair and patch Portland cement concrete pavement conform to the rapid setting patching material requirements .
Strike the pavement surface along the sides of each joint with a hammer chain drag or similar tool to detect unsound concrete that sounds flat or hollow .
Mark the limits of the defective areas on the pavement by making a rectangle in mm beyond the outer limits of the unsound concrete area as a guide for sawing .
Partial Depth Patching of Pavement Potholes The Engineer will determine which pavement potholes will be repaired .
Use the procedures given for repairing spalled joints to repair potholes within the pavement surface .
Ensure that the finished surface including joints meets a surface tolerance of in mm per ft m. Use approved measures as necessary to keep pavement surfaces adjacent to this operation free of excess grout and other materials .
Remove sand from the sandblasting operation from the roadway and shoulders. . Do not overcut the pavement beyond marked areas whenever possible . .
Patching Portland cement concrete pavement Per square yard meter ..
General Description This work includes replacing Portland cement concrete pavement slabs full or partial length .
Operate the equipment so as to prevent damage to the pavement being drilled .
c. Thoroughly clean the drilled holes of contaminants. . Set the type and size of dowels specified in the Plans into the hardened concrete face of the existing pavement with Type VIII epoxy bonding compound that meets the requirements in Section .
Place the dowels at locations noted on the Plans with onehalf of the dowel protruding out of the pavement .
The vertical faces of the existing pavement and shoulder bordering the replaced slab or joint area serve as the forms .
Carefully remove the forms to avoid damaging the pavement. . Repair the shoulder to the Engineers satisfaction at no additional cost to the Department .
For slab replacements done in preparation for resurfacing of the pavement the finished surface including joints shall meet a surface tolerance of in .
The Engineer will require replacement if it is determined that excessive pavement grinding is necessary to match the profile of the full depth slab replacement or if grinding the adjacent pavement would create a drainage problem .
Grind or replace slabs to correct surface tolerance deviations If the Project involves resurfacing or grinding the pavement surface a flat finish will be satisfactory .
f. Place the sealant to conform to the specified recess and thickness shown in the Plans. . Clean Pavement After sealing a joint or crack immediately remove the surplus sealant or other residue on the pavement or structure surfaces. . Open to Traffic Do not permit traffic on the sealed joints or cracks until The sealant is tack free .
Seal joints on new pavement after the curing period .
When the Plans call for resealing before specified grinding increase the recess depth and joint depth by to in to mm to compensate for the depth of the pavement removed during the grinding operation .
Protect the ends of bridges or approach slabs with a timber strip at least in mm wide cut to rest on either the paving rest of the bridge end or the pavement subgrade at the end of the approach slab .
Remove it before constructing the adjacent pavement .
Widen Bases and Pavement When using narrow sections of Portland cement concrete to widen existing bases or bases and pavements use Class B concrete as shown on the Plans or as directed by the Engineer .
Class B concrete used for base and pavement widening will be measured and paid for by the cubic yard meter complete in place and accepted .
Item Payment Superstructure concrete class_____ Bridge no._____ Per lump sum Concrete handrailing designation Per linear foot meter Class_____concrete Per cubic yard meter Class_____concrete highearly strength Per cubic yard meter Seal concrete Per cubic yard meter Class B concrete base or pavement widening Per cubic yard meter Class_____concrete including reinforcement steel Per cubic yard meter Class A concretefiller Per cubic yard meter Class_____concreteretaining wall Per cubic yard meter Grooved concrete Per square yard meter Concrete barrier Per linear foot meter Section Concrete Structures ..
Costs of using a higher class of concrete to widen existing bases or bases and pavements B .
h. Completely open all drain holes in the deck before paving over them. . Place the Pavement Place the pavement as follows a .
Do not allow construction traffic over the waterproofing membrane before placing the surface pavement .
c. Completely open drain holes in the deck after placing the pavement course .
C. Method A and Method B Applying Bituminous Overlay The paving operation and asphaltic concrete temperatures shall comply with the membrane manufacturers recommendations and the applicable asphalt concrete pavement Specifications or be as directed by the Engineer .
Section Bridge Deck Waterproofing Membrane The Contractor shall be responsible for maintaining the condition of the waterproofing membrane until it is covered with pavement .
e. Before reopening work areas to traffic remove abrasive material and debris deposited on the pavement shoulders or slope paving in the area . .
Payment will also include sawing removing and replacing existing pavement removed to install a new drainage structure .
Provide a wellbraced temporary bulkhead against the face of the excavation when work stops while the heading is within ft m of railroad tracks or highway pavement . .
Standard Specifications Section Detour Bridges B. Referenced Documents AASHTO HS .. Submittals If using a bridgetype structure instead of one or more pipes present plans of the proposed structure to the Engineer for approval before beginning construction. . Materials All selected materials are subject to the following requirements A. BridgeType Structure Ensure that each bridgetype structure roadway width is at least ft mm greater than the approach pavement width or ft . m whichever is greater .
Preparation Before placing edgedrains pressure grout and cure pavement slabs in the immediate area .
Do not begin work until the Engineer determines that pavement slabs are stable .
General Description This work includes removing the full depth of existing jointed Portland cement concrete pavement slabs of various lengths .
NOTE During removal avoid damaging the pavement base shoulder or sides that will not be removed. . Repair the damaged shoulder area to the Engineers satisfaction at the Contractors expense . .
If the adjacent concrete pavement is damaged during removal enlarge the removal area to include the damaged sections of adjacent concrete .
K. Raised Edge Curb Remove raised edge curb to a reasonably true line at the elevation of normal finished pavement .
If the average of the plus and minus deviations approximate the original normal edge of pavement a tolerance of approximately in mm above or below this elevation will be accepted .
Section Removal of Miscellaneous Roadway Items Do not shatter pavement that will be retained .
Capping an Existing Structure When capping an existing structure requires removing adjacent existing pavement sidewalk curb gutter or other improvement not otherwise affected by the work follow these guidelines .
Ensure that the adjustment range conforms to the finished pavement surface .
Contractor Warranty and Maintenance Maintenance includes but is not limited to filling washes as they occur and repairing defects in the pavement as directed by the Engineer . .
Payment is full compensation for Earthwork materials pavement drainage structures signs and barricades used and reused as directed on the Plans .
Tilt the sign degrees off perpendicular toward the pavement. . Luminaires and Lamps a .
When necessary to place posts in existing pavement slope paving etc .
Replace the pavement material in kind to the full depth of the original pavement as directed after the post is installed .
Do not place a portion of the loop within feet m of a conductive material in the pavement such as manhole covers water valves grates etc .
Ensure that the ambient pavement surface temperature in the shade is at least ºF ºC before cutting roadway and placing sealant into saw cuts. . Loop Saw Cuts a .
Outline the loop on the pavement to conform to the specified configuration .
AWG loop wire. . At the intersection of the slots drill a inch mm diameter hole or make miter saw cuts in the pavement .
Where the loop wires cross pavement joints and cracks protect the loop wires using the method specified in Traffic Signal Details in the Plans .
c. Apply the sealant so that subsequent expansion does not extend the sealant material above the pavement surface .
Section Traffic Signal Installation e. When the Engineer determines that the loop sealant can accommodate traffic but the surface is tacky dust the sealer on the pavement surface with cement dust before opening the roadway to traffic .
f. Dispose of the solvents used to clean loop installation equipment according to the manufacturers specifications and local State and Federal regulations. . Loop Connections Connect loop conductors to a shielded leadin cable that runs from the pull box adjacent the pavement edge or condulet to the detector hookup panel in the controller cabinet unless otherwise specified in the Plans .
Pull the cables without dragging them on the ground pavement or over or around obstructions .
Install cable under existing pavement or surfaced shoulder according to Subsection .
Under pavement excavate at least inches mm below the bottom of the pavement. . Before excavation the Contractor is responsible for determining the location of electrical lines drainage or utility facilities in the area to prevent damage .
Unless specified in the Plans do not excavate trenches in existing pavement or surfaced shoulders to install conduit . .
When placing conduit under an existing pavement install the conduit by directional boring or other approved means .
When the Plans allow trench excavation through an existing pavement or surfaced shoulder restore the pavement shoulder surface base and subgrade according to the Specification. . Cut trenches for conduit on a slight grade .
Excavate at least inches mm below the top of the finished ground or inches mm below the bottom of the pavement .
Extend the encasement or conduit under roadway pavements or surfaces inches mm past the outer edge of paved shoulders or sidewalks or past curbs if no shoulder or sidewalk is present . .
Do not locate pull boxes on the curb side of the signal pole in the intersection radius return Install pull boxes so that the long dimension is parallel to the adjacent roadway Install the pull box at a location that is level with the surrounding ground or pavement .
Measure the clearance from the pavement to the lowest part of the assembly including brackets and back plates .
m but no more than feet .m above the sidewalk or pavement grade of the center of the highway whichever grade is higher .
Testing Loop Detector Installation Test each loop after installing the conductors in the slots cut in the pavement and before sealing .
Conduct the following five tests to evaluate each loop installation for acceptance before sealing the loop in the pavement .
Include payment for removal disposal of existing pavement shoulder surface base and subgrade and restoration to original condition in the Contract Price for the items to which they pertain .
Ensure that the front most section of the unit the nose is yellow in color unless specified otherwise. . Where required use an approved backup system as specified in the Plans. . For nongating attenuators anchor the attenuator to the pavement according to a system recommended by the manufacturer for the type pavement encountered. . Use Class A concrete for reinforced concrete pads concrete back up if used and concrete transition where required. . Use metal components and hardware galvanized according to ASTM A A M unless otherwise specified .
At bridge columns this character is typically the width of the column plus the barrier base widths on the column sides at the pavement surface .
Installation Follow these steps to cement bars to the pavement .
Use type IR when pavement temperature is between to F to C or when traffic conditions require a rapid set .
Use type IS when pavement temperatures are above F C and when traffic conditions permit .
c. Do not place bars when pavement temperatures drop below F C. . Place enough adhesive on the cleaned pavement or on the bottom of the bar to completely cover the area of contact with no voids .
Position the bar and press it firmly into the pavement .
C. Adhesive Qualities Do not use a viscous or partially set batch of adhesive that does not extrude from under the bar edges when pressed to the pavement .
Glass Spheres and Reflective Composite Optics Use glass spheres andor reflective composite optics for the reflective media system that ensures the high build paint pavement markings meet the reflectance performance requirements in Subsection Do not use glass spheres andor reflective composite optics containing greater then ppm total arsenic ppm total antimony or ppm total lead when tested according to the most recent US EPA Methods and or other approved methods .
Ensure that the painter feeds paint under pressure through nozzles spraying directly onto the pavement .
C. Cleaning Equipment Use brushes brooms scrapers grinders highpressure water jets or air blasters to remove dirt dust grease oil and other foreign matter from painting surfaces without damaging the underlying pavement .
Before painting thoroughly clean pavement surfaces of dust dirt grease oil and all other foreign matter .
Skip Traffic Stripe Paint At least galmile Lkm NOTE Change minimum rate proportionately for varying stripe widths. . Thickness Maintain a mils .mm minimum wet average thickness above the surface of the pavement. . Do not apply paint to areas of pavement when The surface is moist or covered with foreign matter .
Repair stripe damage or pavement smudges caused by traffic according to Subsection D. Appearance and Tolerance of Variance Continually deviating from stated dimensions is cause for stopping the work and removing the nonconforming stripe .
General For a minimum of days from the time of placement ensure the high build traffic paint pavement marking material shows no signs of failure due to blistering excessive cracking shipping bleeding staining discoloration oil content of the pavement materials smearing or spreading under heat deterioration due to contact with grease deposits oil diesel fuel or gasoline drippings spilling poor adhesion to the pavement material vehicular damage and normal wear .
Section Painting Traffic Stripe Obtain pavement marking retroreflectivity values with a meter geometry retroreflectometer .
D. Thickness At the time of installation check the thicknesses on all skip lines edge lines and center lines according to ASTM D . Section Painting Traffic Stripe For each center line edge line and skip line measure thickness above the pavement times for each mile once within the first feet once in the middle and once within the last feet .
For projects less than one mile in length measure the thickness above the pavement times .
If removal of pavement markings is necessary perform it according to Section and place it according to this Specification .
Do not damage the underlying pavement during removal .
General Description This work includes furnishing and applying standard and wet weather thermoplastic reflectorized pavement marking compound .
.. Definitions Thermoplastic Marking Compound A heated compound extruded or mechanically sprayed on the pavement that cools to pavement temperature .
When combined with glass spheres andor reflective composite optics it produces a reflectorized pavement marking .
Ensure the finished thermoplastic material is not adversely affected by contact with pavement materials or by petroleum droppings from traffic .
Use thermoplastic material that has been evaluated year field evaluation by the National Transportation Product Evaluation Panel NTPEP test facility or other approved test facility. . Suitability for Markings Use thermoplastic material that is especially compounded for traffic markings and has the following characteristics Prevents markings from smearing or spreading under normal traffic conditions at temperatures below oF oC Gives a uniform cross section with pigment evenly dispersed throughout the material Has a uniform material density and character throughout its thickness Allows the stripe to maintain its original dimensions and placement Ensures that the exposed surface is free from tack and is not slippery when wet Does not lift from the pavement in freezing weather Has cold ductility properties that permit normal movement with the road surface without chipping or cracking .
Preparation For asphaltic concrete pavement do not begin placement of thermoplastic striping until calendar days after completion of the final surface course .
Thoroughly clean pavement areas to be striped .
Use hand brooms rotary brooms air blasts scrapers or other approved methods that leave the pavement surface clean and undamaged .
Ensure all new Portland cement concrete pavement surfaces are mechanically wire brushed or abrasive cleaned to remove all laitance and curing compound before being striped .
Apply the type of stripe at each location according to the Plans using one of the following methods Spray techniques Extrusion methods wherein one side of the shaping die is the pavement and the other three sides are contained by or are part of the suitable equipment to heat and control the flow of material .
Temperature Apply thermoplastic traffic stripe only when the pavement temperature in the shade is above F C. To ensure optimum adhesion install the thermoplastic material in a melted state at the manufacturers recommended temperature but not at less than F C. . Moisture Do not apply when the surface is moist .
When directed by the Engineer perform a moisture test on the Portland cement concrete pavement surface .
Place approximately yd m of roofing felt on the pavement surface .
c. After minutes lift the roofing felt and inspect to see if moisture is present on the pavement surface or underside of the roofing felt .
d. If moisture is present do not proceed with the striping operation until the surface has dried sufficiently to be moisture free. . Sealing Primer To ensure optimum adhesion apply a bindersealer material before installing the thermoplastic in each of the following cases Where directed by the Engineer for sprayed thermoplastic Old asphaltic concrete pavements with exposed aggregates Portland cement concrete pavements Ensure that the bindersealer material forms a continuous film that mechanically adheres to the pavement and dries rapidly .
Apply in a continuous film over the pavement surface . .
Offset from Construction Joints Offset longitudinal lines at least in mm from construction joints of Portland cement concrete pavements. . Crosswalks Stop Bars and Symbols Make crosswalks stop bars and symbols at least in .
mm thick at the center. . Thickness Maintain the following minimum average dry thicknesses above the surface on all types of pavement .
Apply the glass sphere andor reflective composite optics topcoating with a pressuretype gun specifically designed for applying glass spheres andor reflective composite optics that will embed at least onehalf of the spheres and optics diameter into the thermoplastic immediately after the material has been applied to the pavement .
Remove percent of existing traffic stripe from Portland cement concrete pavement where the new stripe will be placed at the same location as the existing marking Pavement where the new stripe will be placed at a different location from the existing markings Section Thermoplastic Traffic Stripe C. Tolerance and Appearance No traffic stripe shall be less than the specified width and shall not exceed the specified width by more than in mm .
D. Traffic Marking Protection Do not allow traffic onto or permit vehicles to cross newly applied pavement markings until they are sufficiently dry .
Remove and replace any portion of the pavement markings damaged by passing traffic or from any other cause at no additional cost to the Department .
General For a minimum of days from the time of placement ensure the thermoplastic pavement marking material shows no signs of failure due to blistering excessive cracking chipping bleeding staining discoloration oil content of the pavement materials smearing or spreading under heat deterioration due to contact with grease deposits oil diesel fuel or gasoline drippings spilling poor adhesion to the pavement material vehicular damage and normal wear .
Obtain pavement marking retroreflectivity values with a meter geometry retroreflectometer .
New Striping Check the thicknesses on all skip lines edge lines and center lines with an approved traffic marking thickness gage consisting of dials as follows For each center line edge line and skip line measure thickness above the pavement times for each mile once within the first ft m once in the middle and once within the last ft m. For projects less than one mile in length measure the thickness above the pavement times .
For each center line edge line and skip line measure thickness above the pavement times for each mile once within the first ft m once in the middle and once within the last ft m. For projects less than one mile in length measure the thickness above the pavement times .
If removal of pavement markings is necessary perform it according to Section and place it according to this Specification .
.. Limits General Provisions through . . Payment Payment is full compensation for the Work under this section including Cleaning and preparing surfaces Furnishing all materials Applying curing and protecting stripe Protecting traffic including providing necessary warning signs Furnishing tools machines and other equipment necessary to complete the Item Measurement and payment for removing pavement markings will be according to Section when shown in the Proposal as a payment Item .
Thermoplastic pavement markings words and symbols color type _____ Per each Item No .
Wet Weather Thermoplastic pavement markings words and symbols color type _____ Per each Item No .
General Description This work includes furnishing and placing raised pavement markers according to the Plans or as directed by the Engineer .
.. Construction A. Adhesive Types Cement markers to pavement surfaces with a Type IR Epoxy or Type IS Epoxy see Section or with a bituminous adhesive see Section .
Use Type IR Epoxy when the pavement temperature is above F C or when traffic conditions require a rapid setting system . .
Use Type IS Epoxy when the pavement temperature is above F C and traffic conditions permit a slower setting system. . Bituminous Adhesive .
Use bituminous adhesive when the pavement temperature is above F C or when traffic conditions require a rapid setting material .
Surface Cleaning Clean pavement of dirt curing compound grease oil paint moisture loose or unsound layers or other material that would impair the bond between the adhesive and the roadway .
Do not place markers over joints in rigid pavement .
Do not place markers when pavement temperature is below F C. c. When possible wait to days before placing markers using epoxy adhesive on newly constructed asphaltic concrete pavements. . Marker Placement Using Epoxy Adhesives Place markers using epoxy adhesives as follows a .
Place enough adhesive on the cleaned pavement or the bottom of the marker to completely cover the contact area of the marker .
Press the marker firmly to the pavement .
Place enough bituminous adhesive on the cleaned pavement or the bottom of the marker to completely cover the contact area of the marker .
Press the marker firmly to the pavement .
.. Quality Acceptance Refer to QPL for raised pavement markers that have met these requirements .
Measurement The number of each type of installed and accepted pavement marker is counted separately for payment .
Section Raised Pavement Markers .. Limits General Provisions through . . Payment Raised pavement markers will be paid for at the Unit Price for each Unit of each type .
Raised pavement markers type_____ Per each Item No .
Raised pavement markers type_____recessed Per each ..
General Description This work includes installing pavement arrows with raised reflectors .
Mark arrows with traffic paint thermoplastic or preformed plastic pavement markings according to the Proposal and Plan details .
.. Construction Install the raised markers for pavement arrows according to Subsection A .
C. Preformed Plastic Pavement Markings Apply preformed plastic pavement markings according to Section .
.. Construction Remove pavement markings before changing the traffic pattern .
Utilize blasting such as sand blasting or water blasting grinding or other approved methods to completely remove pavement markings without materially damaging the pavement surface or texture .
Repair at the Contractors expense damage to the pavement or other surface from removing the markings .
When blast cleaning within ft m of a lane occupied by public traffic immediately remove residue and dust when the sand hits the pavement surface. . Use a vacuum attachment operating simultaneously with blast cleaning or use other methods approved by the Engineer . .
Measurement Removal of existing pavement markings is measured by the linear foot meter linear mile kilometer gross linear foot meter gross linear mile kilometer or square yard meter of the designated width and the type of stripe .
Payment When shown as a Pay Item on the Plans payment for removing pavement markings will be at the Contract Unit Price for the Unit .
General Description This work includes placing plastic pavement markings or legends according to the Plans and Specifications or as otherwise directed .
Shapes and Sizes Use markings that conform to the shapes and sizes outlined in the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways. . Pigmentation Use white or yellow pigmented plastic according to each marking type. . Adhesion Use markings that can be affixed to bituminous or Portland cement concrete pavements by pressuresensitive precoated adhesive or a liquid contact cement .
Ensure that marking adhesive adheres to the roadway under normal climactic and traffic conditions. . Conformability Use markings that will mold to pavement contours breaks faults and the like by normal action of traffic at normal pavement temperatures. . NTPEP Evaluation Use markings evaluated by the National Transportation Product Evaluation Program NTPEP. . Glass Spheres andor Reflective Composite Optics Use markings with a layer of glass spheres andor reflective composite optics bonded to the surface according to the marking type .
Ensure the pavement shows no objectionable staining or damage after removing the marking .
Temporary NonRemovable markings Type TN This type of pavement marking may use a conformable metallic foil backing with a precoated pressuresensitive adhesive .
.. Construction Remove existing pavement markings according to Subsection B Removing Existing Stripe .
Meet the following conditions before applying markings onto new asphaltic pavements The ambient temperature is F C and rising .
New asphaltic pavement temperature is at least F C. The plastic can be applied to new asphaltic pavement immediately before the new surface is rolled for the final time .
Conventional steel rollers and water used with them do not impede the plastics application. . Meet the following conditions before applying markings onto all pavements The ambient temperature is F C and rising .
The pavement temperature is at least F C and rising .
Section Preformed Plastic Pavement Markings B. PreConditions for Applying Markings Types TR TN and PA . Meet the following conditions before applying markings onto new asphaltic pavements The ambient temperature is F C and rising .
New asphaltic pavement temperature is at least F C. The plastic can be applied to new asphaltic pavement immediately before the new surface is rolled for the final time .
Conventional steel rollers and water used with them do not impede the plastics application. . Meet the following conditions before applying markings onto all pavements The ambient temperature is F C and rising .
The pavement temperature is at least F C and rising .
C. Remove Existing Stripe Remove at least of existing traffic stripe under either of the following conditions On Portland cement concrete pavement where the new stripe is to be placed at the same location as the existing marking On all pavements where the new stripe is to be placed at a location different from the existing marking D. Applying Markings Apply markings as follows .
Thoroughly clean the pavement .
Clean with compressed air hand brooms rotary brooms scrapers or other approved methods which leave the pavement thoroughly clean and undamaged .
Mechanically wire brush or abrasive blast clean all new Portland cement concrete pavement surfaces to remove all laitance and curing compound from the area to be striped . .
Position markings according to the Plans. . Press positioned markings firmly onto the pavement . .
Offset longitudinal lines at least in mm from construction joints of Portland cement concrete pavements .
If removal of pavement markings is necessary perform it according to Section and replace it according to this Specification .
Obtain pavement marking retroreflectivity values with a meter geometry retroreflectometer .
D. Corrective Work For each mile section if preformed plastic pavement marking traffic stripe fails to meet Plan details or Specifications or deviates from stated dimensions correct it at no additional cost to the Department .
If removal of pavement markings is necessary perform it according to Section and place it according to this Specification .
Warrant Type PB and Type PBWR Plastic Markings to adhere to the pavement and to provide a minimum ASTM E dry coefficient of retroreflection of mcdluxm when measured using a meter geometry retroreflectometer for a period of at least years for longitudinal markings and at least years for intersection markings and symbols under normal traffic conditions .
Measurement Preformed plastic pavement markings complete in place and accepted are measured as follows A .
C. Payment by Square Yard Meter When preformed pavement markings are paid for by the square yard meter the number of square yards meters covered is measured .
Section Preformed Plastic Pavement Markings E. Removing Existing Pavement Markings Measurement and payment for removing pavement markings will be according to Section when shown in the Proposal as a payment Item .
Payment will be made under Item No. . Preformed plastic solid pavement markings_____ in mm color type Per linear foot meter Item No. . Preformed plastic solid pavement markings_____ in mm color type Per linear mile kilometer Item No. . Preformed plastic skip pavement markings_____ in mm color type Per gross linear foot meter Item No. . Preformed plastic skip pavement markings_____ in mm color type Per gross linear mile kilometer Item No. . Preformed plastic pavement markings Per square yard meter Item No. . Preformed plastic pavement markings words or symbols color type Per each Item No . .
Wet reflective preformed solid pavement markings_____ in mm color type Per linear foot meter Item No . .
Wet reflective preformed solid pavement markings_____ in mm color type Per linear mile kilometer Item No . .
Wet reflective preformed skip pavement markings_____ in mm color type Per gross linear foot meter Item No . .
Wet reflective preformed skip pavement markings_____ in mm color type Per gross linear mile kilometer Item No . .
Wet reflective preformed pavement markings Per square yard meter Item No . .
Wet preformed pavement markings words or symbols color type Per each ..
Use a polyurea composition that is specifically formulated for use as a durable pavement marking material and for application at elevated temperatures not exceeding ºF ºC .
Glass Spheres and Reflective Composite Optics Use glass spheres andor reflective composite optics for the reflective media system that ensures the polyurea pavement markings meet the reflectance performance requirements in Subsection Do not use beads andor optics containing greater then ppm total arsenic ppm total antimony or ppm total lead when tested according to the most recent US EPA Methods and or other approved methods .
Composition Ensure that the retroreflective pavement markings consist of a mixture of highquality resins curing agent and pigments with a reflective layer bonded to the top surface consisting of glass spheres andor reflective composite optics. . Color Meet these color requirements White markings are pure white and free from dirt or tint .
mm above the surface of the pavement on open graded asphalt concrete friction coureses and mils .
mm on all other pavement types and reflectorized with glass spheres andor reflective composite optics ensure that the polyurea markings reach a notrack condition in less than minutes .
Dry to notracking will be considered as the condition where no visual deposition of the polyurea marking to the pavement surface is observed when viewed from a distance of feet m after a traveling vehicles tires have passed over the marking. . Abrasion Resistance Ensure that the wear index of the polyurea compound does not exceed .
lbs g for cycles. . Adhesion to Concrete Ensure that the polyurea pavement marking materials when tested according to ACI Method have such a high degree of adhesion to the specified concrete surface that there is a concrete failure in the performance of this test .
Adhesion to Asphalt Ensure that the polyurea pavement marking materials when tested according to ACI Method have such a high degree of adhesion to the specified asphalt surface that there is a asphalt failure in the performance of this test .
Traveling Traffic Stripe Painter To apply the traffic marking material use a mobile truck mounted and self contained pavement marking machine specifically designed to apply twocomponent liquid materials and glass beads in a continuous and skipline pattern .
The applicator is equipped with all the necessary spray equipment mixers compressors and other appurtenances to allow for the placement of reflectorized pavement markings in a simultaneous sequence of operations .
Cleaning Equipment Use brushes brooms scrapers grinders highpressure water jets or air blasters to remove dirt dust grease oil and other foreign matter from painting surfaces without damaging the underlying pavement .
Preparation For asphaltic concrete pavement do not begin placement of polyurea pavement markings until calendar days after completion of the final surface course .
Before painting thoroughly clean pavement surfaces of dust dirt grease oil and all other foreign matter .
Remove concrete curing compounds on new Portland cement concrete surfaces and existing pavement markings on both concrete and asphalt surfaces .
.. Construction A. Atmospheric Conditions Apply pavement markings only during conditions of dry weather and subsequently dry pavement surfaces .
Ensure that the pavement surface temperature and the ambient temperature at the time of installation are both greater than ºF ºC and that the relative humidity is not greater than .
C. Application Apply the pavement markings as follows .
Ensure marking configurations are in accordance with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. . Place the reflectorized pavement markings only on properly prepared surfaces and at the widths and patterns designated on the Plans .
Do not begin marking operations until applicable surface preparation work is completed and approved by the Engineer. . Airblast the surface first to remove any dirt and residues from the pavement .
Then apply the pavement markings as a continuous operation. . Heat Component A and Component B to the manufacturers recommended temperatures . .
Ensure that mixing of the two components occurs in a static tube or impingement chamber prior to reaching the application spray nozzle. . Spray the mixed resin onto the pavement at a rate to obtain a minimum uniform dry thickness of mils mils .
mm above the surface of the pavement on open graded asphalt concrete friction coureses and mils mils .
mm above the surface of the pavement on all other pavement types . .
Repair stripe damage or pavement smudges caused by traffic according to Subsection E. Appearance and Tolerance of Variance Continually deviating from stated dimensions is cause for stopping the work and removing the nonconforming stripe .
General For a minimum of days from the time of placement ensure the polyurea traffic pavement marking material shows no signs of failure due to blistering excessive cracking chipping bleeding staining discoloration oil content of the pavement materials smearing or spreading under heat deterioration due to contact with grease deposits oil diesel fuel or gasoline drippings spilling poor adhesion to the pavement material vehicular damage and normal wear .
Obtain pavement marking retroreflectivity values with a meter geometry retroreflectometer . .
Do not damage the underlying pavement during removal .
For each center line edge line and skip line measure thickness above the pavement times for each mile once within the first ft m once in the middle and once within the last ft m. For projects less than one mile in length measure the thicknesss above the pavement times .
If removal of pavement markings is necessary perform it according to Section and place it according to this Specification .
Polyurea pavement markings words and symbols color Per each Item No .
Wet weather polyurea pavement markings words and symbols color Per each Item No .
General Description This work includes furnishing and placing hot applied preformed plastic pavement markings according to these Specifications and at locations shown in the Plans or as otherwise directed .
Use hot applied preformed plastic pavement markings that are compatible with existing alkyd and hydrocarbon thermoplastic material .
Composition The pavement marking material shall consist of a homogeneous mixture of high quality hydrocarbon resin alkyd resin or modified ester rosin solution in conjunction with aggregates pigments binders and glass beads .
Heating Characteristics The preformed markings shall be capable of being affixed to bituminous or Portland cement concrete pavements by the use of the normal heat of a torch recommended by the manufacturer and according to the manufacturers installation guidelines .
Apply markings when the pavement is clean dry and free of debris . .
Hot applied preformed plastic pavement markings that have met the laboratory test and field test requirements will be placed on the Georgia Department of Transportation Qualified Products List .
Measurement Heatapplied preformed plastic pavement markings complete inplace and accepted are measured as follows A .
Section Hot Applied Preformed Plastic Pavement Markings C. Payment by Square Yard Meter When hot applied preformed plastic pavement markings are paid for by the square yard meter the actual number of square yards meters covered will be measured in the overall measurement including the space between the markings .
Hot applied preformed plastic solid pavement markings_____ in mm color type Per linear foot meter Item No .
Hot applied preformed plastic solid pavement markings_____ in mm color type Per linear mile kilometer Item No .
Hot applied preformed plastic skip pavement markings_____ in mm color type Per gross linear foot meter Item No .
Hot applied preformed plastic skip pavement markings_____ in mm color type Per gross linear mile kilometer Item No .
Hot applied preformed plastic pavement markings Per square yard meter Item No .
Hot applied preformed plastic pavement markings words or symbols color type Per each ..
a. Trench Excavation Unless specified on the Plans do not excavate conduit trenches through existing pavement or surfaced shoulders .
Install the conduit under the existing pavement by jacking boring or using other approved means .
When the Plans specifically allow a trench through an existing pavement or surfaced shoulder restore the pavement surface base and subgrade to the Engineers satisfaction .
Include pavement surface base and subgrade removal disposal and restoration in the Contract Price for the Items to which they pertain .
Install new underground concrete encasement as follows Construct encasement under pavements or surfaces so that it extends at least in mm beyond the outside edges of pavement paved shoulders sidewalks or curbs when no shoulder or sidewalk is indicated .
Ensure the trench is deep enough for the finish cover to be At least in mm from the top surface of raw ground At least in mm from the bottom side of pavement .
When installing cable under existing pavements or surfaced shoulders install specified conduit according to Subsection A .. . Cable Slack When cable is brought through the base of the lighting standard or junction box leave enough slack to allow the connections to be made outside the standard or box. . Cable in Conduit Carefully pull cables into place in conduits using approved methods so that the cable is installed without electrical or mechanical damage .
If the conduit is shown in the plans crossing under pavement that portion of the conduit shall be replaced with Conduit Nonmetal Type .
Install Type pull boxes if in unpaved shoulder or concrete ground mounted electrical junction boxes if in pavement along the conduit route between the electrical service pole and the equipment cabinet requiring power .
Make any repairs to pavement required as a result of the installation of electrical junction boxes in accordance with Department standards .
In the case of narrow shoulder lanes where the electrical communication box extends beyond the edge of pavement backfill to the top of the electrical communication box .
Establish the location of the electrical communication box recognizing that pavement may have been placed over the cover of the electrical communication box .
Open the cover of the electrical communication box which may include the use of power tools to accomplish and the removal of pavement .
No roadway pavement subgrade roadbed paved shoulder or unpaved median shall be disturbed or excavated as part of the boring or pipe placing operation for any reason without written authorization by the Engineer .
No separate measurement will be made for Type pull boxes electrical junction boxes electrical wire directional bores transformers pavement repair or any other required materials .
No separate measurement will be made for cable racks cable support arms compacted backfill material compacted coarse aggregate pavement removal or pavement installation .
No separate measurement will be made for cable racks cable support arms pavement removal or pavement installation .
Make the top of the pit and aprons flush and level with the adjoining pavement .
D. Inductive Loops Furnish and install inductive loops in existing concrete pavement according to Subsection B. E. Weight Indicator Recording Elements and Control Unit with Digital Processor Refer to Subsection C. F. Traffic Control Subsystem Furnish and install the traffic control subsystem according to the Plans these Specifications and Subsection D. G. Conduit and Cable with Electrical Wiring Furnish and install cables according to the NEC Section XV of the National Bureau of Standards Handbook the Plans Subsection E and the following .
.. Construction A. Scalepits and Weighing Platforms Construct the scale pits in existing pavement and base material as shown on a typical section according to Section and Section and as follows .
Install a drain line to an outlet beyond the shoulder pavement. . Make the entire weighinmotion scales flush with the pavement .
B. Inductive Loops Saw cut pavement install the loop wires and seal the saw cuts to the Engineers satisfaction .
Apply water in a manner to prevent erosion. . Weed Control Perform weed control throughout the project a minimum of once every two weeks in all areas within the project limits to maintain tree pits shrub beds sidewalks curb and gutter walkways ditch paving concrete medians and other pavement weed free .
Manufactured sand used in concrete for construction of Portland cement concrete pavement approach slabs and bridge decks shall be made from Group II aggregates as specified in Subsection A .. . Miscellaneous Concrete Sand manufactured from synthetic aggregate meeting the requirements of Section may be blended with natural sands or manufactured sands made from crushed stone or gravel for use in miscellaneous concrete as described in Section .
g. Backface hand dressed at least in mm below that part of the back that will be exposed h. Front face hand dressed to a depth of in mm below the indicated elevation of the base course pavement or gutter i .
Recycled Concrete Base From Known Sources Use recycled concrete derived exclusively from Portland cement concrete pavement or structural concrete as a base subbase or shoulder course .
In the Laboratory Slurry Seal containing CQSh shall not set while being mixed according to GDT for a minimum of seconds. . Use ECR in cold mix recycling of reclaimed pavements .
The sealer shall have the following characteristics Forms a resilient and adhesive compound Effectively seals joints and cracks in pavements against moisture during repeated cycles of expansion and contraction Does not flow from the joint and can not be picked up by vehicle tires at an ambient temperature of F C . Compound Characteristics Use a compound that has a uniform pouring consistency capable of completely filling joints without forming large air holes or discontinuities .
f. Use a material that forms a tackfree rubberlike compound that seals pavement or bridge joints within hours of application . .
Used to seal horizontal and vertical joints in Portland cement concrete pavements and bridges .
Used to seal horizontal joints in Portland cement concrete pavements and bridges .
Used to seal horizontal joints in Portland cement concrete pavements and bridges and joints between Portland cement concrete pavement and asphaltic concrete shoulders .
Used to seal horizontal joints in Portland cement concrete pavements and bridges and joints between Portland cement concrete pavement and asphaltic concrete shoulders .
Physical Characteristics Use a sealant that will Remain flexible to ºF ºC necessary to protect the wire from the stress of pavement movement .
c. Use deformed billet steel for longitudinal bars in continuously reinforced concrete pavement that meet the requirements of ASTM A A M Grade .
Requirements Type Use dowel bars for concrete pavement that are plain round steel bars that meet or exceed the tensile requirements of Table Tensile Requirements for Deformed Bars ASTM A A M Grade .
General Description This section includes the requirements for bituminous hotmelt adhesive used to place raised pavement markers .
Use pavement reinforcement fabric that has the following properties Is nonwoven heatresistant material composed of polypropylene or polyester fibers Can be saturated with asphalt cement Can be placed smooth with mechanical devices and be without wrinkles Can withstand the heat of asphaltic concrete mixes during paving operations Can withstand normal field handling and construction operations without damage Meets the following physical requirements .
Use pavement reinforcement fabric with the following properties Is a flexible waterresistant highdensity asphaltic membrane laminated between two layers of high strength heat resistant polypropylene or polyester fabric .
Type IR Rapidsetting marker adhesive for bonding raised pavement markers to pavement .
Type IS Standard setting marker adhesive for bonding raised pavement markers to pavement .
The membranes included herein are for bridge decks pavement joints and cracks and retaining wall joints .
Physical Characteristics Use posts that can either be driven into the ground with equipment that does not damage the posts or reflective sheeting or be surfacemounted onto pavement . .
General Description This section includes the requirements for raised pavement marker materials for use in reflective ceramic and channel markers .
Requirements Do not use any marker materials until the laboratory approves it. . Use raised pavement marker sources as listed in QPL . . Use raised pavement markers of the type shown in the Plans or specified in the proposal .
Clearly mark each package of pavement markers with the size color type and lot number .
Use raised retroreflective pavement makers that meet the requirements of ASTM D designation H. . Use raised retroreflective pavement makers as listed in QPL . . Use raised retro reflective pavement makers that have been evaluated by the National Transportation Product Evaluation Panel NTPEP test facility or other approved test facility .
Fabrication General Provisions through C. Acceptance The Department will give conditional and final approval to retro reflective pavement markers evaluated by the National Transportation Product Evaluation Program NTPEP the Georgia Department of Transportation or other Department approved test facilities and place them on QPL .
All white and yellow retro reflective pavement markers must meet the requirements of this Specification and the following NTPEP field performance requirement .
Use ceramic pavement markers made from a heatfired white vitreous ceramic base and a heat fired opaque glazed surface to produce the properties required in these Specifications .
Use channel pavement markers made of either a heatfired white vitreous ceramic base with a heatfired opaque glazed surface or a gauge .
Housing Ensure that the Type A housing meets these requirements unless otherwise indicated on the Plans Be surfacemounted at about ft . m above the edge of the finished pavement on an outside bridge pier as shown on the Plans Be diecast aluminum with an integral ballast Have a specular aluminum reflector Have a detachable thermal shockresistant glass refractor Have an adjustable porcelainenclosed mogul socket with springloaded center contact and lamp grips to properly position the lamp Have a hinged door assembly protected by safety chains and an approved gasket to keep out moisture and dirt Section Luminaires Be able to attach directly to the bridge pier or underpass wall b .
Whenever unreeled cable is placed on the pavement or surface above a manhole provide means of preventing vehicular or pedestrian traffic through the area in accordance with Section of the Specifications .
C. Wireless Magnetometer Vehicle Detection WMVD Provide a wireless inpavement magnetometer system for use in both freeway and intersection applications .
The batterypowered wireless sensor shall consist of a magnetometer capable of lowpower radio communications to a roadside transceiver packaged in a small hardened plastic case suitable for inpavement mounting .
Verify that the system can at a minimum emulate the output of a pair of ft. by ft. in pavement loops spaced ft. apart .
The Wireless BatteryPowered Magnetometer Vehicle Detection System shall consist of one or more of the following a. Batterypowered wireless sensors installed inpavement in each traffic lane w reuse enclosure .
The testing shall prove that all inpavement sensors are configured and collecting data as required in this specification and as shown on the plans. . Postinstallation test procedures .
