where changes involve adjustments to right of way typical sections or pavement structures major components etc .
The top surface of a roadbed upon which the pavement structure and shoulders including curbs are constructed .
One or more layers of a pavement structure designed to accommodate the traffic load the top layer of which resists skidding traffic abrasion and the disintegrating effects of climate .
Roadbed The graded portion of a highway within the top and side slopes prepared as a foundation for the pavement structure shoulders and median .
During the construction of surfaces or pavements equip all hauling vehicles operating over the subgrade and base intermediate and surface courses with rubber tires .
Limit hauling over pavements as follows do not allow the gross weight to exceed the posted load limit of a bridge in any instance and comply with any decreased gross weight limits when in the Engineers judgment the roadway or structures would be damaged by allowing the posted load limit . .
Do not allow any openings to be made in any surface or pavement except with the written permission of the Department .
If the Department grants an encroachment permit to any person or corporation resulting in the need for an opening in the surface or pavement perform necessary repair work at the opening as the Engineer directs and at the expense of the party to whom the permit was granted. . FEDERAL AID PARTICIPATION .
The Engineer will take longitudinal measurements for area computations of pavement surfaces horizontally and make no deductions for individual fixtures having an area of one square meter or less .
The Engineer will determine transverse measurements for area computations of pavement surfaces using the neat dimensions specified in the Plans or ordered in writing except the Department will measure JPC Pavement according to Subsection ..
Total of all JPC pavement JPC shoulder and PCC base Contract items .
The Department will be responsible for normal routine maintenance according to Subsection .. Furnish erect and maintain all traffic control devices including signs signals channelization devices temporary pavement markings pilot cars and other items necessary to maintain traffic according to the Standard Drawings MUTCD plans TCP and the ATSSA Quality Standard for Work Zone Traffic Control Devices manual throughout the duration of the project .
Traffic control devices include channelization devices signs and detour signs temporary pavement markings and other items necessary to maintain and control traffic in the construction zone .
Barricade all pavement openings and other hazards .
Construct or reconstruct diversions bypass detours detours and median crossovers including associated earthwork for the handling of traffic across new pavements as specified in the Standard drawings in the Plans in the TCP or elsewhere in the Contract .
Have suitable equipment at the site for removing blasted material debris and for cleaning the existing pavement and shoulder area .
After all blasts inspect the pavement for debris and damage that may be a hazard to traffic .
Remove all permanent markings and raised pavement markers that do not conform to the traffic operation in use .
Remove striping according to Section Remove raised pavement markers according to Subsection When the markers casting will conform to the final marking scheme but does not conform to the current traffic operation the Department may allow lens removal in place of removing the entire marker .
Place and remove temporary raised pavement markers when the Contract specifies .
Install temporary pavement markers according to the manufacturers recommendations .
Place temporary striping on new construction resurfacing pavement restoration pavement rehabilitation and other projects that have existing pavement markings as the Contract specifies .
On interstates and parkways and other roadways approved by the State Highway Engineer install pavement striping that is inches in width .
On other routes install pavement striping that is inches in width .
Except on new construction or where markings do not exist prepare and keep a written record of the existing pavement markings locations and furnish a copy to the Engineer before removing or obliterating the markings .
Apply temporary striping when any course of a new pavement is to be driven over by the public including patching milling leveling and wedging courses except when existing centerline markings are plainly visible and not obscured .
Install the pavement marking material for centerlines and lane lines every day before sunset that day .
When rain or other unavoidable occurrences prevent marking before sunset mark the pavement as soon as conditions permit .
Use removable striping tape when different phases of construction will require the relocation of striping to different positions on the same pavement .
Relocate lane lines edgelines and other pavement markings as the Standard Drawings and the Contract specify .
The Department will not measure the flaggers traffic control coordinator removal of pavement striping or removal of pavement markings and will consider these items incidental to this item of work .
The Department will measure the quantity of Department authorized pavement striping and marking removal by the unit listed in the Contract .
The Department will not measure the unauthorized removal of pavement striping or markings for payment .
When not listed as a bid item the Department will consider removing pavement striping and markings incidental to Maintain and Control Traffic .
These blue tops are set to the hundredth of a foot in elevation and are located left and right of pavement centerline usually at the edge of metal .
Remove wholly or in part and dispose of fences structures pavements abandoned pipelines and any other obstructions outside the typical section that are not designated or allowed to remain .
Completely remove all cement concrete pavement or base sidewalks curbs gutters paved ditches asphalt pavements granular bases and similar items .
When the height of the embankment at subgrade elevation is to be greater than feet above existing concrete pavement either break the pavement until no fragments have a dimension greater than feet or remove the pavement .
When the height of the embankment at subgrade elevation is to be feet or less above existing concrete pavement remove the pavement .
When placing embankment above existing asphalt pavement break up to destroy all cleavage planes or remove as the Engineer directs .
The Department will consider removing sod inches or less in depth removing andor scarifying of existing pavements in embankment areas and the addition of water to aid compaction incidental to the earthwork bid items .
Prepare a smooth subgrade without indentations to the full width of the widest course of the pavement system plus one foot additional width beyond each edge .
Prepare all subgrades before the base course or pavement construction to allow the required testing and checking of the subgrade before placing any aggregate .
Before placing base or surface courses on rock subgrade constructed with a . foot tolerance level it to meet the specified inch tolerance for base or surface course preparation with materials from the pavement quantities .
The Department will not measure the repair of yielding or unstable areas for payment when construction of the base course or pavement is included in the same contract as construction of the grade .
The Department will not measure water used for maintaining moisture for subgrade compaction and water used for conditioning the subgrade immediately in advance of base or pavement construction and will consider it incidental to the earthwork bid items .
The Department will measure quantities used to level rock subgrade constructed from a . foot tolerance to a inch tolerance as pavement quantities according to Subsection .. . PAYMENT .
Make every reasonable effort to completely cover the stabilized roadbed with the specified pavement courses before suspending work for the winter months .
If the stabilized roadbed is not completely covered by the specified pavement courses determine and perform any further work necessary to protect and maintain the uncompleted work during the winter months .
Protect the edge of the mainline pavement according to Standard Drawing RPM when quantities are included in the Contract .
When shoulder construction is part of this Contract and the pavement is open to public traffic conform to signing requirements for low shoulders according to Section until the shoulders are completed . .
When the pavement design includes granular base material the Department will measure granular material used in backfilling lateral drains in the same manner as the specified granular base material .
However when the pavement design does not include granular base material the Department will consider furnishing aggregate furnishing geotextile fabric and constructing lateral drains incidental to shoulder construction .
During hauling operations keep pavement surfaces clean .
At locations specified in the Contract or by the Engineer prepare the sod bed incorporate fertilizer and agricultural limestone as needed and place sod flush with any adjacent seeded or turfed area pavement curb or other structures .
Reuse excess material removed by the grading machine in shoulders islands or other areas where aggregate stone base is specified but not under roadway pavement .
Make every reasonable effort to completely cover the aggregate base course with a minimum of course of pavement before suspending work for the winter months .
When the aggregate base course is not completely covered with the specified pavement courses determine and perform all work necessary to protect and maintain the uncompleted work during the winter months .
This section covers pavement drainage blankets .
For JPC pavements construct either an asphalttreated or cementtreated drainage blanket .
For asphalt pavements construct an asphalttreated or cementtreated drainage blanket as the Contract specifies. . MATERIALS .
Conform to the applicable batch plant mixing procedures and hauling equipment requirements of Section for JPC pavement .
For asphalt pavements hold the plastic in place with aggregate or other acceptable means for at least days .
For JPC pavements the Department will waive the curing time requirements .
Preserve the integrity of the subgrade base courses perforated pipe pavement drainage blanket and the subsequent paving courses .
When asphalt pavement is constructed on a treated drainage blanket place the first course using a paver mounted on tracks .
For random locations falling near the pavement driving lane joints obtain the core as close to the location as possible without having any part of the core circumference coming closer than inches to the pavement edge or joint .
The Department will not measure construction of rolled rumble strips or pavement wedge texturing for payment and will consider them incidental to the asphalt mixture .
At the Contractors option and at no expense to the Department the Department will allow the Contractor to core the pavement in question up to a maximum of cores per sublot for the investigation of AC and Lane Density values corresponding to pay factors potentially necessitating removal and replacement .
Under inspection by Department personnel core the pavement in question and submit the samples to the Department for further investigative testing .
The Department may not permit coring to investigate density results when the pavement in question has been subjected to significant traffic loading .
At the Contractors option and at no expense to the Department the Department will allow the Contractor to core the pavement in question up to a maximum of cores per sublot for the investigation of AC values corresponding to pay factors potentially necessitating removal and replacement .
Under inspection by Department personnel core the pavement in question and submit the samples to the Department for further investigative testing .
The Department will not require filling of the grooves when milling of the existing pavement is included in the Contract and the milling operation removes the grooves .
Adjust small drainage structures such as catch basins as required to match the finished pavement or to provide proper drainage according to Subsection .. Only when the Engineer directs adjust manholes according to Subsection .. Return manhole adjusting rings that are removed and not reused to the utility owner .
Operate vibrating screeds or other compacting features of the paver according to the manufacturers recommendations during the placement of the pavement .
Immediately remove and replace as directed all portions of a pavement course that are defective in mixture composition show excessive segregation or do not otherwise comply with the Contract .
A Use a MTV to place the asphalt mixture for all layers of pavement excluding drainage blanket in the driving lanes for all interstates and parkways .
When the Engineer determines the use of the MTV is not practical for a portion of the project the Engineer may waive its requirement for that portion of pavement .
When lift thickness is not specified in the contract or when deviations to the pavement thickness is approved by the Engineer use the following table for application of asphalt mixture thickness .
When the top layer of a new pavement is OGFC sand seal surface or sand asphalt surface consider all asphalt mixtures beneath that course as asphalt base for the purpose of determining compliance with thickness tolerances .
When the Engineer determines the asphalt base is deficient in total thickness by more than inch from the compacted plan thickness overlay the full width of the pavement to bring the pavement to the required plan thickness .
When curbs gutters pavement and other structures adjoin the new construction coat all contact surfaces of the existing construction and joints of previously placed new construction both longitudinal and transverse with tack .
When the pavement construction consists of or more courses offset the longitudinal joint a minimum of inches .
When a transverse joint is necessary complete the spreading of the material by the finishing machine and adjust the course to a straight line square with the pavement .
Avoid cold longitudinal joints when practical by either placing the full width of the course in one pass operating pavers in echelon or moving pavers back each day after placing sufficient tonnage in each traffic lane so the course placed will be the full width of the pavement at the end of each day .
Place sawed rumble strips one foot out from the mainline pavement and to a length of inches .
Place sawed rumble strips one foot out from the mainline pavement and to a length of inches .
Place foot out from the mainline pavement and to a length of feet .
Do not apply the material as a scratch course over the entire area of the existing pavement .
Apply the mixture over the entire area of the existing pavement before constructing the final surface course do not apply material monolithically with the surface course .
Set the paver to a minimum thickness as directed to correct rutting adverse warping dipping and other imperfections in the existing pavement and to provide a smooth level surface for the final surface course .
Compact with a pneumatictired roller to ensure proper compaction in rutted and warped areas in the existing pavement .
The asphalt surface conforms to all requirements for a final surface course when the top portion of a new pavement consists of a wearing course underlain by asphalt surface .
When specified in the Contract cut transverse joints in overlays of JPC pavement base and shoulders .
Apply and maintain pavement marking as specified in Section . .
The Department will not measure rolled rumble strips or pavement wedge texturing for payment and will consider them incidental to this bid item .
When pavement shoulder texturing is required or utilized the Department will not measure the quantity for payment and will consider them incidental to the asphalt mixture .
Construct one course of hotmixed hotplaced OGFC approximately inch thick on a foundation provided by either new or existing pavements. . MATERIALS AND EQUIPMENT .
When placing OGFC on twolane twoway pavements operate the paver according to Subsection ..
Perform the necessary leveling wedging and patching to repair an existing pavement before beginning construction of this surface course .
When the deviation is on the fine side of the JMF the Engineer will evaluate each occurrence and determine if it is detrimental to the pavement performance .
When placing asphalt material adjacent to curbs existing pavements or other structures first coat the contact surface of the existing structure with tack material .
On projects over which public traffic is being maintained apply the tack coat over onehalf of the pavement width not to exceed onehalf of the days work in advance of the construction of the asphalt cover course .
Construct a pavement wedge composed of a hotmixed or warmmixed asphalt mixture .
Remove existing pavement by milling and texturing. . MATERIALS AND EQUIPMENT .
Provide a poweroperated selfpropelled milling machine capable of removing asphalt pavement to the required depth profile cross slope and surface texture accurately establishing profile grades by referencing from either the existing pavement or from an independent grade control controlling cross slope applying sufficient downpressure to plane the milled surface and effectively removing cuttings from the pavement and preventing dust from escaping into the air .
inch between the high and low points on the milled pavement .
Repair pavement that is gouged torn or otherwise damaged during milling operations and repair damage done to any other property of any kind including utility frames grates and covers .
Apply and maintain pavement markings according to Section .
Adjust small drainage structures such as catch basins as required to match the finished pavement or to provide proper drainage according to Subsection When existing catch basin grates are below the finished grade the Department will require no adjustments .
Use reclaimed asphalt pavement RAP from Department projects or other approved sources in hot mix asphalt HMA or warm mix asphalt WMA provided mixture requirements are satisfied .
This section covers the requirements for the ride quality of completed asphalt pavements .
Provide a final corrected surface comparable to adjacent acceptable pavement placed within the project limits with respect to texture appearance and skid resistance .
The Department will test the ride quality of the pavement for acceptance after the Contractor makes a request at least weeks in advance and partially completes the paving and the Department deems it necessary or completes all mainline paving .
The Department will exclude discontinuities such as bridges in the pavement .
When deemed necessary the Department will retest the pavement after any corrective work is completed .
When the final riding surface is an opengraded friction course OGFC the Department will test the underlying pavement before the OGFC is placed and when deemed necessary test the OGFC after it is placed .
When the IRI is greater than for a .mile section perform corrective work or remove and replace the pavement to achieve the specified IRI .
When the IRI is greater than for a .mile section perform corrective work or remove and replace the pavement to achieve the specified IRI .
When requesting tests on partially completed pavement the Department will perform one test at no charge .
The Department will perform additional requested testing and retesting for corrective work or pavement replacement at a cost of .
To expedite opening the pavement to construction equipment or traffic the Department will allow the mat to be cooled by dousing it with water after compaction is complete . .
Construct a single course of JPC pavement PCC base or JPC shoulders .
Construct pavement base and shoulders on a prepared subgrade or an aggregate base course. . MATERIALS AND EQUIPMENT .
Use approved flexible forms for construction of circular pavement edges where the radius is feet or less .
Provide fine grading machines that are capable of preparing the grade for the paving equipment to the specified base tolerance and to ensure that the finished pavement conforms to the specified surface tolerances .
Use finishing machines and floats that screed and finish the pavement within the specified tolerances .
Shape bulkheads to conform to the cross section of the pavement .
Provide hand screeds that are a minimum of feet longer than the maximum width of the pavement to be struck off so shaped and sufficiently rigid to strike off the pavement true to the required cross section .
Provide transverse floats for hand finishing that are of lightweight rigid construction free of warps and with handles of sufficient length to allow operation from off the pavement .
Provide straightedges and templates for testing hardened pavement and forms and all other small tools necessary to completely and satisfactorily finish the work .
Do not place concrete in areas where hand finishing will be used if the ambient temperature is above F. Protect newly placed pavement that is threatened with damage by rain .
Backfill low places and cavities in the base course detected during the final shaping with concrete placed in conjunction with the pavement base or shoulders .
Produce concrete by mixing according to Subsection The Department reserves the right to stop the use of the mixing method in the construction of concrete pavements bases and shoulders when the concrete fails to conform to the specified requirements for proportioning consistency slump or expected strength .
If placing concrete adjacent to a previously constructed lane of pavement base or shoulder and mechanical equipment is to be operated upon the previously constructed lane conform to the strength requirements of Subsection .. for that lane and place temporary seals according to Subsection .. before placing equipment in that lane .
When constructing the pavement using fixed forms provide at least movable bridges from which finishers may satisfactorily finish the pavement .
Pass the machines over each area of pavement base or shoulder as many times and at such intervals to produce a surface of uniform texture .
Consolidate the concrete using a vibrator immediately after placing then strikeoff and screed the pavement with a Department approved portable screed .
Use care to preserve the cross section of the pavement base and shoulders including the crown .
While the concrete is still plastic scrape the pavement and shoulder surface to remove all laitance excess water and inert material and test the surface for trueness with a straightedge .
Finish the pavement using a burlap drag having a double thickness of burlap at least feet wide .
Lay the burlap on the pavement surface and drag it in the direction that the pavement is being placed with approximately feet of width in contact with the pavement surface .
The Engineer will allow hand finishing of the outer edges with smaller pieces of burlap when necessary to avoid rounding or slumping of the edges of slip formed pavement .
In all other instances use burlap of sufficient width such that the full width of the pavement receives the burlap finish .
The Department will waive the requirement for transverse grooves when the pavement is to be diamond ground before opening to traffic .
Stencil station numbers into the pavement before it takes its final set .
Mark equations in the alignment when they occur in the pavement in the same manner and at the same locations as specified in the Contract .
Immediately fill all honeycombed areas appearing in the edges of the pavement base or shoulders with mortar composed of one part cement and parts fine aggregate by loose volume .
Then cure the edges of the pavement base or shoulders .
When it becomes necessary to uncover an area of the pavement before the end of the curing period do not expose the pavement for more than minutes .
After completely finishing the concrete and immediately after any free water has disappeared completely and uniformly coat the entire pavement surface with Type white pigmented liquid membrane forming curing compound .
If there is a delay in applying the first application of the curing compound cover the pavement surface with wetted burlap .
When rain falls on the newly coated pavement before the film has dried sufficiently to resist damage or when the film is damaged or is noticeably faulty apply a new coat of the compound to the affected areas .
Provide approved standby facilities or approved alternate methods for curing concrete pavements at a readily accessible location at the site of the work for use in the event of mechanical failure of the spraying equipment or other conditions which may prevent the proper application of the curing compound .
When electing to or when the Contract specifies to diamond grind the pavement to achieve texture or ride quality conform to Subsections .
excluding The Department will determine pavement thickness according to Subsection .. after diamond grinding .
Construct all joints perpendicular to the surface of the pavement and to true alignment .
Do not allow any traffic on the pavement until the joints are sawed .
Cut transverse saw cuts for joints that are to be sealed with preformed compression joint seals in one continuous cut across the pavement .
When curbs or concrete medians are constructed integral with the pavement construct all transverse joints continuous through the curb or median .
Construct longitudinal sawed joints with tie bars when the width of the pavement base or shoulder is more than feet .
Install the joints so the plane of the finished joint will be perpendicular to both the centerline and the surface of the pavement within inch of true alignment in one lane width .
Provide a continuous joint through the full width of the pavement with the length of individual pieces of joint filler no less than the width of one traffic lane .
Install the joint filler for the full pavement width and from the bottom of the pavement to the bottom of the joint sealer as shown on the Standard Drawings .
When used secure the dowels in position parallel to the surface and the centerline of the slab by a metal device that remains in the pavement .
Place inch expansion joint material against all box inlets manholes concrete barriers retaining walls bridge abutments concrete gutter and similar structures that project through into or against the pavement .
Form transverse contraction joints by sawing perpendicular to the surface of the pavement within the tolerances specified in Appendix A Tabulation of Construction Tolerances .
Form the joints with a Department approved metal or wooden bulkhead shaped to the cross section of the pavement and designed to allow correct installation of tie bars according to the Standard Drawings .
Seal all joints as soon as practical and before opening the pavement base shoulders or any section of the pavement base or shoulders to any traffic .
a transverse and longitudinal sawed joints b transverse and longitudinal expansion joints c longitudinal and transverse construction joints d joints between pavement and shoulders and fixed objects such as box inlets manholes retaining walls and concrete barriers SelfLeveling Silicone Rubber Sealant .
a resealing random cracks in JPC pavement base and shoulders b sealing joints between JPC pavement base and shoulders and asphalt pavement or shoulders c longitudinal and transverse construction joints d joints between pavement and shoulders and fixed objects such as box inlets manholes retaining walls and concrete barriers and sealing joints cut in asphalt overlays of JPC pavement base and shoulders for control of reflective cracking HotPoured Elastic .
a longitudinal and transverse construction joints b joints between pavement base and shoulders and fixed objects such as box inlets manholes retaining walls and concrete barriers c for applications where the Department allows selfleveling silicone joint sealant C Preformed Neoprene Seals .
Do not seal transverse joints in the pavement until all adjacent sawed longitudinal joints have been sealed .
Trim all transverse seals flush with the edge of the pavement base or shoulder after installation .
Place seals when the ambient temperature and the pavement temperature is F or higher .
Sandblast in passes one for each joint face with the nozzle held at an angle to the joint face and within one to inches of the pavement .
This pushing of the sealant will ensure that the joint is filled from the top of the backer rod to at least inch below the pavement surface .
Tool the sealant so that it is forced against the joint faces and recessed below the pavement surface .
Seal joints as soon as practical after sawing and before allowing traffic except construction traffic on the pavement .
Remove all debris and old joint sealer resulting from the sawing operation from the pavement before opening to public traffic .
When necessary saw the pavement to the required depth at the pavement edge extend the saw cut into existing asphalt shoulders .
When edge drain construction is included in the Contract and edge drains are to be placed in the asphalt shoulder adjacent to the JPC pavement being saw cut and resealed perform edge drain construction after sawing and sealing of the pavement so that sealing of cuts in the asphalt shoulder will not be necessary .
Perform sealing of cuts in the asphalt shoulder as soon as practical after completing pavement sealing in the adjacent lane .
Place the material inch below the pavement surface .
Prevent and correct the slumping of the pavement base or shoulder edges .
Ensure that edge slump does not exceed inch when the Plans indicate the edge of the pavement base or shoulder being constructed is to be abutted by subsequently constructed pavement base or shoulders either by this Contract or future contracts .
Ensure that edge slump does not exceed inch where the edge is not to be abutted by subsequent pavement base or shoulder .
Measure the edge slump with a straightedge laid on the pavement base or shoulder perpendicular to the edge .
Texture all areas of the concrete corrected by grinding in the same manner as the undisturbed pavement base or shoulder .
Provide a final surface comparable to the adjacent pavement that does not require corrective work for texture appearance or skid resistance .
The Department will test the ride quality of the pavement for acceptance after the Contractor a makes a request at least weeks in advance b partially completes the paving and the Department deems it necessary or c completes all mainline paving .
The Department will exclude discontinuities such as bridges in the pavement .
When deemed necessary the Department will retest the pavement after any corrective work is completed .
When the IRI is greater than for a .mile section perform corrective work or remove and replace the pavement to achieve the specified IRI .
When the IRI is greater than for a .mile section perform corrective work or remove and replace the pavement to achieve the specified IRI .
When the Contract does not specify that ride quality requirements apply straightedge the pavement or shoulder in the presence of the Engineer .
Plainly mark all high spots indicated by a variation exceeding inch from the straightedge that are inches or more from the pavement base or shoulder edge .
Provide a final surface comparable to adjacent pavement that does not require corrective work in respect to texture appearance and skid resistance .
Open the pavement base or shoulders to traffic anytime psi strength is attained except when curing with wet burlap .
When curing with wet burlap wait at least hours before opening the pavement to traffic .
Complete the construction of shoulders and thoroughly clean the pavement base or shoulders and seal all joints as required before opening the pavement to traffic other than construction equipment .
Prior to opening the pavement to traffic other than the construction equipment complete the construction of shoulders in a satisfactory manner .
When operating any equipment entirely or partially on the pavement provide means to protect the pavement from damage regardless of its age .
Either provide the equipment with rubbertired wheels or operate the equipment over protective mats designed and constructed to prevent damage to the pavement surface and joints .
Sweep the pavement surface free of debris prior to placing the protective matting .
Construct a ramp of compacted earth or other material of sufficient strength to prevent undue stress in the pavement slab from equipment moving on and off the pavement .
Clean the pavement and seal all joints before opening the residential entrances to traffic .
Core the pavement as the Engineer directs .
The Engineer will determine the thickness of the pavement and concrete shoulders according to KM .
The Engineer will evaluate areas of the pavement and shoulders found deficient in thickness by more than one inch .
The Department will not measure reinforcing steel load transfer assemblies dowels joint construction including removal of concrete to accommodate a construction joint bulkhead joint sealing joint repair form pins texturing additional work for drilling holes for form pins texturing areas of the pavement that have been corrected by grinding fly ash Type IP cement Type III cement additional Type I cement for high early strength formed rumbles strips and all other items necessary to construct the pavement according to the Contract for payment and will consider them incidental to this item of work .
The Department will measure the pavement thickness tolerance according to KM .
The Department will not measure the pavement thickness tolerance as a separate pay unit but will use the pavement thickness tolerance to calculate an adjusted Contract unit price for JPC Pavement PCC Base or JPC Shoulders .
The Department will not make additional payment for average thicknesses of pavement base or shoulders in excess of the specified thickness .
When requesting tests on partially completed pavement the Department will perform one test at no charge .
The Department will perform additional requested testing and retesting for corrective work or pavement replacement at a cost of .
Construct a single course of JPC pavement capable of attaining a psi compressive strength within hours hours or hours. . MATERIALS AND EQUIPMENT .
The Department will test one set of cylinders no later than hours for JPC pavement hours for JPC pavement and hours for JPC pavement one hour from time of molding .
When the average compressive strength is psi the Department will allow the pavement to be opened to traffic and will test the remaining sets of cylinders at the required age .
When the average compressive strength is less than psi at the required age do not open the pavement to traffic until the pavement has been in place for days .
The Engineer may accept the pavement based on additional testing .
Coordinate work so that all joint sawing joint sealing shoulder or curb construction sweeping cleaning and other activities are complete when the pavement has attained the required strength to be open to traffic . .
Diamond grind existing JPC pavements .
Eliminate faulting at joints and cracks restore the ride quality to meet or exceed limits specified and restore texture to the entire pavement surface. . MATERIALS AND EQUIPMENT .
Furnish a selfpropelled grinding machine with diamond blades that is specifically designed to smooth and texture JPC pavement .
Grind the entire surface of the JPC pavement mainline .
Grind shoulders or gutters when necessary for proper pavement drainage .
Grind in a longitudinal direction and parallel to the pavement centerline .
Begin and end at lines normal to the pavement centerline .
When the end of the cut is subject to public traffic grind a smooth transition from the smooth pavement to the nonground pavement .
Remove solid residue from the pavement surface before traffic or wind blows it .
Ensure that waste water and residue do not flow across the pavement into gutters or into drainage structures .
Remove existing pavement marking and provide temporary pavement markings according to Section where the Contract specifies .
The Department will measure the transverse slope of ground pavement with a straightedge placed normal to the centerline .
The Engineer will measure the alignment of the top of the pavement surface across the joint and cracks .
The Engineer may exclude pavement areas where grinding alone will not correct deficiency .
Break and seat existing JPC pavement for full depth and full panel width. . MATERIALS AND EQUIPEMENT .
Break the pavement with an impact hammer capable of delivering sufficient energy to break the pavement .
Roller tires capable of satisfactory operation at a minimum inflation pressure of psi when inflated to the pressure necessary to obtain proper surface contact pressure to satisfactorily seat pavement slabs .
Break and seat the existing pavement .
Break the existing JPC pavement to the extent that no more than percent of the broken fragments are larger than feet and no individual fragments are larger than inches .
Determine the extent of the breakage based on cracks visible to unaided normal vision when the pavement surface is dry .
Accomplish breaking uniformly to produce the desired size without displacing the concrete more than inch vertically above the original JPC pavement surface elevation .
When necessary repeat passes of the equipment over the pavement until the test section is acceptably broken according to A above .
Use the extent of breakage of the test section as a guide for breaking the pavement on the remainder of the project .
Use a rolling pattern that will ensure that the entire area of the broken pavement is well seated and is thoroughly and uniformly compacted .
Remove any large rocking fragments and fragments that are displaced more than inch above the original pavement surface elevation after seating and fill the resulting void with asphalt and compact or tamp .
When the Contract includes installation of pavement edge drains install the edge drains at least weeks before breaking and seating operations .
Sweep the broken and seated pavement clean of foreign material using mechanical sweepers and hand brooms .
Place the asphalt base following the breaking and seating operation as closely as practical according to Subsection .. Do not allow the broken pavement to remain exposed more than hours .
If the broken pavement is exposed more than hours suspend the breaking operations until all broken existing pavement has been covered by at least one course of asphalt base .
Offset the longitudinal joints in the asphalt inches according to Subsection Perform leveling and wedging according to Subsection .. on top of the first course of asphalt and not on the existing pavement .
However at specific locations where the Engineer deems a substantial amount of leveling is necessary level and wedge directly on the broken and seated pavement .
The Department will measure the width as the actual width of the original JPC pavement and the length as the horizontal length along the centerline of each roadway or ramp .
Construct concrete sidewalks steps and entrance pavements with or without reinforcement on a prepared subgrade in one course to the dimensions and design specified in the Plans and Standard Drawings .
Construct sidewalks steps and entrance pavements on a prepared compacted smooth subgrade of uniform density formed by trenching or filling to the required elevation .
for the construction of entrance pavements .
Place sidewalks and entrance pavements by use of side forms or an approved slip form method according to Subsection A Side Form Method .
Before giving the concrete sidewalk and entrance pavement the final finish and brooming check the surfaces with a foot straightedge and eliminate all irregularities of more than inch .
Construct inch wide sawed contraction joints in entrance pavements according to Subsection Construct these joints at locations shown on the Standard Drawings .
Cure concrete sidewalks steps and entrance pavements according to Subsection After the concrete has set sufficiently remove forms and backfill areas adjacent to the concrete .
Use combination curb and gutter in conjunction with asphalt pavements .
Use header curb in conjunction with either asphalt or JPC pavement where the depth of pavement is a minimum of one foot or where the thickness of asphalt pavement is variable .
Construct header curb before placing pavement .
Use integral curb in conjunction with JPC pavements where a portion of the JPC pavement is the gutter .
or Class P concrete according to Subsection .. Construct integral curbs monolithic with the pavement or as a separate operation by anchoring to the pavement .
For integral curbs constructed monolithic with the pavement in a separate operation from placement of the pavement concrete place the curbs immediately following completion of the pavement finishing operations and before the concrete has taken its initial set .
Do not exceed an elapsed time between placing concrete in the pavement and in the curb of one hour .
Obtain a thorough bond between the pavement and curb by roughening the surface of the pavement covered by the curb by means of a trowel or wire brush .
When the curb is constructed as a separate operation clean the surface of the concrete in the pavement of all foreign material before placing concrete in the curbs .
Insert preformed joint filler and cut it to conform to the cross section of the curb in the curb directly over the expansion joint in the pavement while placing the curb .
Construct contraction joints at the same locations as those in the pavement .
Check curb forms for grade and alignment to the same degree of accuracy required for pavement forms .
Seal all pavement joints according to Subsection .. before integral curb is constructed .
If the integral curb is constructed monolithically with the pavement seal the curb in the same manner as the pavement . .
Construct concrete mountable medians or standard barrier medians on the accepted prepared subgrade or the completed and accepted base course or old pavement .
Place concrete either by use of side forms or by an approved slip forming method according to Subsection When constructing medians in conjunction with JPC pavement construct transverse joints at the same intervals and locations as joints in the adjacent pavement .
When constructing medians in conjunction with asphalt pavement space transverse joints at intervals of feet or less to provide uniform spacing .
For construction in conjunction with JPC pavements locate transverse expansion joints so that a joint occurs at the same stations as that of the rigid pavement transverse joints .
Construct oneinch expansion joints over expansion joints in rigid pavement or base .
Do not use ski or shoe sensors to reflect the grade of the subgrade unless the ski or shoe can ride on the completed pavement surface .
Construct oneinch transverse expansion joints over all transverse expansion joints in rigid pavement or base .
When constructing a concrete median barrier over JPC pavement or base locate transverse joints in the barrier to match transverse joints in the pavement or base .
When constructing transverse joints in the JPC pavement or base at variable intervals adjust the joint interval in the wall to match the joint interval in the pavement or base and construct additional joints as necessary to avoid exceeding the foot maximum interval .
Seal concrete surfaces except JPC pavement with an epoxy resin seal and patch concrete surfaces except JPC pavement with an epoxy resin mortar patch .
Do not apply to JPC pavement .
Seal and patch JPC pavement as specified in the Contract .
After the patch has cured broom vacuum or blow away all loose material from the area and remove it from the pavement or deck .
Furnish and install epoxy coated hook bolts with expansion anchors for use in JPC pavement widening or concrete culvert extensions. . MATERIALS .
Water may only be added to the load as a onetime addition prior to depositing any concrete into the structure or pavement .
The Department will allow the use of JPC pavement mixture for nonstructural construction .
For applications requiring early opening to traffic or placement of pavement as soon as possible provide a mixture that conforms to the following general guidelines Mixture bleeds freely within minutes .
Type III cement J Class P. JPC pavement .
Consolidate concrete in all other concrete construction exclusive of pavement either by vibration as described herein or with approved spading tools .
When vibrating concrete the Engineer will require spading in addition to vibrating to prevent formation of honeycomb voids and air pockets against the forms except for concrete placed in pavements bridge slabs footings and culvert slabs .
Place the flowable fill from the top of the compacted bedding to the bottom of the pavement structure .
Do not use fly ash or Type P cement in bridge decks JPC pavement JPC base or JPC shoulders between November and March if the item is to be opened to public traffic and exposed to deicing salts .
When nonstructural concrete items are constructed on top of rigid pavement ensure that construction joints in the non structural items coincide with the pavement joints .
When another concrete item crosses an expansion joint in JPC pavements construct the expansion joint for the structural or nonstructural concrete item one inch wide and construct all other expansion joints inch wide .
Either form inch wide contraction joints for nonstructural concrete items or construct them according to requirements of this subsection at intervals not to exceed feet except when items are constructed on or adjacent to a rigid pavement or shoulder .
For these exceptions make the joint spacing coincide with that of the pavement or shoulder .
Sandblast each joint a minimum of passes one for each face with nozzle held at an angle to the joint face and within to inches of the pavement .
Install sealant at a minimum of inch below the pavement face and in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
Set the finishing machine rails to provide a foot transition on the ends of the bridge to match the finished grade of the overlay with the existing grade of the adjacent pavement .
Do not allow any traffic over the structure from the time it is completed until the pavement is completed without protecting the ends of the bridge .
Provide reinforcing mesh in widths that are one foot less than the finished width of the pavement .
Shape and smooth the concrete pavement by means of a template to conform to the approximate contours of the invert .
When installing under existing pavement backfill with flowable fill to the subgrade elevation .
Do not use geotextile pipe sock and sand if the pavement section is constructed with a drainage blanket .
In paved sections bring the concrete or flowable fill up to the bottom of pavement .
Inspect installed pavement edge drain system immediately before placing the final surface .
Provide certification that the installed pavement edge drain system is functioning properly before formal acceptance of the project .
When adjacent to a concrete pavement or shoulder tie flume inlets to the concrete pavement or shoulder by means of deformed steel tie bars .
Furnish and install strips of recessed type longitudinal metal joint punched to accommodate tie bars at the designated locations adjacent to the forms at the pavement edge .
Bend tie bars to right angles at the midpoints and install them in the pavement with one end of each tie bar placed in the grooves of the metal joint so the bar can be straightened after removing the pavement forms .
When excavation for small drainage structures extends under pavement curb gutter or sidewalk backfill the excavation with dense graded aggregate or gravel base .
When structures abut rigid pavement place inch preformed joint filler between the rigid pavement and the structure for the full depth of the pavement .
Furnish and install raised pavement markers. . MATERIALS .
If any adhesive or foreign matter can not be removed from the reflective faces or if any marker fails to properly adhere to the pavement surface remove and replace the marker .
Ensure that the pavement surface temperature is at or above ºF at the time of application .
Install Type V Markers in slots cut into the pavement according to the manufacturers recommendations .
Do not cut the slots until the pavement has cured sufficiently to prevent tearing or raveling .
Prepare the pavement surfaces and install the markers according to the manufacturers recommendations and the following requirements .
Maintain pavement surfaces in a clean condition until placing markers .
Use materials equipment and construction procedures that ensure proper adhesion of the markers to the pavement surface .
Under no circumstances install a marker on top of a pavement joint or crack .
Offset markers a minimum of inches from any longitudinal pavement joint or crack and at least one inch from the painted stripe ensuring that the finished line of markers is straight with minimal lateral deviation .
If conflicts between marker placement in relation to pavement joint and striping can not be resolved markers may be eliminated with the Engineers approval .
Place Type V markers as much in line with existing pavement striping as possible .
For facilities with double yellow centerlines place markers between the lines provided the minimum inch gap requirement between the marker and the longitudinal pavement joint or crack is not violated .
For instances when the double yellow centerline may bound the longitudinal pavement joint or crack use judgment to determine which side of the painted stripe would be suitable for marker installation .
Use beads that will ensure the pavement marking material will meet retroreflectivity requirements .
On interstates and parkways and other routes approved by the State Highway Engineer install pavement striping that is inches in width .
On other routes install pavement striping that is inches in width .
The Engineer may waive the tolerances when deviations are caused by undulation in the pavement surface .
Offset longitudinal lines at least inches from longitudinal pavement construction joints .
On resurfacing pavement restoration and pavement rehabilitation projects reinstall the recorded existing pavement markings as modified by the Engineer .
On resurfacing pavement restoration and pavement rehabilitation projects prepare and keep a written record of the locations of existing pavement markings and furnish a copy to the Engineer before removing or obliterating the markings .
Clean grease oil mud dust dirt grass loose gravel or other deleterious material from the surface where pavement markings are to be applied .
Apply permanent striping to new pavements when the final surface course has been placed and subsequent paving operations will not adversely impact the permanent striping .
Apply striping before sunset on new pavement that is to be driven over by the public .
Remove pavement striping temporary or permanent from asphalt or concrete pavement using ultrahigh pressure water .
Do not damage the pavement in any way and protect all joint seals .
Repair any damage to the pavement as a result of the marking removal .
A proving period will follow the application of the permanent pavement striping .
Perform pavement marking replacement according to the requirements specified in this subsection for the initial application .
Furnish a binder that the manufacturer of the pavement marking material recommends and the Engineer approves .
Provide a binder that forms a continuous film that dries rapidly and adheres to the pavement .
Provide a material that does not discolor or cause any noticeable change in the appearance of the pavement outside of the finished pavement marking .
Submit the material and method of application to the Engineer and obtain written approval from the Engineer and the manufacturer of the pavement marking material before applying .
Use beads that will ensure the pavement marking material will meet retroreflectivity requirements .
Provide equipment with an extrusion die that simultaneously deposits and shapes lines at a minimum thickness of mils on the pavement surface .
Install pavement striping at the width specified in the Contract .
The Engineer may waive the tolerances when deviations are caused by undulation in the pavement surface .
Use Type I Tape for markings on bridge decks JPC pavement and JPC intersections .
Do not use thermoplastic materials on bridge decks JPC pavement and JPC intersections .
Install all pavement markings according to Part of the MUTCD and the following requirements .
Offset longitudinal lines at least inches from longitudinal pavement construction joints .
On resurfacing pavement restoration and pavement rehabilitation projects prepare and keep a written record of the locations of existing pavement markings and furnish a copy to the Engineer before removing or obliterating the markings .
Before applying the pavement marking material premark the pavement surface and obtain the Engineers approval of the proposed location alignment and control guides .
Remove existing pavement markings and clean grease oil mud dust dirt grass loose gravel or other deleterious material from the surface where pavement markings are to be applied as directed by and by methods acceptable to the Engineer .
Remove the existing pavement markings until a minimum of percent of the pavement surface is uniformly exposed throughout .
Ensure that the pavement surface is in proper condition for successful bonding of the pavement markings and provides a neat appearance .
Do not leave any loose or flaking existing pavement markings .
When removing the existing pavement markings ensure that the finished pavement surface is not damaged or left in a condition that may mislead or misdirect the motorist .
Repair any damage to the pavement pavement joint materials or the pavement surface caused by the removal of the existing pavement markings in a manner acceptable to the Engineer .
After completing these operations use compressed air to blow clean the pavement surface of residue and debris resulting from the removal of existing pavement markings .
When removal of existing pavement markings and objectionable materials obscures existing pavement markings of a lane occupied by public traffic immediately remove the residue including dust from the surface being treated .
Place the final pavement markings on the same day that the existing pavement markings are removed .
On concrete surfaces and as the Engineer directs on older asphalt pavements apply binder to the area where placing pavement marking material .
On new concrete pavement surfaces remove the curing compound from the pavement surface before applying the binder and the pavement marking material .
Rather than installing thermoplastic pavement markings on fresh asphalt the Department will allow temporary striping with paint .
When choosing this option cover the temporary striping with the thermoplastic pavement markings within calendar days .
The Department will not require removal of the interim pavement marking paint before applying the thermoplastic pavement markings .
Install the thermoplastic material at a minimum thickness of mils on the pavement surface in a melted state at a temperature from and F. Apply additional glass beads by dropon or pressure spray methods in sufficient quantities to obtain the retroreflectivity requirements specified in Subsection Verify the adhesion of the thermoplastic to asphalt pavements by performing bond checks at least per mile of line as follows .
The thermoplastic is successfully bonding to the pavement surface if a layer of asphalt clings to the removed thermoplastic stripe and the pavement surface under the removed stripe is shiny and black .
Do not apply the pavement marking material when air and pavement temperatures are below F. Do not apply the pavement marking material when the surface of the pavement contains evidence of moisture in amounts significant enough to prevent the pavement marking material from bonding to the pavement .
Heat the thermoplastic material to the upper temperature limit specified by the manufacturer and apply a test line on the pavement .
Perform a bond check according to Subsection If the thermoplastic successfully bonds to the pavement continue to apply thermoplastic lines provided there is evidence that the moisture is escaping through the surface of the line as indicated by very small pin holes .
Perform a sufficient number of bond checks to ensure that the thermoplastic is bonding to the pavement .
When other construction projects are in progress within the limits of the designated work areas install no pavement markings that will be removed or damaged by immediate subsequent construction .
Schedule the installation of pavement markings after completion of the conflicting construction .
During the proving period ensure that the pavement marking material shows no signs of failure due to blistering excessive cracking bleeding staining discoloration oil content of the pavement materials deterioration due to contact with grease deposits oil diesel fuel or gasoline drippings chipping spalling poor adhesion to the pavement loss of retroreflectivity vehicular damage and normal wear .
During the proving period ensure that the thermoplastic pavement marking material shows no signs of failure due to blistering excessive cracking bleeding staining discoloration oil content of the pavement materials smearing or spreading under heat deterioration due to contact with grease deposits oil diesel fuel or gasoline drippings chipping spalling poor adhesion to the pavement materials loss of retroreflectivity vehicular damage and normal wear .
Perform pavement marking replacement according to the requirements specified in this subsection for the initial application .
Remove pavement striping temporary or permanent from asphalt or concrete pavement using ultrahigh pressure water .
Do not damage the pavement in any way and protect all joint seals .
Repair any damage to the pavement as a result of the marking removal .
The Department will not measure sampling testing surface preparation premarking and binder application for payment and will consider them incidental to the pavement marking bid items .
The Department will not measure for payment the removal of existing pavement markings that have not been authorized by the Engineer .
When the Contract does not list a bid item the Department will consider existing pavement marking removal incidental to the other pavement marking bid items .
Make all pavement crossings by placing conduit in the subgrade before paving or by boring and jacking under existing pavements .
Do not cut any pavement without obtaining the Engineers prior approval .
Include each duct or conduit pavement crossing with distances to permanent markers such as structures and curb lines .
Keep a daily record of all conduit placed in trenches showing the distance from the pavement edge the depth and the length of runs and indicate these on the asbuilt drawings .
Use beads that will ensure the pavement marking material will meet retroreflectivity requirements .
Provide equipment with a shaping die that simultaneously deposits and shapes lines at a minimum thickness of mils on the pavement surface .
On resurfacing pavement restoration and pavement rehabilitation projects prepare and keep a written record of the locations of existing pavement markings and furnish a copy to the Engineer before removing or obliterating the markings .
Before applying the pavement marking material premark the pavement surface and obtain the Engineers approval of the proposed location alignment and control guides .
Clean all grease oil mud dust dirt grass loose gravel or other deleterious material from the surface where pavement markings are to be applied as directed by and by methods acceptable to the Engineer .
On concrete surfaces and as the Engineer directs on older asphalt pavements apply binder to the area where placing pavement marking material .
On new concrete pavement surfaces remove the curing compound from the pavement surface before applying the binder and the pavement marking material .
Install extruded thermoplastic at a minimum thickness of mils on the pavement surface in a melted state at a temperature from and F. Install preformed thermoplastic according to manufacturers instructions at a minimum thickness of mils .
Verify the adhesion of the thermoplastic to asphalt pavements by performing bond checks as follows .
The thermoplastic is successfully bonding to the pavement surface if a layer of asphalt clings to the removed thermoplastic and the pavement surface under the removed section is shiny and black .
Cut all tape at pavement joints when applied to concrete surfaces .
Do not apply the pavement marking material when air and pavement temperatures are below F. Do not apply the pavement marking material when the surface of the pavement contains evidence of moisture in amounts significant enough to prevent the pavement marking material from bonding to the pavement .
Heat the thermoplastic material to the upper temperature limit specified by the manufacturer and apply a test line on the pavement .
Perform a bond check according to Subsection If the thermoplastic successfully bonds to the pavement continue to apply thermoplastic material provided there is evidence that the moisture is escaping through the surface of the material as indicated by very small pinholes .
Perform a sufficient number of bond checks to ensure that the thermoplastic is bonding to the pavement .
During the proving period ensure that the material shows no signs of failure due to blistering excessive cracking bleeding staining discoloration oil content of the pavement materials smearing or spreading under heat deterioration due to contact with grease deposits oil diesel fuel or gasoline drippings chipping spalling poor adhesion to the pavement materials loss of retroreflectivity vehicular damage and normal wear .
During the proving period ensure that the pavement marking material shows no signs of failure due to blistering excessive cracking bleeding staining discoloration oil content of the pavement materials drippings chipping spalling poor adhesion to the pavement loss of retroreflectivity vehicular damage and normal wear .
Perform pavement marking replacement according to the requirements specified in this subsection for the initial application .
Construct guardrail inches to the top of the rail with a tolerance of plus or minus one inch above the theoretical pavement elevation .
Compute these elevations from the proposed pavement edge elevations or from other methods to ensure construction of the guardrail to the true gradient and with no sags .
Set posts vertically with the rail faces in a straight line or when on a curve at a uniform distance from the pavement .
Repair all damaged pavement .
Do not drive guardrail posts within one foot of the outlet pipe for pavement edgedrains .
Repair all damage to the outlet pipe for pavement edgedrains caused by guardrail installations .
Erect rail so it appears smooth uniform continuous and closely parallels the line and grade of the pavement .
Make all pavement crossings by placing conduit in the subgrade before paving or by boring and jacking under existing pavements .
Do not cut any pavement without obtaining the Engineers prior approval .
On projects involving new asphalt pavement install loops in the base course of asphalt pavement before the final surface in constructed .
Construct the pad according to Section for rigid pavement or Section for sidewalk except use Class AA concrete .
Construct the pad according to Section for rigid pavement or Section for sidewalk except use Class AA concrete .
The Department will not measure the work necessary to anchor Crash Cushion Types VI Class B C VI Class BT CT and VII Class B C to existing pavement or bridge decks for payment and will consider it incidental to the crash cushion .
The Department will subject coarse aggregates that are to be used in JPC base JPC pavement JPC shoulders bridge decks concrete overlays and precast products to freezethaw testing according to KM .
Ensure that the liquid asphalt material furnished under this subsection provides satisfactory coating properties workability and adherence characteristics for patching during cold and damp weather in either asphalt or concrete pavement surfaces .
Ensure that the sealers used in JPC pavement comply with the applicable Standard Drawings .
Ensure conformance to ASTM D when utilizing lubricant with sealers on concrete pavements .
Ensure that the sizes of sealers used in JPC pavement comply with the applicable Standard Drawings .
Ensure conformance to ASTM D when working with concrete pavements .
This section covers pavement marking material designed to provide reflective delineation in construction zones .
Use material that is thin flexible formable and remains conformed to the texture of the pavement surface following application .
Provide a nonshrink nonstringing moisture cure onepart polyurethane traffic loop encapsulate suitable for use in both asphalt and concrete pavements .
Ensure it provides a voidfree encapsulation for detector loop wires and adequate compressive yield strength and flexibility to withstand heavy vehicular traffic and normal pavement movement .
Provide each tube with a plastic nozzle to facilitate placing of the material in the pavement slot. . NONSHRINK GROUT .
Use preformed pavement marking material consisting of white or yellow films with retroreflective optics incorporated to provide immediate and continuing retroreflection .
Use preformed pavement marking material capable of adhering to new dense and open graded asphalt surfaces during the paving operation or portland cement concrete by a precoated pressure sensitive adhesive .
The Engineer may require a primer to precondition the pavement surface .
Ensure that the markings conform to pavement contours by the action of traffic .
Use retroreflective preformed pavement markings consisting of a mixture of high quality polymeric materials pigments and retroreflective optics distributed throughout its base cross sectional area .
Ensure that the pavement marking material is capable of use for patching worn areas of the same type according to the manufacturers recommendations .
The Department will approve Type I pavement marking tape based on conformance to KM and this section. . CERTFICATION .
Submit manufacturers certification stating conformance to the requirements of this section for each shipment of approved Type I pavement marking tape for use on projects .
The Department will accept Type I pavement marking tape based on verification of inclusion on the Departments List of Approved Materials compliance of the manufacturers certification and visual inspection of the installation of the Type I pavement marking tape .
This section covers extruded thermoplastic pavement marking materials for permanent applications. . DROP ON BEADS .
Use beads that will ensure the pavement marking material will meet retroreflectivity requirements .
Use for application to reflective pavement markings .
The Department will evaluate beads used by the Contractor as part of the installed pavement marking in accordance with KM KM or KM as applicable .
This section covers the requirements for snowplowable raised pavement markers replacement lens and temporary surface mounted raised pavement markers. . GENERAL .
Use raised pavement markers conforming to the following types .
The Department will approve raised pavement markers based on conformance to KM and the requirements of this section. . PACKAGING .
Submit a manufacturers certification stating conformance to the requirements of this section for each shipment of raised pavement markers delivered for use on projects .
Identify the lot numbers of the raised pavement markers and adhesives expiration date of the adhesives and quantity of raised pavement markers delivered . .
The Department will accept raised pavement markers based on verification of inclusion on the Departments List of Approved Materials compliance of the manufacturers certification and verification the adhesives has not exceeded the expiration date .
This section covers quickdrying waterborne acrylic pavement striping paint for permanent applications. . GENERAL .
ASTM D Ultraviolet Degradation at hours strength retained for all classes ASTM D Flow Rate gal.min.ft ASTM D TYPE II FABRIC GEOTEXTILES FOR UNDERDRAINS except pavement edge drains Property Minimum Value Test Method Grab Strength lbs ASTM D Elongation NA ASTM D Sewn Seam Strength lbs ASTM D Puncture Strength lbs ASTM D Trapezoid Tear lbs ASTM D Apparent Opening Size U.S. Std .
This section covers quickdrying durable waterborne acrylic pavement striping paint for permanent applications .
.. Bituminous plant mixed pavements JMF tolerances .
.. Asphalt mixture for pavement wedge .
Asphalt binder content shall be maintained within .. .. Asphalt pavement milling and texturing surface tolerance .
Fly ash incorporated in concrete mixes for JPC pavement. . of specified weight .
.. D JPC pavement Transverse contraction joints .
.. C JPC pavement installation of preformed neoprene joint seals .
Pave ment abutted by subsequent or JPC shoulder edge slump with edge forms or tailing forms or fixed forms Pavement not abutted by pavement or shoulders edge slump High spot inches or more from pavement edge .
See Underdrains See Pavement Edge Drains Edge Planing Structural Steel Bridges Edge Slump JPC pavement base and shoulders Edging Concrete Entrance Pavements Concrete Sidewalks JPC Pavement Base and Shoulders Elastomeric Bearing Pads Electronic Surveying Embankment Channel Changes Compaction EmbankmentinPlace Foundations General Materials Embankment Drainage Blankets Coarse Aggregate Fine Aggregate Rock Sand Embankment Foundation Stabilization Geotextile EmbankmentinPlace Emulsified Asphalt General Price Adjustment End Connector Angles Structural Steel Bridges End Structures .
See Also Underdrains Breaking and Seating JPC pavement Pavement Marker Removal Pavement Markers .
