The top surface of a roadbed upon which the pavement structure shoulders and curbs are constructed .
One or more layers of a pavement structure designed to accommodate the traffic load the top layer of which resists skidding traffic abrasion and the disintegrating effects of climate .
The graded portion of a highway within top and side slopes prepared as a foundation for the pavement structure and shoulders . .
The portion of the pavement structure contiguous with the traveled way for accommodation of stopped vehicles for emergency use and for lateral support of base and surface courses. . SIDEWALK .
Substantial completion of a unit or portion of the work such as a structure an interchange or section of road or pavement occurs at the point at which the portion of the work is complete such that it can be safely and effectively used by the public and when the following criteria are realized All courses of pavement are complete curbing and sidewalks are placed all project drainage is complete guardrail and terminal sections are properly installed pavement markings are in place traffic signal systems meet the following requirements a isolated traffic signals the signal control equipment is fully programmed detectors are installed and functioning and the signal is in actuated operation b coordinated traffic signal systems the requirements of condition a are met the interconnect is installed and functioning and the signals are operating as a coordinated system c closed loop signal systems the conditions of a and b are met the communications link is operating and the monitoring functions including system and intersection graphics are installed and operating at the Departments monitoring stations regulatory and warning signs are installed highway lighting is operational and only corrective or repair work remains for the physical completion of the Contract. . SUBSTRUCTURE .
Handling or hauling of materials over the base course or surface course under construction shall be limited as directed by the Engineer to prevent damage to the pavement structure .
No loads will be permitted on a concrete pavement base or structure before the concrete has attained its required strength unless otherwise authorized in writing by the Engineer . .
Unless otherwise specified the Contractor shall schedule pavement removal such that no location shall remain unpaved for longer than ten working days .
This means that once the Contractor commences with the removal of existing full depth pavement from any location where traffic flow is to be maintained he must restore the roadway with no less than a full depth bituminous base course at that particular location within working days .
In the case of partial depth pavement removal cold planningmilling the Contractor shall schedule the pavement removal such that no location shall remain without a new bituminous asphalt layer for longer than seven calendar days . .
These actions include but are not limited to the following clearing and grubbing cutting and removing isolated trees and stumps partial or complete removal of isolated tree stumps trimming tree roots removal and disposal of culverts masonry drainage and utility structures pipe rigid and flexible pavement granite concrete and bituminous curbing fences and railings guardrail of all types underground and aboveground storage tanks miscellaneous items such as highway bounds and signs demolition of buildings and structures and all other obstructions or undesirable materials within the rightofway .
This work consists of removing flexible and rigid pavement including surface base andor subbase courses granite concrete and bituminous curbing and concrete and bituminous sidewalks as shown on the Plans .
All pavement base course sidewalks curbs gutters of whatever nature designated to be removed shall be soremoved and legally disposed of .
When specified ballast gravel bituminous material or other surfacing or pavement materials shall be removed and stockpiled as required .
Where the remainder of the existing pavement or sidewalks are to remain undisturbed a clean saw cut shall be made to separate the remaining pavement from that being removed .
Removal of Pavement and Sidewalks will be measured by the number of square yards of such pavement actually removed in accordance with the Plans andor as directed by the Engineer .
Saw cutting associated with removal of pavement sidewalks or curbing will be paid for separately under the appropriate work items as listed in the Proposal .
Prior to placing of any subbase base or pavement courses all surplus excavated material including stumps earth rock etc .
Where embankment is less than feet in height above an existing road surface scarify or pulverize the existing roadway to a depth of inches below the pavement surface .
In the case of the subgrade surface the work also includes the compaction of the surface upon which the pavement structure shall be placed .
The areas to be graded shall be cleared of unsatisfactory material and shall then be compacted as directed within the areas of the proposed pavement structure .
The subgrade upon which the pavement structure and sidewalk are placed shall be graded and compacted to percent of maximum density in accordance with Subsection .. of these Specifications .
This operation shall be performed prior to pavement structure construction .
Should the Contractor elect to excavate to the angle of repose as specified in OSHA Excavation and Trenching Operations and the lines of angle of repose intersect the ground beyond the pay limits of trench excavation as described subsequently in Subsection .. any required additional excavation disposal of unsuitable material backfill borrow compaction replacement of pavement structure curb sidewalk lawn area etc .
This work consists of placing a sandbag barrier upstream of a gutter inlet prior to the placement of roadway pavement .
The silt fence inlet protection shall be removed and the area prepared for pavement construction once the contributing drainage area is free from future uncontrolled discharges .
The baled hay inlet protection shall be removed and the area prepared for pavement construction the contributing drainage area is free from future uncontrolled discharges .
This work consists of the placement of bituminous millings from cold planing operations at all guardrail locations less than feet from the edge of the existing pavement or as indicated on the Plans andor as directed by the Engineer all in accordance with these Specifications. . MATERIALS .
The Contractor shall grade beneath the guardrail such that the finish surface of the millings is flush with the bituminous berm or edge of pavement .
The millings shall be placed to a point foot behind the guardrail post and shaped compacted and sloped to drain away from the pavement .
These Specifications are applicable to all types of bituminous pavements irrespective of gradation of aggregate kind and amount of bituminous material or pavement use .
This work consists of constructing base binder or surface courses of bituminous concrete pavement on prepared foundations in reasonably close conformity with the dimensions and details indicated on the Plans all in accordance with these Specifications .
The specific pavements and mixes are designated by the column headings of the table that constitutes Subsection M .. of these Specifications .
One roller used for compaction shall be equipped with an infrared thermometer with remote sensor that will continuously indicate the temperature of the pavement and be visible to the operator during the rolling process .
Surfaces of curbs gutters vertical faces of existing pavements and all structures to be in contact with the bituminous mixture shall be given a thin even coating of bituminous material .
No trucks or other equipment shall be allowed on freshly placed bituminous pavement unless specifically permitted by the Engineer .
Unless otherwise directed by the Engineer any layer of bituminous pavement i.e .
The practice of placing pavement on side streets after the main roadway has been paved results in cold joints at the gutter line and therefore such practice is not acceptable .
In the event of a dispute as to the credibility of the results the density shall be determined from cores taken from the pavement .
Unless otherwise directed rolling shall start longitudinally at the sides and gradually progress toward the center of the pavement except on superelevated curves where the rolling shall begin on the low side and progress to the high side overlapping on successive trips by at least onehalf the width of tandem rollers and uniformly lapping each preceding track .
Joints between old and new pavements or between successive days work shall be carefully made in such a manner as to insure a thorough and continuous bond between the old and new surfaces .
The edge of the old pavement or previously placed new pavement shall be cut back a sufficient distance to expose a fresh full thickness vertical face .
Care shall be taken to insure that the material pushed onto the hot side of the joint remains in the joint area and is not broadcast over the pavement .
The edge of a newly placed pavement that has not been opened to traffic need not be cut back but will require tack coat .
When specified the Contractor shall cut samples from the compacted pavement for testing by the Engineer .
The thickness of a pavement shall be that as shown on the Plans and shall not vary from the specified thickness by more than that specified in Subsection .
below except as otherwise provided for in resurfacing existing pavements .
If the existing pavement is removed before the winter shutdown the Contractor shall not close the project for the season until a new bituminous binder course has been placed and striped with temporary pavement markings .
A longitudinal dropoff occurs along the outside edges of pavement and is the difference in elevation between the top of recently placed bituminous pavement and the top of existing ground or pavement. . For Posted Speeds of mph or Less .
Dropoffs greater than inches but less than inches shall be tapered to a maximum to slope to existing ground or pavement .
Drop offs inches or greater shall be tapered to a maximum to horizontal to vertical slope to existing ground or pavement. . For Posted Speeds Greater than mph .
However should either the sequence of operation required by the Contract or the Contractors approved sequence of operation result in overnight dropoffs greater than inches occurring between and feet from the edge of a travel lane then such dropoffs shall be tapered to a to horizontal to vertical slope to existing ground or pavement .
Longitudinal dropoffs will not be paid for separately but will be included in the contract unit price for bituminous pavements as listed in the Proposal .
A transverse dropoff occurs when pavement removal operations cease at the end of a working day .
The dropoff is the difference in elevation between the bottom of the excavated pavement and the top of the existing pavement .
A transverse dropoff occurs when pavement overlay operations cease at the end of a working day .
The dropoff is the difference in elevation between the top of the overlay pavement and the top of the existing pavement .
In each case at the end of a working day either the pavement removal operations or the pavement overlay operation must be left in a squaredoff condition or approximately perpendicular to the direction of traffic .
If traffic is allowed across either of these dropoffs during the period prior to the resumption of pavement removal or pavement overlay operations tapers must be provided as follows .
Prior to the resumption of pavement overlay operations the transition slope shall be removed as follows The pavement overlay shall be saw cut back approximately inches to expose a fresh full thickness vertical face .
Transverse dropoffs will not be paid for separately but will be included in the contract unit prices for bituminous pavements as listed in the Proposal . .
The thickness of each course as well as of the total asphalt concrete pavement shall be that indicated on the Plans or as ordered by the Engineer .
The thickness of the total asphalt concrete pavement will be determined by cutting or coring holes to full depth .
The Contractor shall fill any holes cut or cored in the pavement by the Department with a compacted dense bituminous hot mix material which is acceptable to the Engineer .
If required by the Engineer the Contractor shall maintain and control traffic while the pavement samples are being taken and while the holes are being filled and compacted .
The pavement thickness will be considered acceptable if both of the following requirements are met a The total asphalt concrete tonnage delivered and placed does not exceed the tonnage calculated from the approved area measured from the final surface course width by the project length and the pavement thickness specified in the Contract Documents by more than percent .
and b When Specification Conformity Analysis Federal Highway Administration Technical Advisory T. dated June is applied to the entire roadway or sections thereof as determined by the Engineer at least percent of the total asphalt concrete pavement will have a thickness that meets the minimum pavement thickness .
The minimum pavement thickness is that contained in the contract documents minus ½inch e.g .
a total pavement thickness of inches will have a minimum pavement thickness requirement of .
pavement rutting .
If the second requirement indicates that the pavement thickness is deficient the Contractor with permission of the Engineer shall place a correction course not less than one inch in depth after compaction provided an acceptable grade and cross section can be achieved .
Where an acceptable grade and cross section can not be achieved through the above means the Contractor shall reconstruct by cutting back and into the pavement a sufficient distance to permit the placement of an acceptable depth and place new material to achieve the proper depth cross section and profile .
These areas where a corrective course is placed or reconstruction of the pavement is performed will be measured again as though originally constructed no compensa tion will be made to the Contractor for the material removed or removal of materials and disposal thereof or for restoration of affected supporting base or adjacent construction or for traffic control adjusting all utility appurtenances in the roadway or for correcting pavement striping .
Compensa tion will be made for the additional pavement Class I correction course accepted in place .
The specific pavements and mixes are designated by the column headings of the table that constitutes Subsection M .. of these Specifications .
The Contractor shall submit a mix design for the specific pavements .
When used to overlay an existing roadway the thickness shall be minimum of inch and a maximum of ¾ inches to accommodate for rut depths of up to ¾ inch on the existing pavement .
Tack coat must be applied uniformly over the surface of the underlying pavement .
The total tonnage delivered and placed shall not exceed the tonnage calculated from the approved areas measured from the final surface course width by the project length and the pavement thickness in the Contract by more than percent .
A thicker pavement may be acceptable however no payment shall be made for any quantity of asphalt concrete delivered which exceeds percent of the final measured length times measured width times specified thickness times unit weight . .
This work consists of the rehabilitation of an existing pavement structure into a processed asphalt stabilized base recycled course .
The existing pavement is to be mixed with a specified depth of the existing gravel base .
This mixture of pavement and gravel is to be processed reshaped rolled compacted and fine graded to the cross sections andor grades indicated on the Plans all in accordance with these Specifications .
However scarified pavement and gravel fines must be mixed together and thoroughly worked andor reworked as described herein .
The structures are to be covered with a temporary cover which shall overhang the pavement opening by a minimum of one foot on all sides of adequate strength to accommodate truck and construction equipment loadings .
The existing pavement is to be scarified and mixed with gravel from the roadway structure .
pounds of calcium chloride per gallon of water per square yard of recycled pavement area .
This Specification provides the Contractor with the option of recycling reclaimed asphalt pavement RAP into the composition of the following mixes or applications .
Reclaimed Asphalt Pavement RAP shall consist of asphalt pavement recovered by cold milling or other removal techniques approved by the Engineer .
The RAP shall be separated according to specific pavement sources by the Contractor unless otherwise permitted by the Engineer .
RAP obtained from a pavement which was constructed with asphalt cement and aggregates that meet the current requirements of Subsection M of these Specifications . .
RAP from similar pavement types and sources shall be stockpiled on a free draining base separated from other aggregates and RAP sources and shall be free of foreign materials .
The recycling modification shall be such that it provides a separate independent controlled cold feed system to introduce the salvaged bituminous pavement material into the weigh box for automatic proportioning with new virgin aggregates liquid asphalt and additives as required .
This cold feed system shall also be equipped with a scalping screen to insure that all bituminous pavement material being recycled will be percent passing the maximum size sieve allowed by the job mix formula .
The recording equipment shall be capable of automatically recording the batch weight of the salvaged bituminous pavement material along with other batch components on the required delivery tickets .
The salvaged bituminous pavement material to be recycled shall be added to the heated aggregates in the weigh box at a rate that will minimize heat loss and provide for efficient plant operations .
The salvaged bituminous pavement material to be recycled shall not be preheated prior to being added to the weigh bin .
The combined aggregate and pavement material shall be mixed in the pugmill for approximately seconds after which the mixture shall be sprayed with the asphalt cement and additives as required and mixed for approximately seconds more .
The plant shall consist of a dryer with a dual entry system capable of drying heating and mixing new aggregate and salvaged bituminous pavement material to the temperature and gradation requirements established in the job mix formula .
The plant shall have an adjustable feed rate control for the salvaged bituminous pavement feeder as well as for the cold aggregate feeder and the mineral filler feeder .
This work consists of performing all operations in connection with the reshaping cleaning and filling of construction and random cracks in bituminous concrete pavements at the locations indicated in the Plans or as directed by the Engineer all in accordance with these Specifications. . MATERIALS .
Small selfpropelled vacuum sweeper designed especially for use in cleaning highway and airfield pavements shall be used to remove debris dirt and dust from routed cracks .
f. Hand Pouring Pots must be equipped with mobile carriage and rubber shoe and have a flow control valve which allows all cracks to be filled to refusal so as to eliminate all voids or entrapped air and not leave unnecessary surplus crack sealer on pavement surfaces .
All old material and other debris removed from the cracks shall be removed from pavement surface immediately by means of vacuum sweepers or hand brooms .
All cracks shall be sealed as specified herein and the sealer shall be well bonded to the pavement .
Unless otherwise directed the cracks shall be completely filled flush with the pavement and not less than inch below surface without formation of voids or entrapped air .
This work consists of making a saw cut transversely across the finished bituminous surface pavement and filling it with a hot poured asphalt rubber compound at the locations indicated on the Plans or as directed by the Engineer all in accordance with these Specifications. . MATERIALS .
Saw and blades of such size and configuration that saw cuts can be made with one pass and shall not cause damage or ravelling to the adjacent pavement sidewalls .
The cut shall be made directly over the existing underpavements transverse joints .
The completed cuts shall extend in a straight line transversely across the pavement to the extent of the existing underpavements transverse joints .
It shall be the responsibility of the Contractor to insure that the saw cuts are constructed directly over the existing underpavements transverse joints .
The joint seal shall be applied with a pressurized mobile carriage and rubber shoe and the system shall have a flow control valve which allows all cracks to be filled to refusal so as to eliminate all voids or entrapped air and so as to not leave unnecessary surplus crack sealer on the pavement surface .
The hot seal shall completely fill the joint such that after cooling the level of the sealer will be flush with the pavement surface .
All workmanship shall be of the highest quality and all excess or spilled sealer must be removed from the pavement by approved methods and discarded . .
Repair shall consist of placing asphalt patching material by hand in up to two inch lifts leaving the repair flush with the existing roadway pavement when complete .
The existing pavement shall be neatly cut on both sides .
When completed the patch shall be left flush with the existing roadway pavement .
This work consists of constructing Portland cement concrete base or pavement with or without reinforcement on a prepared subgrade or subbase in reasonably close conformity with the dimensions and details indicated on the Plans all in accordance with these Specifications. . MATERIALS .
The classifications proportioning testing batching mixing handling placing finishing and curing of Portland cement concrete pavement or base shall conform to the applicable requirements of SECTION PORTLAND CEMENT CON CRETE of these Specifications .
Equipment for finishing concrete pavement shall be mechanical selfpropelled spreading and finishing machines capable of consolidating the concrete and producing a finished surface as specified herein .
Builtup forms shall not be used except where the total area of pavement of any specified thickness on the project is less than square yards .
After the roadbed has been graded and compacted to meet the density requirements of Subsection .. of these Specifications the grade shall be trimmed approximately to correct elevation extending the work at least feet beyond each edge of the proposed concrete pavement or base .
Low areas may be filled and compacted to a condition similar to that of surrounding grade or filled with concrete integral with the pavement .
The finished grade shall be maintained in a smooth and compacted condition until the pavement is placed .
Also concrete shall not be placed when subgrade is frozen under adjacent pavement which is to remain in place .
Where concrete is to be placed adjoining a previously constructed lane of pavement and mechanical equipment will be operated upon the existing lane of pavement that pavement shall meet the minimum flexural strength of pounds per square inch when tested by the thirdpoint method in accordance with AASHTO T. If only finishing equipment is carried on the existing lane paving in adjoining lanes may be permitted after three days .
The beams shall be cured by a designated method as specified for the pavement according to AASHTO T. .. Strikeoff of Concrete and Placement of Reinforcement .
Following the placing of the concrete it shall be struck off to conform to the cross section shown on the Plans and to an elevation such that when the concrete is properly consolidated and finished the surface of the pavement will be at the elevation shown on the Plans .
When reinforced concrete pavement is placed in two layers the entire width of the bottom layer shall be struck off to such length and depth that the sheet of fabric or bar mat may be laid full length on the concrete in its final position without further manipulation .
The longitudinal joint shall be sawed before the end of the curing period and before any equipment or vehicles are allowed on the pavement .
Preformed joint filler shall be furnished in lengths equal to the pavement width or equal to the width of one lane .
Transverse contraction joints shall consist of planes of weakness created by cutting grooves in the surface of the pavement and when shown on the Plans shall include load transfer assemblies. . Sawed Contraction Joints shall be created by sawing grooves in the surfaces of the pavement or base to the dimensions and at the spacing and lines shown on the Plans with an approved concrete saw .
If curing blankets are used they shall be removed from the pavement only at the locations where a joint is to be sawed and only a sufficient width to allow the cut to be made .
The pavement within the lane where cracks occur shall be removed to the full width of the lane and replaced .
The minimum lane length of pavement replacement shall be feet .
Dowels when used shall be held in position parallel to the surface and centerline of the slab by a metal device that is left in the pavement .
In lieu of using dowel assemblies at contraction joints dowel bars may be placed in the full thickness of pavement by a mechanical device approved by the Engineer .
Following the placement of concrete it shall be struck off to conform to the cross section indicated on the Plans and to an elevation such that once the concrete is properly consolidated and finished the surface of the pavement will be at the elevation indicated on the Plans .
The concrete adjacent to joints shall be compacted or firmly placed without voids or segregation against the joint material also under and around all load transfer devices joint assembly units and other features designed to extend into the pavement .
The machine shall go over each area of pavement as many times and at such intervals as necessary to give the proper compaction and to leave a surface of uniform texture .
If uniform and satisfactory density of the concrete is not obtained by the vibratory method at joints along forms at structures and throughout the pavement the Contractor will be required to furnish equipment and methods which will produce pavement conforming to the Specifications .
The longitudinal float operated from foot bridges resting on the side forms and spanning but not touching the concrete shall be worked with a sawing motion while held in a floating position parallel to the road centerline and passing gradually from one side of the pavement to the other .
Movement ahead along the centerline of the pavement shall be in successive advances of not more than onehalf the length of the float .
The float shall pass over each area of pavement at least two times but excessive operation over a given area will not be permitted .
If necessary following one of the preceding methods of floating longhandled floats having blades not less than feet in length and inches in width may be used to smooth and fill in open textured areas in the pavement .
Longhandled floats shall not be used to float the entire surface of the pavement in lieu of or supplementing one of the preceding methods of floating .
When strikeoff and consolidation are done by the hand methods and the crown of the pavement will not permit the use of the longitudinal float the surface shall be floated transversely by means of the longhandled float .
Care shall be taken not to work the crown out of the pavement during the operation .
After floating any excess water and laitance shall be removed from the surface of the pavement by a straightedge feet or more in length .
The broom shall be drawn from the center to the edge of the pavement with adjacent strokes slightly overlapping .
If the surface texture is to be a belt finish when straightedging is complete and water sheen has practically disappeared and just before the concrete becomes nonplastic the surface shall be belted with a ply canvas belt not less than inches wide and at least feet longer than the pavement width .
If the surface texture is to be a drag finish a drag shall be used which shall consist of a seamless strip of damp burlap or cotton fabric which shall produce a uniform surface of gritty texture after dragging it longitudinally along the full width of pavement .
For pavement feet or more in width the drag shall be mounted on a bridge which travels on the forms .
The dimensions of the drag shall be such that a strip of burlap or fabric at least feet wide is in contact with the full width of pavement surface while the drag is used .
After the final finish but before the concrete has taken its initial set the edges of the pavement along each side of each slab and on each side of transverse expansion joints formed joints transverse construction joints and emergency construction joints shall be worked with an approved tool and rounded to the radius required by the Plans .
As soon as the concrete has hardened sufficiently the pavement surface shall be tested with an approved foot straightedge furnished by the Contractor .
Where the departure from correct cross section exceeds ½inch the pavement shall be removed and replaced by and at the expense of the Contractor .
When it is necessary to remove and replace a section of pavement any remaining portion of the slab adjacent to the joints that is less than feet in length shall also be removed and replaced .
Forms shall be removed carefully so as to avoid damage to the pavement .
When it is necessary to remove and replace a section of pavement any remaining portion of the slab adjacent to the joints that is less than feet in length shall also be removed and replaced .
If the joints are to be sealed they shall be filled with joint sealing material before the pavement is opened to traffic and as soon after completion of the curing period as is feasible .
Any excess material on the surface of the concrete pavement shall be removed immediately and the pavement surface cleaned .
The Contractor shall protect the pavement and its appurtenances against both public traffic and traffic caused by his own employees and agents .
Any damage to the pavement occurring prior to final acceptance shall be repaired or the pavement replaced .
The Engineer will decide when the pavement or base shall be opened to traffic .
The grade on which the pavement is to be constructed shall then be brought to the proper profile by means of a properly designed machine .
The concrete shall be placed with an approved slipform paver designed to spread consolidate screed and floatfinish the freshly placed concrete in such manner that a minimum of hand finish will be necessary to provide a dense and homogenous pavement in conformance with the Plans and Specifications .
The machine shall vibrate the concrete for the full width and depth of the strip of pavement being placed .
Unless otherwise specified curing shall be done in accordance with one of the methods included in Subsection The curing media shall be applied at the appropriate time and shall be applied uniformly and completely to all surfaces and edges of the pavement .
Such protective materials shall consist of standard metal forms or wood plank having a nominal thickness of not less than inches and a nominal width of not less than the thickness of the pavement at its edge for the protection of the pavement edges and covering material such as burlap or cotton mats curing paper or plastic sheeting material for the protection of the surface of the pavement .
When rain appears imminent all paving operations shall stop and all available personnel shall begin placing forms against the sides of the pavement and covering the surface of the unhardened concrete with the protective covering .
The thickness of the pavement or base will be determined by the average caliper measurement of cores tested in accordance with AASHTO T. For the purpose of establishing an adjusted unit price for the pavement or base units to be considered separately are defined as linear feet of pavement in each traffic lane starting at the end of the pavement bearing the smaller station number .
At such points as the Engineer may select in each unit one core will be taken for each square yards of base or pavement or fraction thereof in the unit .
The method of establishing the adjusted unit price for pavement based on the measurement of cores is specified below in Subsection .
The width for measurement will be the width of the pavement shown on the typical cross section of the Plans additional widening where called for or as otherwise directed in writing by the Engineer .
Where the average thickness of pavement is deficient in thickness by more than inch but not more than inch payment will be made at an adjusted price as specified in the following table Concrete Pavement Deficiency Deficiency in Thickness Proportioned Part Determined by Cores of Contract Unit Inches Price Allowed __________________________ _____________________ to percent to percent to percent to percent to percent to percent When the thickness of pavement or base is deficient by more than one inch and the judgment of the Engineer is that the area of such deficient pavement or base should not be removed and replaced there will be no payment for the area soretained .
No additional payment over the contract unit price will be made for any pavement or base which has an average thickness in excess of that shown on the Plans .
This work consists of performing all operations required for cleaning and sealing cracks and joints in existing Portland cement concrete pavement of ½inch nominal width or less at the locations indicated on the Plans or as directed by the Engineer all in accordance with these Specifications .
A small selfpropelled sweeper designed especially for use in cleaning highway and airfield pavements shall be used to remove debris dirt and dust from joints or cracks in concrete pavement .
Just prior to sealing each joint or crack shall be thoroughly cleaned to the full depth of the concrete pavement of all foreign material by compressed air .
All material and debris removed from the joint or crack shall be immediately removed from the pavement surface by means of sweepers or hand brooms before sealing .
The hot seal shall completely fill the joint or crack such that after cooling the level of the sealer will be flush with the pavement surface .
All workmanship shall be of the highest quality and all excess or spilled sealer must be removed from the pavement by approved methods and discarded . .
This work consists of performing all operations required for cleaning saw cutting concrete removal rebuilding and sealing joints in existing Portland cement concrete pavement that are greater than ½inches and less than or equal to inches nominal width at the locations indicated on the Plans or as directed by the Engineer all in accordance with these Specifications .
The concrete shall be removed to the full depth of the existing pavement and to a minimum width of inches by a method approved by the Engineer .
All material and debris removed from the joint shall be immediately removed from the pavement surface by means of vacuum sweepers or hand brooms before sealing .
The hot seal shall completely fill the joint such that after cooling the level of the sealer will be flush with the pavement surface .
All workmanship shall be of the highest quality and all excess or spilled sealer must be removed from the pavement by approved methods and discarded .
This work consists of installing grooves in existing concrete pavement at the locations indicated on the Plans or as directed by the Engineer all in accordance with these Specifications. . MATERIALS .
Prior to grooving all joints in the concrete pavement are to be cleaned and sealed .
The Contractor shall determine the equipment to be used and the methods to be employed to install grooves in the existing pavement .
The entire width of concrete pavement is to be grooved within the limits shown on the Plans .
After grooving the entire pavement including the grooves is to be thoroughly cleaned of any remaining fine material . .
Pavement Grooving will be measured by the number of square yards of pavement actually grooved in accordance with the Plans andor as directed by the Engineer . .
This work consists of constructing a Class XAE Portland cement concrete base course inches thick for the purpose of providing high early strength in the pavement. . MATERIALS .
The pavement will not be opened to traffic until it conforms to the requirements of Subsection .. of these Specifications . .
Portland Cement Concrete Base Course wCrack Control Inch Extra Strength will be measured by the number of square yards of pavement actually provided in accordance with the Plans andor as directed by the Engineer . .
This work consists of furnishing placing curing and finishing Portland cement concrete for bridges pavements structures and incidental construction in accordance with these Specifications the Special Provisions and Contract Documents .
Should the film of compound be damaged from any cause before the expiration of days after the concrete is placed in the case of structures and hours in the case of pavement the damaged portion shall be repaired immediately with additional compound .
For utility or drainage cuts within existing pavement the excavation limit will be as shown in the Plans and or Special Provisions . .
The price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment including removing and reconstructing existing walls excavation backfill examining and cleaning the existing basin before and after reconstruction saw cutting and matching of the full pavement and sidewalk depth gravel borrow compaction concrete and for all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the Engineer .
When structures are to be adjusted in paved areas cutting and matching pavement will be required .
Cutting and matching pavement will be performed in accordance with SECTION of these Specifications .
The prices sostated constitute full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment required to provide these adjustments including cutting and matching pavement cement concrete collar backfilling and disposal of all surplus material and for all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by both the Engineer and the representative of the particular utility company involved .
Block or brick pavements are not included under this designation. . MATERIALS .
This work consists of the provision of weep holes through abutments and walls pavement subdrains through bridge decks and wall drains behind abutments and walls at the locations indicated on the Plans or as directed by the Engineer all in accordance with these Specifications. . MATERIALS .
Unless otherwise specified in the Special Provisions pavement subdrains shall be either inch diameter PVC pipe or inch diameter ductile iron pipe .
Unless covered by a Special Provision together with a corresponding Proposal Item weep holes and pavement subdrains will not be measured separately for payment .
Unless covered by a specific Proposal Item materials for the installation of weep holes and pavement subdrains will not be paid for separately but will be included as incidental items in the respective contract unit prices per cubic yard as listed in the Proposal for the applicable classes of Portland cement concrete .
Grooving shall be done utilizing diamond blades mounted on a multiblade arbor on a selfpropelled machine which has been built for grooving of pavements .
The groover shall have a depth control device which will detect variations in the pavement surface and adjust the cutting head height to maintain the depth of the groove specified .
The Contractor shall provide an experienced technician to supervise the location alignment layout dimension and grooving of the pavement .
Grooves shall be transverse perpendicular to the pavement centerline .
Solid residue resulting from grooving operations should be removed from the pavement surfaces before such residue becomes airborne by the wind .
No construction work including placement of sidewalk curbing railing bituminous pavement concrete overlays grooving etc .
Variations in pavement surface in excess of inch above or below the proper finished elevation or surface irregularities of more than inch in feet will not be accepted .
This work consists of making two saw cuts one within the other in the finished bituminous concrete pavement directly over the transverse joints and edge of deck and filling the cuts with a hot poured asphalt rubber compound at the locations indicated on the Plans or as directed by the Engineer all in accordance with these Specifications. . MATERIALS .
The intent of the work under this provision is to establish a weakened plane joint to control reflectance cracking in the newly installed bituminous concrete pavement at the piers and abutments .
The completed cuts shall extend in a straight line across the pavement from curb to curb .
The joint seal shall be applied with a mobile carriage and rubber shoe and the system shall have a flow control valve which allows all cracks to be filled to refusal so as to eliminate all voids or entrapped air and not leave unnecessary surplus crack sealer on the pavement surface .
The hot seal shall completely fill the joint such that after cooling the level of the sealer will not be greater than inch below the pavement surface .
All workmanship shall be of the highest quality and all excess or spilled sealer shall be removed from the pavement by approved methods and discarded .
The sealant shall fill the joint from the bottom to slightly below the pavement surface .
The interface between the joint and the pavement shall be sealed with a inch wide band of the binder centered on the interface for the entire length of the joint on both the leading and trailing edges relative to traffic .
This work consists of the removal and disposal of a portion of the existing bituminous pavement overlay from the concrete bridge deck within the limits indicated on the Plans or as directed by the Engineer all in accordance with these Specifications .
This work shall consist of the complete removal and disposal of the existing bituminous pavement overlay including the waterproofing membrane from the concrete bridge deck within the limits indicated on the Plans or as directed by the Engineer all in accordance with these Specifications. . MATERIALS .
The Contractor shall insure that the process of partial pavement removal will not cause any damage to the waterproofing membrane underlying concrete deck andor bridge joints to remain .
In addition equipment andor machinery to be used shall have the capability and precision necessary to adhere to the pavement removal depth requirements .
The pavement removal shall be performed in accordance with the sequence of construction and traffic controls indicated on the Plans .
Where required the Contractor will saw cut the pavement to prevent overbreakage into the vehicular travel areas .
The Contractor shall insure that the process of removal of the pavement and the waterproofing membrane will not cause any damage to the underlying concrete deck andor bridge joints to remain .
The Contractor will note that the thickness of the existing pavement may vary .
The pavement and waterproofing removal shall be performed in accordance with the sequence of construction and traffic controls indicated on the Plans .
Where required the Contractor will saw cut the pavement to prevent overbreakage into the vehicular travel areas .
The accepted quantity of PartialDepth Removal and Disposal of Bituminous Pavement from Concrete Bridge Decks will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard as set forth in the Proposal which price will constitute full compensation for the complete removal and disposal of bituminous pavement and all materials labor tools equipment saw cutting and all other incidentals necessary for the proper completion of the work specified shown on the Plans complete and accepted by the Engineer .
The accepted quantity of FullDepth Removal and Disposal of Bituminous Pavement from Concrete Bridge Decks will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard as set forth in the Proposal which price will constitute full compensation for the complete removal and disposal of bituminous pavement including waterproofing membrane and all materials labor tools equipment saw cutting and all other incidentals necessary for the proper completion of the work specified shown on the Plans complete and accepted by the Engineer .
The price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor materials equipment backfill pavement patch and clearing and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the Engineer .
Coarse and fine aggregates mineral filler and asphalt cement shall be combined to produce sidewalk and driveway pavements in accordance with the requirements listed under the column heading entitled CLASS I or SIDEWALK in Subsection M .. of these Specifications .
Portland Cement Concrete Sidewalks and Driveways will be measured by the number of cubic yards of pavement actually placed in accordance with the Plans andor as directed by the Engineer .
Bituminous Concrete Sidewalks and Driveways will be measured by the number of tons of pavement material actually placed in accordance with the Plans andor as directed by the Engineer . .
This work consists of the construction of curbing on prepared gravel bases andor the construction of bituminous berm on underlying pavement courses at the locations indicated on the Plans or as directed by the Engineer all in accordance with these Specifications .
The bituminous berm shall be placed on the underlying pavement course in accordance with either Method A or B as described below .
The underlying pavement shall be broom cleaned and tacked prior to placement .
After the berm is placed the joint between the berm and the existing pavement shall be sealed with an approved highway joint sealant .
The existing curbing or edging shall be carefully removed to minimize damage to said units and adjacent pavement or sidewalks .
The following work will be paid for separately under appropriate work items saw cutting the removal and disposal of existing pavements both rigid and flexible and sidewalks .
The prices sostated constitute full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment including removal and disposal of existing pavement structure excavation for removal and setting unless otherwise noted that resetting excavation is to be paid for separately all handling hauling and stockpiling cleaning all sections to be reset cutting and trimming as necessary to provide the maximum ½inch opening across the top and down the front of the curbing gravel borrow subbase course including compaction and fine grading unless otherwise noted the resetting of the curb or edging to line and grade backfilling compacting and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete in place and accepted by the Engineer .
Saw cutting replacement concrete base and any concrete required between the reset curb or edging and the existing pavement structure will be paid for separately under appropriate work items .
This work consists of providing snow plowable raised reflective pavement markers RRPM yellow and white at locations designated on the Plans or as directed by the Engineer all in accordance with these Specifications. . MATERIALS .
The pavement reflector and casting shall be able to withstand snow plowing in opposite directions without sustaining damage .
At the time of installation the metal casting shall be free of dirt oil grease rust moisture or any foreign matter which will impair adhesion to the pavement .
Pavement markers shall not be placed on pavement surfaces that show evidence of cracking checking spalling or failure of underlying base material .
If during the laying out process it is determined that the marker would be installed at a point with one of the aforementioned surface defects or at a pavement construction joint then the marker shall be relocated a distance not to exceed percent of the typical marker spacing .
The minimum pavement surface temperature at the time of application shall be that recommended by the epoxy manufacturer .
No markers shall be installed if the pavement surface or precut slots are wet .
Plowable pavement markers shall be installed by inserting the two keels of the casting into parallel slots cut into the pavement said slots to be partially filled with epoxy adhesive all in accordance with the RRPM manufacturers recommendations .
The markers shall be placed no later than seven days after the slots are cut into pavement .
A predetermined amount of epoxy shall be placed in and between the slots to insure that all voids beneath and around the casting are filled so as to create a watertight seal around the casting and yet not produce an excessive overflow resulting in unacceptable residue on pavement .
The keels of the pavement marker casting shall be hand placed into the slots in such a manner as to assure that the tips of the markers deflecting surface are below the pavement surface .
The four lugs on the keels of the casting shall be in contact with the pavement .
The epoxy adhesive requires that the mixing operation and placing of the pavement markers be accomplished in a timely manner .
Excess adhesive on the pavement and on the exposed surface of the marker shall be immediately removed .
Any marker leaving a raised end exposed above the pavement must be removed .
The price sostated is full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment including cutting the pavement to the specified dimensions to receive the marker housing mixing the epoxy adhesive and placing it into the parallel slots placing the marker units in the prepared slots and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete in place and accepted by the Engineer .
Materials associated with test pit excavations such as backfill subbase and base courses bituminous pavements loam and seeding are specified elsewhere in these Specifications. . CONSTRUCTION METHODS .
Cutting pavement .
Breaking up and disposal of existing pavements .
f. Replacement paving which shall match as nearly as possible the existing pavement in thickness . .
The price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for labor materials and equipment including cutting and matching pavement removal and legal disposal of existing pavements excavation pumping and bailing backfilling loaming and seeding where required and for all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the Engineer .
Precast concrete median barrier used for temporary traffic control shall be placed on the pavement at locations indicated on the Plans or as directed by the Engineer .
Precast concrete median barrier units shall be carefully removed from their initial locations and transported to alternate locations where they shall be placed on the pavement as directed by the Engineer .
The price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor tools for hauling handling equipment temporarily storing units off the roadway any new parts required to secure the units to the pavement or to adjacent units and all other incidentals necessary to finish the work complete and accepted by the Engineer .
This work consists of cleaning and sweeping surfaces of bituminous concrete pavement and cement concrete pavement designated on the Plans or as directed by the Engineer to remove materials deposited on said pavements during extended delays in construction operations all in accordance with these Specifications .
These delays include but are not limited to suspension of construction operations during the winter months and the interruption of construction operations for extended lengths of time between the placement of successive courses of bituminous concrete pavement .
The sweepings must be removed prior to the placement of any successive pavement .
The work consists of cleaning and sweeping limited areas of roadway surface for the sole purpose of preparing said pavement to receive striping and markings .
Payment for cleaning and sweeping pavements to remove materials deposited thereon during normal uninterrupted construction operations is paid for under SECTION DENSE GRADED BITUMINOUS CONCRETE PAVEMENTS of these Specifications .
This work consists of cutting back and matching cuts in both Portland cement and bituminous concrete pavements to the required depths of the specified course or courses at the locations indicated on the Plans or as directed by the Engineer all in accordance with these Specifications .
The sections of existing pavement to be removed surface course base course or combination thereof shall be cut along the neat lines shown on the Plans or as directed by the Engineer .
The pavement to be removed shall then be chipped and removed .
The clean edge shall then be protected by adequate measures until the new pavement is placed and matched thereto .
Any existing pavement surface course base course or combination thereof beyond the neat lines called for on the Plans that is damaged or destroyed by the Contractors operations shall be either repaired or replaced at no additional cost to the State .
Cutting and Matching Pavement will be measured by the length in linear feet of cuts actually made on designated courses of pavement in accordance with the Plans andor as directed by the Engineer . .
This work consists of saw cutting a slot into existing pavement surfaces for the purpose of installing a traffic count loop detector at the locations indicated on the Plans all in accordance with these Specifications. . MATERIALS .
The Contractor shall then cut a slot into the existing pavement surface inch in width and between ½inches and ½inches in depth depending upon the thickness of the final surface course .
For slope limits pavement edges gutter lines etc .
The equipment for removing the bituminous pavement shall be a power operated planing machine or grinder capable of removing a layer of bituminous material .
The equipment shall be capable of accurately establishing profile grades by referencing from either the existing pavement or from an independent grade control and shall have a positive means for removing excess material from the surface and preventing any dust resulting from the operation from escaping into the air .
A foot ski shall be utilized with the pavement removal equipment on all limitedaccess highways and on other types of highways when indicated in the Contract Documents .
The equipment furnished by the Contractor shall be in good repair and shall be maintained so as to produce a clean cut to the pavement at all times .
The surface shall be free of imperfections of workmanship that will prevent the surface from being resurfaced with new pavement following this operation .
Removing Bituminous Pavement by Cold Planing will be measured by the number of square yards of said pavement actually removed in accordance with the Plans andor as directed by the Engineer . .
All pavements curbs gutters culverts guardrail sidewalks walls landscaping conduit or wire and all other existing improvements removed due to construction damaged or injured by any reason of or resulting from the Contractors operations shall be replaced or reconstructed of similar materials in a manner satisfactory to the Engineer at no additional cost to the State .
Underground conduit shall refer to all conduit placed underground in nonpaved areas or in paved areas where the pavement will be replaced as part of the project under other contract items .
Conduit under existing pavement shall refer to all conduit placed under existing paved areas where removal of the pavement is required only for the placement of conduit and the pavement is to be restored as part of this item .
Conduit under existing pavement shall be placed in accordance with all applicable requirements of Para .
The prices sostated constitute full and complete compensation for all materials equipment tools and labor including all fittings couplings and restoration of existing ground surfaces excavation and backfill saw cutting pavements temporary patch testing and all other incidentals necessary to satisfactorily finish the work complete in place and accepted by the Engineer .
The prices sostated constitute full and complete compensation for furnishing all materials T equipment tools and labor including fittings couplings saw cutting excavation and backfill restoration of existing pavements and sidewalks testing and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete in place and accepted by the Engineer .
After backfilling all pavement or surface treatment which has been disturbed by the construction operation shall be replaced with similar material in a manner satisfactory to the Engineer at no additional cost to the State .
The price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all materials including anchor bolts breakaway support couplings ground rods reinforcing steel conduit conduit couplings washers and nuts excavation backfilling and compaction replacing flexible pavement concrete or other surface treatment and for all labor tools equipment and incidentals required to finish the work complete in place and accepted by the Engineer .
Once a loop detector has been disconnected due to pavement removal trench T excavation for drainage or utility work conduit installation or any other construction activity the Contractor must restore loop detection within calendar days unless otherwise authorized in writing by the Engineer .
The loop shall be outlined on the pavement to conform to the specified configuration .
A power saw shall be used to cut a slot in the pavement .
Immediately after sawing the slot and pavement shall be flushed with high pressure clean water to remove the saw slurry .
To protect the loop wire at the edge of the pavement or curb inch minimum diameter flexible PVC or vinyl conduits shall be installed between the pavement and handhole in accordance with the details indicated on the Plans .
Where the loop wire crosses pavement joints and cracks the loop wires shall be further protected using the method specified on the Plans .
The pavement temperatures shall be OF and rising before the sealer is placed .
When sign posts except Uchannels are to be installed within areas where new concrete or asphalt pavement is to be placed the following method shall be used .
The box shall be firmly anchored and shall be placed such that the top of the box is at the finished grade of the pavement .
The pavement shall be installed around the box .
The markers shall be mounted at a height of feet above the pavement except when applied directly to a hazardous object which by its nature requires higher or lower mounting .
This work consists of furnishing and applying andor removing the following items of pavement marking at the width and locations indicated on the Plans all in accordance with these Specifications .
a. Waterborne pavement markings .
b. Thermoplastic pavement markings .
c. Epoxy resin pavement markings .
e. Temporary reflectorized pavement markings tape .
f. Temporary fast drying waterborne pavement markings .
g. Removal of existing pavement markings .
Composition binder pigments thermoplastic compound pavement marking material reflective glass spheres and epoxy resin marking material shall conform to the applicable requirements of SECTION M. PAVEMENT MARKINGS of these Specifications .
All dirty pavements shall be swept or air blasted clean .
Excess solvent shall be wiped from the pavement and allowed to evaporate before applying pavement marking material .
The Contractor shall be responsible for all pavement cleaning which may be required .
The maximum notracking time shall not be exceeded when the pavement temperature is greater than OF under humidity conditions of percent or less on dry pavement .
Paint to be used for temporary pavement markings shall conform to the requirements of Subsection T Paras .
The Contractor shall schedule temporary pavement markings such that they shall be placed on newly paved roadways which shall be opened to traffic at the completion of each days paving operations .
When thermoplastic pavement markings are specified the material used shall be a thermoplastic compound free of volatiles which is designed for machine application from approved equipment and shall readily extrude at temperatures between OF to OF to produce a cross section of line inch to inch thick .
After cooling to the ambient temperature and without polymerization or other chemical change the line shall form a pavement marking continuous and uniform in shape having a clear and sharp dimension and of the quality and appearance herein specified .
The material shall be especially compounded for traffic marking and shall not lose its bond with the pavement when the ambient temperature falls below OF .
The pigmented binder shall be well dispersed and free from all skins dirt foreign objects or ingredients that will cause bleeding staining or discoloration due to dissolution of asphalt in the pavement .
The compound shall not be deteriorated by contact with sodium chloride calcium chloride or mild acids alkalies or other chemicals used against formation of ice on roadways by oil contained in the pavement material or by oil drippings from vehicular traffic .
Equipment must be provided to insure removal of dust debris and other foreign matter from the road surface immediately prior to the installation of the pavement marking .
The equipment used for the placement of thermoplastic pavement markings shall be two general types mobile applicator and portable applicator .
The mobile applicator shall be defined as a truck mounted selfcontained pavement marking machine that is capable of hot applying thermoplastic by the extrusion method .
The extrusion shoes which shall be so constructed that the th side of the extrusion consists of the pavement itself shall be closed heat jacketed or a suitably insulated unit shall hold the molten thermoplastic at a temperature of from OF to OF and shall be capable of extruding a line of from to inches in width and at a thickness of not less than inch nor more than inch and of generally uniform cross section .
The portable applicator shall be capable of applying thermoplastic pavement markings by the extrusion method .
Thermoplastic pavement markings shall be placed upon dry pavement surfaces .
At the time of installation the pavement surface temperature shall be a minimum of OF and rising. . Option .
In the event that the surface temperature is OF and rising the Contractor may choose to apply thermoplastic pavement marking material provided that the surface is dry and the Contractor accepts all responsibility for the performance of the thermoplastic line striping for a period of one year from the date of application .
Equipment for the application of epoxy resin traffic stripes or special handwork shall consist of one or more mobile truckmounted and selfcontained pavement marking machines specifically designed to apply epoxy resin striping material and reflective glass beads in continuous and skipline patterns .
The application equipment shall be capable of installing a minimum of miles of epoxy reflectorized pavement markings in an eight hour day and shall include the following features .
Before any pavement marking work is begun a schedule of operations shall be submitted for the approval of the Engineer .
When pavement markings are applied under traffic flow conditions the Contractor shall provide all necessary signs cones arrow boards etc .
in accordance with the contract provisions and the latest edition of the MUTCD to maintain and protect the traffic the marking operation and the pavement markings until thoroughly set .
The application of pavement markings shall be performed in the general direction of traffic .
If for any reason it is not possible to place epoxy lane and center lines within the guidelines and restrictions of the contract and no previous lines exist the Contractor at his expense shall place the appropriate color of fourinch reflective temporary pavement markings for the entire length of the roadway that is unstriped in accordance with the latest edition of the MUTCD .
The temporary pavement markings and possible subsequent removal shall be at the Contractors expense .
Each test strip shall consist of approximately linear feet of pavement with white and yellow striping lane and edgeline similar to that required for the project .
Any pavement markings removed must be replaced within day .
The pavement surface shall be airblasted to remove dirt and residues just prior to the application of the markings .
Epoxy striping material shall be applied to substantially dry pavement surfaces .
The pavement surface temperature and the ambient temperature shall be a minimum of OF at time of application .
Operations shall neither start nor be continued during periods of rain or in the case of damp pavement .
Epoxy pavement markings must be reflectorized for night visibility by adding reflective spheres before the paint dries or sets by the doubledrop method .
The reflective spheres Type I followed immediately by Type II shall be evenly dispersed on a minimum wet film thickness of mils on existing and new pavements at a minimum rate of pounds per gallon for each type of glass sphere .
Longitudinal joints pavement edges and existing markings shall serve as horizontal control when approved by the Engineer .
Epoxy reflectorized pavement markings shall be placed at the width thickness and pattern designated by the Contract Documents .
Marking operations shall not begin until applicable surface preparation work is completed and approved by the Engineer and the T atmospheric conditions and pavement surface temperature are acceptable to the Engineer .
The temperature of the mixed epoxy may be adjusted as required for prevailing conditions including air temperature and pavement temperature to achieve the prescribed notrack time .
Epoxy reflectorized pavement markings which after application and curing are determined by the Engineer to be defective and not in conformance with this Specification shall be repaired .
Symbols and word messages shall be applied to the pavement where designated on the Plans or as directed by the Engineer .
The prices sostated shall constitute full and complete compensation for all labor tools materials and equipment including protection of newly applied markings from traffic layout cleaning and sweeping furnishing and applying the pavement markings and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete in place and accepted by the Engineer .
The price sostated shall constitute full and complete compensation for all labor tools materials and equipment including protection of newly applied markings cleaning and sweeping pavement applying pavement markings and removal of pavement markings when no longer in use and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete in place and accepted by the Engineer .
This work consists of furnishing placing maintaining and removing construction zone reflective pavement delineators at the locations indicated on the Plans or as directed by the Engineer all in accordance with these Specifications .
At the time of installation the pavement surface must be clean and dry so that it will not impair the adhesion .
The delineator must be applied with quick pressure to insure proper adhesion to the pavement surface .
Moreover any damage to the finished pavement surface any permanent marks or scars on the finished pavement surface including marking materials or any adhesive residues left in a pattern that may mislead or misdirect traffic that results from removal of delineators shall be removed or repaired as directed by and to the satisfaction of the Engineer all at no additional cost to the State .
If necessary this would include complete removal andor replacement of the damaged pavement section .
The Contractor shall be careful not to distribute straw on to new or existing plant material pavement surfaces driveways roads or sidewalks or other areas not designated on the Plans to receive straw .
Suitable materials may include natural granular soils boulders or rock roadway subbase base and asphalt or concrete pavement and other concrete stone brick or cinder block recovered from existing foundations buildings or selected utilities .
Controlled blending of approved aggregates at the asphalt or concrete production plants of different aggregate types andor aggregates from different sources will be allowed provided that each aggregate type from each separate source is stockpiled in a separate bin at the production plant and the Los Angeles abrasion and soundness values of each aggregate type from each source meets the criteria established for that type and for the intended asphalt pavement application or concrete use .
Keystone or chipstone used for keying bases and pavements and cover stone for seal coats shall consist of crushed quarry rock or crushed gravel and shall conform to the gradation requirements of either Column III or VI Table I Subsection M .. Gradation of Aggregates .
Coarse and fine aggregates mineral filler and asphalt cement shall be combined to produce bituminous concrete pavements in accordance with the gradation requirements physical properties and test limits indicated in the following Table .
This Specification covers performance graded asphalt cement for use in pavement construction .
This material shall conform to the mix requirements for Type I pavement specified in Subsection M .. of these Specifications .
This Specification covers the requirements for glass beads which are to be dropped onto white and yellow epoxy resin pavement marking material to produce a highly weather andwear resistant reflectorized traffic marking .
The notracking condition shall be determined by actual application on the pavement at a wet film thickness of mils .
This maximum drying time shall not be exceeded when pavement temperature is OF and under humidity conditions of percent or less providing that the pavement is dry .
