ROADBED The graded portion of a highway within the top and side slopes prepared as a foundation for the pavement structure and shoulders .
m wide strip adjacent and parallel to the finished pavement along both roadsides .
SUBGRADE The top surface of a roadbed upon which the pavement structure shoulders and curbs are constructed .
SURFACE COURSE One or more layers of a pavement structure designed to accommodate the traffic load the top layer of which resists skidding traffic abrasion and the disintegrating effects of climate .
Incentives will be reduced based on the percentage of density tests that do not meet minimum plant mix pavement density requirements as determined by Table Ride Incentive Reduction .
This includes but is not limited to Bridges Centerline stations Clearing limits Drainage structures Fencing Pavement Reference points Retaining structures Rightofway lines and monuments Sewers and waterlines Signs pavement markings guardrail Surfacing courses Wetland delineation Any other items of work included in the contract Special conditions for specific layout items Determine the slope stake catch point and provide copies of the slope staking notes to the Department .
Do not place loads on a concrete pavement treated base or structure before the curing period has been achieved .
Cut the pavement full depth vertically along regular neat lines in paved roadways that require patching .
Shoring Provide and remove shoring or supports for excavation walls that protect the work existing property utilities pavement and other existing facilities .
Finish the slope to provide a smooth surface from the edge of pavement to the catch point .
mm No. . mm No. . mm Cold milled pavement is not required to meet the above gradation when used as shoulder gravel .
The contract unit price may be adjusted if the average pavement depth varies by more than .foot mm from plan and the Project Manager issues a written order to increase or decrease the pulverization depth . .
Do not place pavement on the CTB until the compressive strength reaches psi kPa .
DESCRIPTION This work is producing furnishing placing and compacting plant mix asphalt pavement .
Plant mix pavement is or more courses of plant mixed aggregate hydrated lime or chemical additive when required and bituminous material constructed on a prepared foundation .
Equip the paver with a mobile grade reference system that provides a uniform pavement profile .
Apply tack coat on the prepared surface existing surfacing to be overlaid and between lifts when pavement is constructed in multiple lifts .
Make permanent repairs and restore partially completed pavement to the required profile section and condition at Contractor expense before placing the remaining lifts .
Provide all required interim traffic striping and traffic control on partially completed pavement at Contractor expense .
EDITION PLANT MIX SURFACING Payment for partial width or thickness pavement in acceptable condition will be made on the estimates following the end of the period on the next April th .
Failure to maintain the paver control line within the specified tolerance is cause for corrective action or pavement removal and replacement as directed by the Project Manager at Contractor expense .
Remove and replace segregated pavement areas behind the paver with new plant mix before initial rolling begins .
Sign the new pavement end at the close of work each day meeting the projects traffic control plan and the contract .
The Project Manager may adjust the minimum F C temperature if compaction rolling damages the new pavement or has received written approval from the asphalt cement manufacturer .
The pavement density is determined from cores taken at randomly selected locations after all rolling is complete and before the roadway is open to traffic .
Plant mix surfacing is evaluated for density on a lotbylot basis in accordance with Subsection .. Pavement Repair Cut out the defective pavement section to at least .foot mm depth or as directed by the Project Manager .
Construct all surfacing courses to provide completed plant mix pavements that meet surface smoothness levels derived from the IRI for the category specified in the contract and that meet the surface profile requirements for the finished surface .
Correct surface profile defects by milling and filling deficient pavement depths or by diamond grinding excess pavement depths .
Ensure corrected pavements do not create a transverse height difference between adjacent lanes exceeding ⅛inch mm .
The Department will test for surface smoothness and surface profile prior to the placement of seal and cover or plant mix seal on the final lift of plant mix surfacing pavement .
If the entire final lift of pavement can not be completed before winter shutdown data will be collected for all roadway sections paved through the final lift .
Evaluation of the remaining pavement will be performed once the paving is completed .
Horizontal curves feet m or less in centerline radius and pavement within the superelevation transitions of these short radius curves or .
m each side of the defective pavement and fill with like material compacted to the specified density .
Ensure the corrected pavement and adjoining surface meet the smoothness specifications .
Produce the rumble strips without tearing and snagging the pavement .
The offset may be adjusted to avoid longitudinal pavement joints .
.. Contract Time In cases where seal coat and pavement marking application are the only remaining items of work contract time will be charged in accordance with Subsection .. beginning the first working day following the July th Independence Day holiday .
In cases where seal coat and pavement marking application are the only remaining items of work as of August st contract time will not be charged after August th if seal coat work is not performed .
Bituminous materials suppliers recommended ambient and pavement surface temperatures .
Perform seal coat work when both the ambient and pavement surface temperatures meet the bituminous material suppliers recommended temperatures. . Stop seal coat work at least ½ hour before sunset to include equipment off of the roadway and placement of traffic control devices for nonconstruction activities. . Do not apply bituminous material to damp or wet roadway surfaces. . Do not apply bituminous material to plant mix pavement which has been placed in accordance with the contract within the previous hours .
If the seal coat experiences chip loss tracking flushing or bleeding at any time between the date the seal coat is completed and the st Wednesday in December of the same calendar year perform repairs to the seal coat and replace pavement markings covered by the repairs at no additional cost to the Department .
If pavement markings are not placed within hours of completion of the seal coat work the Department may have work performed and deduct the costs from monies due to the Contractor .
Apply final pavement markings as specified elsewhere in the contract .
Perform final sweeping and brooming operations to remove excess loose material no sooner than calendar days before final pavement markings . .
DESCRIPTION This work is the removal of existing bituminous pavement at the locations and depth specified in the contract or designated by the Project Manager . .
CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS .. Equipment Use a poweroperated cold milling machine equipped to control cross slope and to establish profile grade from the existing pavement or an external reference .
Starting at the center of the road begin milling on a longitudinal line parallel to the centerline with succeeding passes progressing to the outer edge of the pavement unless approved by the Project Manager .
Remove all thin delaminated or loose layers of existing pavement left after cold milling .
Replace the milled pavement at bridge ends and cattle guards with new bituminous surfacing the same day leaving no transverse joints in the milled areas .
After cold milling do not leave the remaining pavement exposed to traffic more than hours before placing the plant mix surfacing .
Replacing existing pavement is a separate operation from any succeeding overlay or lift .
Mill the existing pavement at the locations widths and depths specified .
The depth is measured below the existing pavement plane projected from points on undistorted pavement near the centerline and the edge of the driving lane .
.. Salvage of Pavement Millings Salvage haul and stockpile the milled pavement to the specified site .
Milled pavement is the Contractors property when specified and must be removed from the project .
Grades will be provided at foot m intervals for placing the new pavement for feet m from each bridge end and feet m from cattle guards .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT Cold milling is measured by the square yard m of pavement removed to the specified depth . .
Furnish all reinforcing steel in accordance with Subsection .. .. Dowel Bars and Sleeves Furnish Grade plain round dowel bars in accordance with AASHTO M . Bar dimensions and placement in the pavement are specified in the contract .
Do not begin paving operations until all equipment and tools for the pavement construction are available at the site .
Operate only rubbertired equipment on adjacent pavement .
Pad crawler units to prevent pavement damage .
Keep the adjacent pavement and form tops clean to provide good contact with tires or crawler units. . Slipform Pavers .
Use transverse vibrating units that do not project outside the specified paving section thickness and are positioned ahead of the screed a minimum distance equal to the pavement thickness .
The planer wheels must ride on the forms or adjacent pavement . .
Payment for a lot where a price reduction applies in accordance with Subsection .. is calculated using the following formula Price Reduction Contract Unit Price x . x P x Lot Quantity Where P the percent reduction in contract unit price as defined in Subsection Lot Quantity the plan quantity in cubic yards m or square yards m of the pavement section where the lot was placed .
Construct the pavement in full lane widths in a single operation .
Finish the concrete surface to meet Subsection PORTLAND CEMENT CONCRETE PAVEMENT EDITION Correct any pavement edge slump excluding specified edging exceeding ¼inch mm before the concrete has hardened .
Before the initial concrete set round the pavement edges on each side of the transverse expansion joints formed joints transverse construction joints and emergency construction joints to the required radius .
Extend the finished subgrade feet mm beyond each side of the planned pavement width .
Maintain the finished subgrade or foundation course in a smooth compacted undisturbed condition until the pavement is placed .
Exercise care in removing forms to avoid damage to the pavement edges. . Strikeoff and Consolidation .
Before the concretes initial set work the pavement edges along each side of transverse isolation joints transverse construction joints and fixed forms to produce a ¼inch mm continuous radius and a smooth dense mortar finish .
For artificial carpet and burlap drag furnish carpet or burlap that is long and wide enough to cover the entire pavement width and that produces a uniform texture .
All protective remedial and corrective work to produce acceptable pavement is at Contractor expense .
Construct and seal joints between concrete approach slabs and structures or concrete pavement as specified .
Place hotpoured joint sealer in sawed joints to within ¼ to inch mm of the pavement surface when the pavement temperature is at least F C. Do not use polyethylene strips to form transverse contraction joints .
Saw and apply hotpoured joint sealer in accordance with Subsection .. D. Ensure the finished joint alignment is parallel to the centerline of the pavement and does not have irregularities exceeding .foot mm measured by a foot .
Construct keyway joints as specified when adjacent pavement slabs are constructed separately .
Surface Test Test pavement surfaces in accordance with the following criteria using the straightedge method .
m of existing pavements or bridge ends .
Once the concrete has hardened test the pavement surface with a foot m straightedge placed parallel to the pavement centerline .
PORTLAND CEMENT CONCRETE PAVEMENT EDITION Correct all pavement showing a variation from the testing edge exceeding inch per foot mm per mm from the nearest contact point with the testing edge or showing a total variation exceeding ¼inch mm from the foot m straightedge by grinding until the areas are within the above limits .
Where the grinding methods would result in an unsatisfactory surface or in a slab thickness less than specified the affected pavement may require an adjustment in the contract unit price or removal and replacement in accordance with Subsection B. Profilograph .
Run the profilograph parallel to the pavement edge at all times .
Complete all corrective work before measuring the pavement thickness .
Perform all pavement corrections at Contractor expense .
.. Correcting Spall and Cracks Remove and replace pavement slabs cracked through the full depth into or more parts .
Repair pavement slabs containing a single diagonal crack intersecting the transverse and longitudinal joints within ⅓ of the width and length of the slab from the corner by removing and replacing the smaller portion of the slab .
Groove and seal random cracks that penetrate the full depth of the pavement .
The Project Manager will determine what random cracks are tight dont penetrate the full depth of the pavement and will be left undisturbed .
m from the nearest contraction joint in the pavement seal both the joint and the crack .
Take the concrete for the test beams from different concrete batches for each square yards m of concrete pavement and make at least sets per day .
Cure the test beams under the same environmental conditions as the pavement they represent .
The pavement represented by the beams may be opened to traffic when the average modulus of rupture of the set exceeds psi kPa and no individual beams modulus of rupture is less than psi kPa .
Opening to traffic does not constitute a final acceptance of the pavement .
The pavement is accepted upon confirmation of the day flexural strength .
.. Integral Curb Construct the curb monolithically with the pavement .
Construct the inside face of the curb true to the lines and grades in the contract using the finish specified for the concrete pavement including longitudinal floating and burlap drag finishing .
Meet the same surface requirements specified for the concrete pavement .
Continue concrete pavement joints through the integral curb at the same locations of the same type and constructed in the same manner .
Cure the integral curb as specified for concrete pavement .
.. Protection of Concrete Cover the concrete with an approved commercial insulating blanket covering all pavement if the ambient temperature falls below F C during the cure period .
.. Pavement Thickness Construct concrete pavement to the specified thickness .
A primary unit of pavement is the pavement area placed in each days paving operations .
A minimum of random locations will be tested for each square feet m of pavement placed within the primary unit .
Fill core holes with concrete of the same quality as used for the pavement at no cost to the Department .
If the thickness variation in a primary unit is less than .foot mm a deduction will be applied in the amount determined in Table times the area of pavement in the primary unit .
Panels are the areas bound by longitudinal and transverse joints and pavement edges .
Replaced pavement will be tested for thickness requirements using additional secondary measurements and is subject to all of the contract requirements .
The Contractor may leave deficient pavement panels in place if the panels meet all of the other contract requirements .
A deduct equal to of the contract unit price per square yard m will be imposed for those pavement panels left in place .
.. Area Measurement PCCP is measured by the square yard m. The measured width is from outside to outside of completed pavement including integral curb not exceeding the specified width or the width ordered by the Project Manager .
The length is measured along the centerline of the pavement surface .
Fillets for widened sections or at drainage structures and similar locations placed monolithic with the pavement are measured as pavement .
Areas constructed other than as pavement are deducted from the pavement area .
No deduction is made for any fixture located within the pavement limits that has a surface area in the plane of the pavement surface of square yard .
Integral curb included in the completed pavement is not measured separately for payment . .
Pave Used for concrete pavement streets and highways .
Do not use nonagitating transport equipment to transport concrete except when placing concrete pavement in accordance with Section .
Use whitepigmented compound for pavements .
In addition to the compressive strength requirements Class Pave hydraulic cement concrete pavements require beam tests to determine the concretes flexural strength .
Joints for Bridge Approach Slabs Construct and seal joints between concrete approach slabs and structures or concrete pavement as specified .
High spots are measured as ½ the distance between the end of the straightedge and the pavement surface with the straightedge centered on the apex and the opposite end held in contact with the surface .
Restoration and Maintenance of Existing Pavement Restore and maintain existing pavement structures disturbed during the removal or relaying of pipe culverts in accordance with Subsection .
Restoration and Maintenance of Existing Pavement Restore the existing pavement excavated for pipe installation using material equal to or better than the in place pavement .
Place and compact the replacement bituminous surfacing to match the adjacent pavement providing a smooth riding surface including the joints .
Maintain the restored pavement areas in good condition until the new pavement is placed . .
Gasket material specified coatings coupling bands bolts bands fittings tees risers end sections joint testing restoring disturbed pavement flared ends beveled EDITION CULVERTS STORM DRAINS SANITARY SEWERS STOCKPASSES AND UNDERPASSES skewed and similar shapes or special designs riser pipe lengths riser tee sections and field cast concrete bends and connections are not measured separately but are included in the pipe lengths measured .
Excavate the postholes and drive the posts using methods and equipment that do not damage the adjacent pavement .
Stop post driving that heaves the adjacent pavement more than ½inch in feet mm in m measured using a foot m straightedge parallel to the pavement .
Cut asphalt pavements leaving a straight cut face .
Replace all damaged pavement .
Coordinate all construction activities to ensure all interim andor permanent pavement markings and all associated signs are in place prior to the signal turnon .
Saw cut all existing pavements before excavating .
Removing and Replacing Improvements Replace or reconstruct existing sidewalks curbs gutters pavement bituminous surfacing base material landscaping and other improvements removed broken or damaged by the Contractor with equal or better quality materials .
Cut concrete sidewalk and pavement borders to be removed without damaging the adjacent surface .
Whenever a part of the existing concrete sidewalk driveway or pavement is broken or damaged remove the entire square or slab and replace the concrete as specified .
.. Loops Repair saw cuts through existing pavement markings as directed .
DESCRIPTION This work is the furnishing installing and maintaining of traffic signs barricades lights signals pavement markings and other specified traffic control devices .
For longterm stationary operations greater than days remove pavement markings in the traveled way that are no longer applicable in accordance with Subsection Minimize pavement scarring when removing pavement marking material .
Do not paint over existing pavement markings with black paint or spray with asphalt as a substitute for removal or obliteration .
m above the pavement. . Sign median crossings as specified in the contract . .
Leave remaining signs in place until pavement markings within the zone are completed .
Position the truck to follow within to feet m on pavement marking removal and application .
When placing or removing traffic cones that protect the pavement markings use a vehicle with a truckmounted attenuator or follow with a shadow vehicle possessing a truck mounted attenuator. . Equip shadow vehicles with an arrow board facing rearapproaching traffic .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT The contract quantities for traffic control devices temporary pavement markings flagging and pilot car operation are an estimate only and may vary from the actual quantities used or required in the contract .
Items Not Eligible for Separate Payment The following items are not measured or paid for separately Amber flashing or strobe lights on equipment vehicles and hauling units Impact attenuators for median barrier openings Permits and costs relating to project access Construction drainage maintenance removal restoration and reseeding of areas used for temporary roads approaches and crossovers Radios for flaggers and pilot vehicles Illumination of work areas Reflectorized safety equipment garments and headgear Vehiclemounted arrow boards on stripers and shadow vehicles Replacing temporary pavement marking tabs and tape destroyed by traffic Temporary pavement marking tabs used for seal coat operations Costs to clean and maintain installed traffic control devices Devices not properly maintained Devices placed beyond feet m of the work termination point for that day Adjustments or moving of devices that were initially installed improperly Adjustments or moving of devices solely to aid contractor operations such as temporarily relocating devices to allow equipment access Additional traffic control costs resulting from corrective actions on items failing to meet contract requirements Traffic Control at commercial pits and Other miscellaneous materials and equipment required for proper traffic control that are not included in the Traffic Control Rate Schedule . .
DESCRIPTION This work is the application of temporary striping interim pavement markings and final pavement markings. . MATERIALS Furnish materials in accordance with the following subsection requirements Epoxy Traffic Paint .
Layout of Pavement Markings The Project Manager will lay out the final pavement marking configurations and locations .
Apply words symbols letters andor numeral pavement markings free of gaps and fully solid .
Remove and replace out of specification pavement markings as directed at Contractor expense .
Equip the pavementmarking machine with a flow meter and totalizer that measures paint quantities in gallons L to the nearest .
Apply pavement markings during daylight hours only .
Obtain Project Manager approval to apply pavement markings any other time .
Grind all surfaces with existing epoxy pavement markings within calendar days before applying the pavement markings .
Grind to a depth that completely removes the existing pavement markings .
Immediately stop grinding if the depth exceeds that of the existing pavement markings and make adjustments to meet the specified grind depth .
Do not grind or apply final pavement markings on new concrete until calendar days after it has been placed .
Apply temporary striping for paving and milling operations in accordance to Subsection EDITION PAVEMENT MARKING APPLICATION Remove at Contractor expense all temporary striping that conflicts with interim or final pavement markings .
Remove conflicting temporary stripes the same day the interim or final pavement markings are applied .
.. Interim Pavement Markings Interim pavement markings consist of all longitudinal striping centerlines edge lines shoulder lines lane lines etc .
and words and symbols identical to the final pavement marking configuration .
Apply interim pavement markings no later than calendar days after the application of temporary striping on intermediate lifts and before opening to traffic on top lift .
Do not apply interim pavement markings when the ambient air temperature is lower than F C. Stripe newly constructed pavements including partially completed sections .
Apply the interim pavement markings matching the final pavement marking configurations and locations .
Interim pavement markings placed prior to chip seal may be offset as approved by the Project Manager .
Final Pavement Markings Apply final pavement markings a minimum of calendar days and a maximum of calendar days after concrete is placed or after seal coat operations through initial sweeping are completed .
When final pavement markings are the only remaining item of work on the project contract time assessment will be suspended until either beginning final pavement markings application or calendar days elapse after seal coat operations are completed or concrete placement is completed .
The Project Manager may extend the days due to holidays or inclement weather that prevent the application of final pavement markings .
Apply the pavement marking material when the pavement is dry and the ambient temperature is F C and rising or follow the manufacturers surface and temperature requirements whichever is more restrictive .
Apply pavement markings up to inches mm wide in a single application to the specified width .
Apply pavement markings over inches mm wide in or inch or mm multiple applications and minimum fractional inch mm applications .
Apply inlaid plastic materials into the new asphalt pavement just before final compaction and roll it flush with the roadway surface during the final plant mix compaction .
Apply curb paint during the application of the final pavement markings .
Marking Removal Remove existing temporary and final pavement markings using any of the following Sand blasting with air or water Highpressure water Steam or superheated water or Mechanically grinding sanding scraping brushing .
EDITION PAVEMENT MARKING APPLICATION Remove all pavement markings that would conflict with newly applied striping or markings at contractor expense .
Remove conflicting pavement markings the same day new markings are applied .
Only those pavement markings represented by a manufacturers certification at the time of application and actually used and witnessed on the project are eligible for payment .
.. Interim Pavement Marking Quantities Interim pavement markings are measured by the gallon L. Only those pavement markings represented by a manufacturers certification at the time of application and actually used and witnessed on the project are eligible for payment .
.. Epoxy Traffic Paint Epoxy is measured by the gallon L. Only those pavement markings represented by a Manufacturers Material Certification at the time of application and actually used and witnessed on the project are eligible for payment .
.. Preformed Plastic Materials Preformed plastic and thermoplastic pavement striping is measured by the foot m. Words and symbols are measured by the square foot m. .. Curb Painting Painting curb is measured by the gallon L. .. Hand Painted Pavement Markings Words and Symbols Hand painted pavement striping words and symbols stop bars crosswalks hash marks and other striping not applied by a striping truck are measured by the gallon L. Quantity measurements are based on flow metertotalizer readings taken before and after each run or if a calibrated tank is used tank measurements are taken before and after each run .
Removal of Pavement Markings If bid separately pavement striping removal is measured by the foot m based on a inch mm width for the actual quantity of striping removed .
If not bid separately removal of pavement markings is incidental to other items and is not measured separately for payment .
.. Line Control Establishing line control for pavement markings is not measured for payment . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT Payment for the completed and accepted quantities is made under the following Pay Item PayUnit Curb Painting Gallon L Plastic Markings Square Foot m or Linear Foot m Remove Pavement Markings Square Foot m or Linear Foot m Striping Gallon L Temporary Striping Mile km Words Symbols Gallon L Line control is not paid for separately but is included in the cost of the pavement markings .
Make final adjustment of structures to match the grade of the new pavement .
Replace and set to grade cast iron rings and covers once the pavement is placed .
AGGREGATE FOR CONCRETE These specifications describe the quality and size of aggregate for hydraulic cement concrete pavements and bases highway bridges and incidental structures .
Furnish sealing material for all types of pavement joints that is a hotpoured thermoplastic rubber or rubber asphalt compound in accordance with AASHTO M furnished in one grade only .
Use readymixed cold applied joint fillers for sealing concrete pavement joints only with the Project Managers prior written approval .
TEMPORARY STRIPING TAPE Furnish temporary striping tape that is inch mm wide retroreflective pressure sensitive tape specifically manufactured for use as pavement striping .
Composition Requirements Furnish preformed plastic pavement marking material consisting of plastics and plasticizers pigments and reflective glass beads combined and proportioned to meet the following .
Be sufficiently free of tack so the material can be handled or repositioned on the pavement before being permanently fixed in position .
Mold to the pavement contours breaks faults under traffic at normal pavement temperatures .
Capable of being inlaid in pavement at temperatures up to F C and .
EDITION PAVEMENT MARKING MATERIALS .. Dimensional Requirements Furnish the pavement marking material in standard manufactured widths of inch inch inch inch and inch and mm .
Furnish the pavement marking material in the thickness specified in the contract .
Provide glass beads for reflectorizing traffic pavement markings that are spherical transparent have a smooth lustrous surface and in accordance with AASHTO M except as modified below and the pavement marking manufacturers recommendations .
Ensure the glass beads do not impart a noticeable daytime hue to white pavement markings .
CONCRETE SEALANTS EDITION TABLE DECK SEALANT SAND GRADATIONS Percentage By Weight Passing Square Mesh Sieves Sieve Size Percent Passing No. . mm No. . mm No. . mm INDEX Acceptance of Bituminous materials Commercial plant mix Concrete structures Modified concrete overlay Noncommercial plant mix Signs and traffic guide devices Acceptance Final Items designated on a lot basis Quality incentive allowance Access breaks traffic control Access to contractors records Accessible pedestrian signals APS materials Acronyms and abbreviations Addenda Additives warm mix plant mix surfacing Administrative allowances subcontracting Admixtures hydraulic cement concrete Advance flagger ahead warning signs materials Advance warning arrow panels materials Aggregate and bituminous material application rates seal coat Aggregate production PCCP Aggregate requirements bituminous mixtures Aggregate design requirements grade S mixtures Aggregate sampling and testing PCCP Aggregate stockpiling methods surfacing aggregates Aggregate surfacing Aggregate surfacing construction Bridge end backfill Compaction Curing Finishing Placing Pugmill mixing Restrictions Road mixing Surface preparation Surface smoothness Treatment Aggregate Cement treated base Bank Protection Bituminous surface treatment Concrete requirements Modified concrete overlay Plant mix pavement Surfacing requirements Treatment Air entraining agents Air quality Alignment for piles while driving INDEX EDITION Alternate type or grade of bituminous materials Aluminum sign material American legion fatality markers Antigraffiti coating permanent materials Application of Bituminous material bituminous surface treatment Blotter material seal coat Cover aggregate bituminous surface treatment Emulsified asphalt tack coat Painting structure finishes Seal coat materials Appurtenance joints concrete plastic and fiber pipe Aquatic resource protection Archeological and historical findings protection of Asphalt cement plant mix surfacing Assembling steel steel structures Authority of the Engineer Inspector Project manager Award of contract Award cancellation of Backfill Concrete structures Manholes and inlets Metal bintype retaining walls Backfilling culverts storm drains sanitary sewers underpasses Bald and golden eagle protection act Bank protection riprap Bar reinforcing material requirements Barb wire material requirements Barricade permanent Batching mixing handling and sampling hydraulic cement concrete Bearing and anchorage devices Bearing and anchorage prestressed concrete members Bearing assembly anchor bolts materials Bearing devices Bearing devices PTFE Bid documents Bid ExpressTM Bid package contents of Bid proposals rejection of Bidding Bid submission Determination of bid responsiveness Rejection of bid proposals Requirements Venue Billing cycle Binder aggregate surfacing Bintype retaining walls Bituminous coated corrugated steel pipe pipe arches structural steel plate pipe Bituminous curbs EDITION INDEX Bituminous material Bituminous surface treatment Furnishing and applying Requirements Seal coat Tack coat Bituminous mixtures hamburg requirements Bituminous pavement pulverization Compaction Mixing Pulverization Testing and acceptance Bituminous surface treatment Blasting Blasting professional Controlled Noise and debris control Operations Production Records Safety Survey Test section Blending materials aggregate surfacing Blending materials cement treated base Bolts and bolted connections steel structures Bolts and nuts specifications Bolts high tensile strength Bonding and grounding traffic signals and lighting Bonding steel prestressed concrete members Borrow excavation unclassified and special Borrow material requirements Brace wire fence materials Breakaway system signs and delineators Breakaways requirements Bridge deck crack sealing Bridge deck milling Bridge deck repair Bridge deck sealants materials Bridge end backfill Aggregate requirements Aggregate surfacing construction Bridge survey Burner fuel restrictions plant mix surfacing Cable guardrail Cast in place curb and gutter Cattle guards Cement grout material requirements Cement hydraulic cement concrete Cement treated base Certification of compliance Chain link fence constructing Change orders Character of work significant changes in the INDEX EDITION Character of workers Chlorides Chromium alloy steel castings Circular reinforced concrete culvert storm drain and sewer pipe Claims Assignment of Decision on Notice of Submission of certified Cleaning up Drilled shaft Final Steel structures Clear zone Clearing Clearing and grubbing Coaxial cable ohm Cofferdams Backfilling Drawings and calculations Inspections Cold milling Cold weather concreting Hydraulic cement concrete Precast concrete products Communication cable Compaction Aggregate surfacing Bituminous pavement pulverization Cement treated base Installation of structural plate type culverts Moisture and density embankment Over geotextile separation stabilization Over geotextile subsurface drainage Plant mix surfacing Requirements embankment Rollers equipment use Compensation for altered quantities Completion bituminous surface treatment Component inspection Composite pull boxes lights and signals Composition and proportioning cement treated base Composition of concrete hydraulic cement concrete Composition of mixtures plant mix surfacing Compost mulch Compression joint seals miscellaneous structure items Concrete Concrete Aggregates Barrier rail Classification Curing materials Drilled shaft Foundations lights and signals EDITION INDEX Concrete continued Manholes and inlets Ordinary finish Pipe Portland cement concrete pavement Posts guardrail Pressure pipe Prestressed concrete members Sealants Sidewalks Structures Concrete pavement joint fillers joint materials Concrete pull boxes lights and signals Concrete retaining walls Concrete slope protection Concrete surface finish prestressed concrete members Conductors and cable traffic signals and lighting Conductors lighting and signals Conduits and pull boxes Conduit and pull box requirements Conformity with plans and specifications Consent to contract provisions Consideration of proposals Constructing barbed wire and woven wire fences Constructing chain link fence Constructing joints Concrete structures Plant mix surfacing Cement treated base Construction sign support assemblies traffic control devices Construction stakes lines and grades Contents of bid package Contract provisions consent to Contract provisions coordination of Contract time seal coat Contract Award of Bond Execution and approval of Failure to execute Intent of Performance Contractor survey and layout Contractor Furnished drawings and submittals Registration Responsibility for damage claims Responsibility for utility property and services Responsibility for work Submittals table Contractorfurnished sources Control cabinet pedestals traffic signals and lighting Controlled blasting INDEX EDITION Cooperation Between contractors By contractor With utilities Coordination of contract provisions Copper pipe Correcting spalls and cracks PCCP Corrugated Aluminum pipe and pipe arch culverts Aluminum pipe for underdrains Polyethylene drainage pipe Steel pipe and pipe arches Steel pipe for underdrains Cover aggregate seal coat Crack sealing Blotter material Bridge deck Routing Sealant Critical path method CPM Crossing entering and using roadways Crushed aggregate course Crushed base course type A Crushed base course type B Crushed cover aggregate cover material Crushed cover aggregate excess seal coat Crushed top surfacing type A Crushed top surfacing type B Culvert Excavation Removal Sealers Trench excavation Culvert storm drains sanitary sewers stockpasses and underpasses Curbs and gutters Curing and cleaning bituminous surface treatment Curing and testing concrete precast concrete members Curing compound PCCP Curing concrete Hydraulic cement concrete Portland cement concrete pavement Precast concrete members Cement treated base Curing aggregate surfacing Cutting off steel or steel pipe piles Damage claims responsibility for Deadman or anchor fences Debarment Decision on claims Default of contractor Definitions Delay compensation Delays Deleted or terminated work EDITION INDEX Delineators Density quality incentive allowance Department furnished survey and layout Depositing concrete underwater Design calculations and shop drawings signs delineators and guideposts Design of Concrete mixtures Concrete mixtures prestressed members Detours Plant mix surfacing Detectable warning devices sidewalks Detector loop shielded cable traffic signals Determination of Calendar day contracts Completion date contracts Excusable noncompensable and compensable delays Working day contracts Detours Diesel fuel used on the project Differing site conditions Digout excavation and embankment Digout subex and replacement material Disposal of unsuitable or excess material excavation and embankment Disposal clearing and grubbing Domestic materials Dowel bars and sleeves PCCP Dozers Drain aggregate Drainage chute concrete Drainage structure castings Drawings and submittals contractor furnished Drilled shafts Drilled shafts Obstructions Sloughing and caving Testing and acceptance Tolerances Driving posts guardrail posts Driving steel piles Ductile iron water pipe Dust control traffic control Earth embankment Elastomeric bearing devices Embankment at structures Embankment over swampy areas Embankment protectors Embankment requirements Enclosures prestressed concrete members Endangered species act Engineer authority of Environmental protection Epoxy coated reinforcing bars requirements Equipment Aggregate surfacing INDEX EDITION Equipment continued Bituminous surface treatment Bridge deck milling Bridge deck repair Cold milling Lists and drawings traffic signals and lighting Modified concrete overlay Pavement markings Pile driving Plant mix surfacing Portland cement concrete pavement Rental rate guidelines Use Equitable adjustment Erection steel bridge railing Erection steel structures Erosion and sediment control measures Erosion blankets Erosion control geotextile permanent Erosion control plan water pollution control Escrow bid documents Estimate final process Evaluation and repair of rain damaged concrete PCCP Examination of documents and site of work Excavating and backfilling traffic signals and lighting work Excavation and embankment Excavation Appurtenant structures Cattle guards Drilled shaft Embankment Manholes combination manholes and inlets and inlets Muck Pipe foundation Requirements Trench Existing bridge and structure removal Existing bridge and structure removal aquatic resource protection Expansion joint filler and joint sealing material PCCP Extensions contract time Extra work Fabrication and erection signs delineators and guideposts Fabrication Prestressed concrete members Reinforcing bars Steel structures Failure to complete on time Failure to properly maintain roadway or structure Falsework Concrete structures Steel structures Federalaid participation Feed system plant mix surfacing Fence EDITION INDEX Fence Fabric Preparation Snow fence Fertilizer Fiber reinforced pads Bearing plates prestressed concrete members Structures Field laboratory and equipment Field test traffic signals and lighting Field welding steel structures Final tensioning of steel prestressed concrete members Final Acceptance Cleaning up Project finalization Walk through process Finish grade control Finish on exposed surfaces precast concrete products Finishing Aggregate surfacing Class A and B repair Concrete structures Portland cement treated base Flagging operations traffic control Flared end terminal sections and tee risers for concrete pipe Flasher traffic signals Flexible delineators Flexible delineator materials Flexible joint sealers Flow rate meter plant mix surfacing Fly ash Force account basis work performed Foreign material domestic material Forest protection Form removal precast concrete products Forms and forming precast concrete products Forms Concrete structures Prestressed concrete members Foundation and bedding material structures Foundation concrete signs Foundation preparation culverts sewers drains etc .
Foundations and forms Foundations Concrete structures Retaining walls Traffic signals and lighting Fuel price adjustment Furnish piles Furnishing rightofway Galvanized metal miscellaneous metals Gaskets Concrete plastic and fiber pipe INDEX EDITION Gaskets continued Culverts storm drains sanitary sewers underpasses Joint materials Metal pipe Gates Fence Road closure General storm water permit Geotechnical logging drilled shafts Geotextiles Classification Permanent Permanent erosion control Requirements Sampling Separation stabilization Silt fence Source approval Subsurface drainage Gravel shoulder and traffic Grout Grouted riprap Grubbing Guardrail And concrete barrier rail Guardrail end terminal section widening Reset guardrail items Revise guardrail items Hamburg wheel track testing Hamburg requirements bituminous mixtures Handlaid riprap Handling and placing reinforcement PCCP Handling and storage of materials Handling transporting and storage precast concrete products Hardware guardrail and guideposts Hardware signs Haul road repair public roadways Hazardous materials discovery and removal of High density polyethylene pipe High durability waterborne traffic paint High tensile strength bolts miscellaneous hardware High tensile strength bolts steel structures High float emulsions Holes in piling Hydrated lime Hydraulic cement concrete Hydraulic mulch Incising treated timber Inspection Component Light and signal standards Piles Plant Signs EDITION INDEX Inspection continued Treated and untreated timber and timber piles Water pollution control Work Inspectors authority and duties of Installation CSL tubes drilled shafts Culverts storm drains sanitary sewers stockpasses underpasses Date tags and route markers Expansion and contraction joints concrete structures Posts guardrail Insurance requirements All contracts General Railroad Third party beneficiary clause Utility property and services Integral curb PCCP Irrigation facilities and headwalls Irrigation water Maintenance of Issuance of proposals Joint materials Joints bridge approach slabs Joints PCCP Jointventure bids Latex admixture modified concrete overlays Laws rules and regulations to be observed Layout of pavement markings Legal rights no waiver of Liability for CERCLACECRA claims Lighting and signal materials Lightweight concrete guardrail posts Limitation of operations Limitations on grading operations Livestock and property protection of Load restrictions Loading and application temperatures bituminous materials Loading of piers and abutments Location and inspection of repair areas Loop detector shielded cable Loop detector traffic signals Loops traffic signals and lighting Luminaire highway lighting Luminaire standards and posts Mailboxes Maintenance of BMPs Constructed roadway excavation and embankment work Detours Existing pavement culverts Existing pavement remove and relay culvert Irrigation water Cement treated base Signals INDEX EDITION Maintenance of continued Sod Surface bituminous prime and tack coat Traffic and detours Traffic during work suspensions Work Maintenance stockpile payment Major item significant changes in the character of work Mandatory material sources Manholes combination manholes and inlets and inlets Marking and shipping steel structure elements Mast arms signals and luminaires Master blasting and safety plan Material and property rights Material sources Contractorfurnished Local Mandatory Mix designs and testing of Prospected Reclamation requirements Material test methods precedence Material Departmentfurnished Disposal of excess Domestic requirements Materials source bituminous materials Materials Accepted by certification Accepted by department testing Certification of compliance Found in the work rights in and use of Guaranty Handling and storage Plant inspection Unacceptable Use of department property Materials requirements Aggregate surfacing Aggregate treatment Bearing devices Bituminous material Bituminous pavement pulverization Bituminous surface treatment Bituminous tack coat Bridge deck repair Bridge survey Cattle guards Concrete sidewalks Concrete structures Conduits and pullboxes CPM Crack sealing Culverts storm drains sewers stockpasses EDITION INDEX Materials requirements continued Curbs and gutters Detectable warning devices Drilled shafts Fences Finish grade control Geotextiles Guardrail and concrete barrier rail Hydraulic cement concrete Irrigation facilities and headwalls Mailboxes Manholes and inlets Metal water service lines Modified concrete overlay Pavement marking application Piling Plant mix pavement Portland cement concrete pavement Portland cement treated base Precast concrete products Prestressed concrete members Reinforcing steel Retaining walls Riprap and slope and bank protection Roadside revegetation Seal coat Signs and delineators Steel bridge railing Steel structures Stemming blasting Stockpiled surfacing aggregate Structure finishes Traffic control Traffic signals and lighting Welding Measurement and Payment Aggregate Aggregate treatment Aluminum and plywood Asphalt cement plant mix Bank Protection Bedding and foundation Bituminous material Bituminous material seal coat Bituminous material surface treatment Blasting consultant Blotter material Box beam guardrail Box beam guardrail terminal section Breakaway system Bridge approach section Bridge deck milling Bridge end backfill Bridge railing INDEX EDITION Measurement and Payment continued Bridge survey Cable guardrail Cable guardrail terminal section Cables Casing Cattle guard new Cattle guard reset Cement concrete pavement Cement treated base Class A and B deck repair Clearing and grubbing Cold milling Commercial plant mix surfacing Compaction Composting Concrete Concrete barrier rail Concrete barrier rail terminal section Concrete barrier rail transition Concrete barrier rail reset Concrete drainage chute Concrete slope protection Concrete drilled shaft Condition seedbed surface Conductors Conduit and pull boxes Conical driving point pile Controller cabinet pedestals Controllers Cover type and Cover aggregate CPM schedule Crack sealing Crosshole sonic logging tubes and testing Crushed aggregate course Culvert remove Curb and gutter Curb markings pavement marking application Curing seal Cutting shoe pile Deadman fence Delineator type and design Detectable warning devices type Detector loop amplifiers Detector loops Detour construct maintain and remove Dozer Dozer operation fence Drill and socket pile Drill Presplitting holes Drilled shaft Drive pile Driving point pile EDITION INDEX Measurement and Payment continued Dynamic load test Elastomeric bearing device PTFE Elastomeric bearing devices Embankment in place Embankment protector Emergency preemption systems Emulsified asphalt SS Epoxy traffic paint Erosion control Excavation Excavation water lines Facilities reset Fertilizing Final sweep and broom Finish grade control Flagging Furnish pile Gates Geotextile filter subsurface drainage Granular bedding Grouted riprap Guardrail end terminal section widening Handlaid and random riprap Hydrated lime Impact attenuators Integral curb and gutter Interim pavement markings Irrigation facilities Luminaire assemblies Lump sum traffic control Mailbox Manhole manhole and inlet and inlets Manholes Median concrete curb Metal sign post Metal guardrail Modified concrete overlay Motor grader Mulch Nested sections guardrail New fence Optional terminal sections Overheight detector Panels fence Pavement markings line control Pavement markings removal Pavement pulverization Pedestrian push buttons Pedestrian signals Permanent barricade Photoelectric controls Pilot car operation Plant mix surfacing INDEX EDITION Measurement and Payment continued Plastic markings preformed plastic Portland cement cement treated base Prebore pile Precast concrete bridge members Precast concrete curb Precast concrete median barrier rail Precast member Preparation fence Prestress member Pull box Pull boxes traffic signals and lighting Raise guardrail Redrive service pile pile Redrive test pile pile Reinforcing steel Relay pipe culvert Remove and reset existing pole Remove and reset fence Remove concrete barrier rail Remove fence Remove guardrail Remove signs Replace signs Reset signs Retaining wall metal Retaining walls Reuse sign face Road closure gate assembly Roadway obliteration Rumble strip Sandgravel cushion Seal coat Seeding Separation stabilization geotextile Service and control assemblies Sheet aluminum overlay Shoring and cribs Shoulder gravel Sidewalk concrete Signal standards Silt fence Slotted drain Sodding Soil retention blanket Splice pile Standards traffic signals Static load test pile Stiffened sections guardrail Stockpile aggregate Structural steel Structure excavation type I and II Structure finishes Structures EDITION INDEX Measurement and Payment continued Structures and obstructions remove Temporary casing Temporary erosion and sediment control Temporary pavement markings traffic control Temporary striping quantities Test trailer Timber sign post Topsoil revegetation Topsoil embankment Traffic gravel Traffic signals Traffic signals and lighting Transverse deck grooving Treated timber poles Type and size Units traffic control Water service line Words and symbols Measurement of quantities Mechanical rebar connectors Medium curing liquid asphalts Metal beam guardrail erection Metal bin type retaining walls Metal fence stays Metal gates fences Metal pipe Metal posts and assemblies fence Metal shoes piles Metal water service lines Methods and equipment prosecution and progress Metric plate substitution Migratory bird treaty act Mill and shop inspection Milling pavement Miscellaneous materials Miscellaneous work Misfits steel structures Mix designs plant mix surfacing Mix designs testing of material sources Mixing PCCP Mixing cement treated base Mobilization payment Mobilization SMP contracts payment Modified concrete overlay Moisture and density requirements excavation and embankment Motor graders Muck excavation Mulch Mulching Nested guardrail sections No waiver of legal rights Noise pollution Notice of claim INDEX EDITION Notice to proceed Noxious weed control Obliterate roadway Obstructions drilled shaft Opening to traffic Concrete structures Portland cement concrete pavement Sections of project Optimized gradations for concrete Optimized gradation requirements Optional terminal sections Overhead structures signs Overheight detector Materials Traffic signals and lighting Overpayments Paint coating systems for structures Paint coating systems structure finish Painting Cattle guards Curbs Steel bridge railing Steel piles and steel pipe pile Steel structures Structure finishes Paints and enamels Paints signs Partial payments Patented devices materials and processes Pavement marking application Pavement marking materials Pavement markings Concrete curbs Layout Removal Final Interim Temporary Pavement repair plant mix surfacing Pavement thickness deficiency Pay unit rounding Payment Extra work Partial Stockpiled material Subcontractor Termination for public convenience Pedestrian push buttons materials Pedestrian push buttons traffic signals Perforated concrete pipe Performance graded asphalt binder PGAB Permanent casing drilled shafts Permanent control measures Permanent pollution control measures EDITION INDEX Permanent turf reinforcement mat Permits licenses and taxes Permits Construction dewatering Floodplain General storm water Section rivers and harbors act Section nationwide and individual Shortterm turbidity standard authorization SPA notification Tribal Personal liability of public officials Photoelectric controls traffic signals and lighting Pigments vehicles and thinners Pile bearing resistance Pile driving aids and accessories Pile driving equipment Piles steel pipe piles Piling Pilot car operations Pin connections steel structures Pins and rollers miscellaneous structure items Pipe Concrete plastic and fiber pipe Joints PVC gravity sewer and drain pipe PVC pressure water pipe Pipes conduits and ducts Placing and fastening reinforcing steel Placing and finishing concrete concrete pavement Placing concrete Bases for cattle guards Concrete structures Hydraulic cement concrete Prestressed concrete members Placing Aggregate surfacing Anchor bolts concrete structures Anchor bolts steel structures Cattle guards Posts by excavation and backfill wood and concrete guardrail posts Prestressed concrete members Plans and specifications conformity with Plant and animal protection Plant inspection Plant mix surfacing Plant mix surfacing Additives for warm mix Aggregate Asphalt cement Burner fuel restrictions Compaction Composition of mixtures Constructing joints INDEX EDITION Plant mix surfacing continued Design of Equipment Feed system Flow rate meter Grade S specifications Mix designs Pavement repair Production monitor recorder Quality incentive allowance Recycled asphalt pavement Safety requirements Spreading and finishing Surface tolerances Tack coat Test procedures Volumetric properties quality incentive allowance Plastic Conduit electrical Conduit lighting and signal materials Pipe Waterstops Plywood sign materials Poles and posts treated and untreated timber Pollution control Air quality Noise pollution Structure finishes Water pollution control Porous concrete pipe Portland cement concrete pavement Post tensioning prestressed concrete members Posts fence Posts rails and braces fence materials Powder coating prequalification and certification Precast concrete curbs Precast concrete products Precast prestressed deck sections Precoated galvanized steel culverts and underdrains Preconstruction conference Preformed plastic pavement marking material Preparation of embankment foundations Prepaving conference PCCP Prequalification steel fabricators Presplitting rock slopes Prestress steel prestressed concrete members Prestressed concrete members Prestressing equipment prestressed concrete members Prestressing steel Pretensioning prestressed concrete members Price reduction factors Product data sheet Production blasting Production monitor recorder plant mix surfacing EDITION INDEX Profilograph PCCP Project finalization Project manager authority and duties of Project schedules Property and landscape protection and restoration Proposal guaranty Proposal guaranty release of Proposals Consideration of Delivery and public opening of Issuance of Rejection of Withdrawal of Prosecution of work Prospected sources Protection and curing Cement treated base Protection and restoration of property and landscape Protection of Aquatic resources Archeological and historical findings Concrete from rain Concrete PCCP Livestock and property Material reinforcing steel Traffic and highway structures bituminous surface treatment Traffic and highway structures seal coat PTFE bearings bearing devices PTFE sheets Public safety and convenience Public works contract Pugmill mixing aggregate surfacing Pull boxes and manholes Pumping water from cofferdams Purpose and prosecution of work zone traffic control PVC gravity sewer and drain pipe PVC pressure water pipe Qualified products list QPL Quality assurance Quality control steel structures Quality incentive allowance Acceptance Plant mix surfacing Quantities of work in the proposal Radio antennas lighting and signal material Radio antennas traffic signals and lighting Railroad insurance requirements Railway highway provisions Raise guardrail Reclamation requirements Reclamation Seed Recycled asphalt pavement plant mix surfacing Reflective glass beads pavement markings Reinforced concrete arch culvert storm drain and sewer pipe Reinforced concrete elliptical culvert storm drain and sewer pipe INDEX EDITION Reinforced concrete pipe Reinforcing steel Reinforcing steel Bridge deck repair Drilled shaft Manholes and inlets Material guaranty and random sampling Miscellaneous structure items Portland cement concrete pavement Precast concrete products Prestressed concrete members Structural steel hardware Reject material aggregate surfacing Rejections steel structures Rejects excess fines Relaying culverts Release of bid documents Removal of And salvage of structure Bridges and major drainage structures Concrete bridge deck repair Detours Forms and falsework concrete structures Minor drainage structures Pavement concrete and masonry Structures and obstructions Unacceptable and unauthorized work Remove And relay pipe culvert And reset fence Guardrail Reset and adjust facilities Signs Removing and replacing improvements traffic signals and lighting Removing excess moisture excavation and embankment Replace reuse sign face and reset Replacing removed pavement cold milling Resetting cattle guards Responsibility of contractor and surety Restoring surfaces opened by permit Restrictions aggregate surfacing Retaining walls Retroreflective sheeting sign materials Ride specification Riprap Slope and bank protection Construction requirements Materials requirements Road mixing aggregate surfacing Roadside revegetation Roadway or structure failure to properly maintain Rock embankment Rock excavated below grade Rolled erosion control products EDITION INDEX Rollers requirements Rolling bituminous surface treatment Rolling seal coats Rubber waterstops Rumble strips Safety requirements plant mix surfacing Safety blasting Salvage of pavement millings Salvaging and reinstalling electrical equipment Samples tests and cited specifications Sampling handling batching and mixing precast concrete products Sampling testing and acceptance aggregate surfacing Sampling testing and acceptance seal coat Sampling aggregates PCCP Sampling bituminous materials Sampling geotextiles Sandgravel cushion requirements Scaling rock slopes Schedule of liquidated damages Schedule project Scope of payment Seal coat Seamless steel pipe Section rivers and harbors act permit Section nationwide and individual permits Seeding fertilizing and mulching Seeding temporary erosion control Service and control assembly lighting and signal materials Service and control assembly traffic signals and lighting Sheet aluminum overlay sign materials Sheet aluminum sign materials Sheet copper water stops Shipment and storage geotextiles Shipping bituminous materials Shoring and cribs structure excavation Shoring culvert and trench excavation Shortterm turbidity standard authorization Sidewalk Concrete Finish Removal Sign fabrication Sign posts Signal cable lighting and signals Signal standards type and Signal standards type luminaire standards Significant changes in the character of the work Signing materials Signs and channelizing devices traffic control devices Signs and delineators Silane sealer concrete structures Silt fence Slipformed concrete curb and gutter Sloping and finishing excavation and embankment INDEX EDITION Slotted corrugated steel pipe Sloughing and caving drilled shafts Sod Sodding Source of supply SPA notification Span wire mounted signals traffic signals and lighting Spill prevention and waste disposal Splicing piles Splicing reinforcing steel Spreading and finishing plant mix surfacing Staples and nails fence materials Steel and aluminum gates fencing Steel Beams and fittings guardrail Bridge railing Castings highway bridges Components structure finish Conduit construction requirements Conduit lighting and signals Pipe piles Posts guardrail and guideposts Reinforcing Rods and bolts prestressed concrete members Structures Water pipe Stiffened guardrail sections Stockpile SMP Stockpiled surfacing aggregate Storage and handling of materials steel structures Storage and transportation of prestressed concrete members Storage of materials hydraulic cement concrete Storm drain manhole and trunkline connections Straightening bent material steel structures Street excavation Structural steel Plate pipe and pipe arches Precast concrete products Prestress concrete members Requirements Tubing Structural timber and lumber Structure excavation Structure finishes Structure tolerances Subcontracting Subcontractor payments Subexcavation Subgrade and forms concrete sidewalks Subgrade preparation cement treated base Submission of bid documentation Submission of certified claims Submittals Bridge deck repair EDITION INDEX Submittals continued Detours Drilled shafts Modified concrete overlay Steel structures Structure finishes Welding Surface conditions weather limitations and paving dates plant mix pavement Surface preparation Modified concrete overlay Pavement marking Seal coat Structure finishes Surface smoothness and thickness requirements CTB Surface smoothness aggregate surfacing Surface test PCCP Surface tolerances plant mix surfacing Survey tolerances finish grade control Suspensions of work ordered by the engineer Sweeping and brooming seal coat Table of contractor submittals Tack Tack coat plant mix surfacing Temporary facilities Temporary Casing drilled shafts Control measures Erosion seeding Facilities aquatic resource protection Fence Striping tabs Striping tape Waterborne traffic paint Tension wire fencing Termination for public convenience Test procedures plant mix surfacing Test trailers transport and set up Testing and acceptance Bituminous materials Concrete Drilled shaft Portland cement treated base Testing of bituminous materials Third party beneficiary clause Tie bars PCCP Tie wire fencing Tolerances Drilled shaft Structure Topsoil Topsoil salvaging and placing Top soiling Traffic and detours maintenance for Traffic and pedestrian signals traffic signals and lighting INDEX EDITION Traffic and pedestrian signals materials Traffic control devices materials Traffic control Cold milling Conference Device location and installation Dropoff areas Paving and milling operations Plan Requirements Reviews Seal coat operations Striping operations Units Traffic paint Epoxy or other polymeric High durability waterborne Traffic signals and lighting Transfer of prestress prestressed concrete members Transporting concrete Hydraulic cement concrete PCCP Treated timber and lumber Treated timber poles class lighting and signals Treated wood posts for sign poles Treatment of structure foundation materials structure excavation Trench excavation Tribal permits Truss rods fencing Unacceptable and unauthorized work removal of Unclassified channel excavation Unclassified excavation Underground storage tanks discovery of Unit price or lump sum basis measurement and payment Use of explosives Use of trimmed material cement treated base Utilities cooperation with Utility property and services insurance requirements Value engineering proposals Vegetative mulch Warning lights traffic control devices Warranty seal coat Water pollution control Aquatic preservation Erosion and sediment control measures Inspections Permanent control measures Regulations Temporary control measures Water Dust control Hydraulic cement concrete Requirements Waterborne traffic paint EDITION INDEX Watering equipment Weather and night limitations PCCP Weather limitations Hydraulic cement concrete Cement treated base Structure finishes Tack coat Weighing equipment general Welded stud shear connectors miscellaneous structure hardware Welded stud shear connectors steel structures Welding Electrodes miscellaneous structure hardware General Qualifications Steel lighting and signals Wire and wire mesh miscellaneous structure hardware Wire protection lighting and signals Wire rope and connecting hardware guardrail Withdrawal of proposals Wood fence posts and brace rails fence material Wood posts and blockouts guardrail Wood treatment guardrail and guideposts Work suspensions maintenance for traffic Work inspection of Work removal of unacceptable and unauthorized Workmanship and tolerances prestressed concrete members Woven wire fence INDEX EDITION TABLES Measurement abbreviations Contract items evaluation elements Table of price reduction factors Maximum allowable variance and divergence Unit cost Ride incentive reduction table Districtarea phone numbers Number of mix designs and tests furnished at no cost Subcontract requirements Schedule of liquidated damages Rounding criteria Subcontracting administrative allowances Mobilization payments Items subject to fuel price adjustment Compaction requirements Seismograph tolerances Temporary erosion control lump sum progress payments Surface smoothness Shoulder gravel gradation requirements Pay factors for CTB Table of pay factors EPA specification used oil fuel requirements Minimum lift thickness Maximum allowable variance and divergence Price adjustments due to line deviations Schedule of tolerances Recommended application temperatures for bituminous materials Crack sealant specifications Contract unit price adjustments Concrete pavement thickness deficiency Water requirements Concrete classification Concrete requirements CLSM gradations Concrete strength pay factors Air content pay factors Concrete permeability pay factors coulombs Concrete permeability pay factors kΩcm Pay factors for concrete Tolerances for prestressed concrete members Minimum bending radii Minimum bar embedment Weights of standard sizes of reinforcing bars Bolt length determination Bolt substitutions Finish coat paint color Structure tolerances Minimum dry film thickness Traffic control requirements for hauling units lane roadways C factors for dropoffs on the outside of horizontal curves Average daily traffic adjustment factor Traffic control device based on spacing factor TABLES EDITION Traffic control speed limits in construction zones Traffic control rates based on category and device type Traffic control lump sum progress payments Materials required for sign work Limits on deleterious material in fine aggregate Table of gradations fine aggregate for concrete Limits on deleterious substances in coarse aggregate Table of gradations course aggregate for concrete Optimized gradation requirements Table of gradations selected surfacing Table of gradations sand surfacing Table of gradations crushed base course type A Table of gradations crushed base course type B Table of gradations crushed top surfacing type A Table of gradations crushed top surfacing type B Table of gradations cover material Table of gradations aggregate for cement treated base Aggregate requirements Grade S mixture design and production requirements Grade S aggregate design requirements Hamburg wheel track requirements Grade S specifications Table of gradations bedding material Table of gradations filter material Table of gradations random riprap Size requirements bank protection Table of gradations drain aggregate Digout and subex replacement material crusher reject Table of gradations bridge end backfill Basis for acceptance of bituminous materials Specification for performance graded asphalt binder Latex or polymer modified crs emulsified asphalt Specifications for medium curing liquid asphalts Specifications for high float emulsions Single post mounting Timber pole Top diameter limits ASTM retro reflective sheeting requirements Properties and test methods finished rubber waterstop Properties and test methods finished plastic waterstop Aluminum epoxy paint composition Epoxy paint for pipe pile requirements Enamel paint requirements Zinc phosphate paint requirements Structures intermediate coat requirements Structures finish coat requirements Certified test results Heavy hex nuts Steel plate substitutions PTFE sheet properties Woven wire requirements Post lengths Approximate gate frame weights Liquid magnesium chloride requirements Liquid calcium chloride requirements EDITION TABLES Mortar sand gradation requirements Topsoil gradation requirements Temporary rolled erosion control Synthetic fiber TRM Natural fiber TRM Compost physical and chemical properties Temporary waterborne traffic paint composition Waterborne traffic paint composition High durability waterborne traffic paint composition Epoxy or other polymeric traffic paint composition Minimum SIA plastic pavement marking material Reflective glass bead gradation E Geotextile strength property requirements M Geotextile strength property requirements Separation geotextile property requirements Stabilization geotextile property requirements Subsurface drainage geotextile filter property requirements Permanent erosion control geotextile property requirements Temporary silt fence property requirements Properties of HMWM Deck Sealant Sand Gradations TABLES EDITION For copies of the Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction write Montana Department of Transportation Contract Plans Bureau Prospect Avenue PO Box Helena MT The edition is available in two formats inch by inch bound and loose leaf three ring binder inch by inch binder included .
