Roadbed The graded portion of a highway within top and side slopes prepared as a foundation for the pavement structure and shoulders .
Subgrade The roadbed materials beneath the pavement structure .
A VEP changing the type of the pavement structure or the type or basic design of a bridge structure will not be considered .
Changes in the pavement structural section or in structure design details may be considered with prior approval by the Materials or State Bridge Engineer .
No loads will be permitted on a Portland cement concrete pavement base or structure before the expiration of the curing period .
Subsection .C is used for thickness of Portland cement concrete pavement and Subsection .D for compressive strength of Portland cement concrete pavement .
Existing structures pavement sidewalks curbs gutters and other existing improvements which are to become an integral part of the planned improvements shall remain even though not specifically noted .
Removal of Pavement A Portland Cement Concrete Pavement Unless otherwise specified in the Special Provisions concrete pavement designated on the project plans to be removed shall either be removed from the job site and disposed of at a site secured by the contractor or buried in embankment areas .
W here new construction is to join the existing concrete pavement the pavement shall be saw cut to a true line perpendicular to the centerline of the pavement with straight vertical edges free from irregularities .
B Bituminous Pavement Unless milling is specified in the Special Provisions all bituminous pavement designated on the project plans to be removed shall be SECTION completely removed down to the underlying base course or subgrade .
The pavement material shall be removed and disposed of as specified in the Special Provisions .
W here new construction is to join existing bituminous pavement the existing pavement shall be cut to a true line perpendicular to the centerline of the pavement with straight vertical edges free from irregularities .
The removal shall be accomplished in a manner which does not destroy the integrity of any asphaltic concrete pavement that remains and which does not result in a contamination of the milled asphaltic concrete with the underlying base material .
If the Engineer deems it to be warranted the Engineer will require that the contractor provide for the surface drainage of areas where the pavement surface has temporarily been removed .
On projects with existing curb and gutter any asphaltic concrete buildup in the gutter designated to be removed shall be removed prior to the pavement removal operation by equipment and methods approved by the Engineer .
Removal of Miscellaneous Concrete Miscellaneous concrete shall be defined as all or portions of mortared rubble masonry curbs gutters sidewalks driveways aprons slope paving island paving retaining walls spillways drainage structures concrete box culverts foundations footings and all other Portland cement concrete or masonry construction except bridges and pavement .
Asphaltic concrete obtained either from commercial or other sources and approved by the Engineer shall be used to fill and repair voids on the existing pavement surface that result from the removals . .
Temporary pavements facilities utilities and installations shall also be protected until they are no longer required .
W here a structure is located within a paved area all backfill material above finished subgrade elevation shall conform to the requirements of the typical pavement section of the same elevations .
All embankment material whether from sources within the site or from borrow to be placed within three feet of the finished subgrade elevation shall have a resilient modulus value equal to or greater than the design resilient modulus value for the pavement structure .
SECTION GRADING ROADWAY FOR PAVEMENT Description The work under this section shall consist of removing pavement excavating removal and disposal of excess material furnishing and placing embankment material and all grading shaping and compacting of materials necessary to construct the subgrade to the lines and grades shown in the plans and as depicted by the new pavement section specified and in accordance with the requirements of these specifications .
General All existing pavement shall be removed as designated on the project plans .
feet above or below the grade established by the Engineer except when Portland cement concrete pavement or asphaltic concrete pavement are to be placed directly on the subgrade the finished surface shall not vary by more than .
Method of Measurement Measurement of grading roadway for pavement will be made by the square yard of the area prepared and subsequently covered with a subbase base asphaltic concrete or Portland cement concrete however when raised median islands are constructed the area occupied by these islands will be included in the area measured for payment .
W here the new pavement is not bounded by curb and gutter and additional shoulder work is necessary to construct the typical section shown in the project plans such work shall be considered as incidental and the cost will be considered as included in the cost of the contract bid item Grading Roadway for Pavement .
Basis of Payment The accepted quantities of grading roadway for pavement measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard for the work complete as specified herein and as shown on the project plans .
The center of a longitudinal overlapped joint shall be located in the same manner as a longitudinal pavement joint according to Subsection .
Subsequent subbase base or pavement course shall be placed within days after the curing seal is applied .
Any damage to the curing seal or lime treated subgrade shall be promptly repaired by the contractor at no additional cost to the Department and as directed by the Engineer until a subsequent subbase base or pavement course is placed over the lime treated subgrade. . Safety Program The contractor shall provide to the Engineer for review a detailed safety program for the protection of the workers and public covering precautions to be exercised and emergency treatment to be available on the project site .
Subsequent subbase base or pavement course shall be placed within days after the curing seal is applied .
Any damage to the curing seal or cement treated subgrade shall be promptly repaired by the contractor at no additional cost to the Department and as directed by the Engineer until a subsequent subbase base or pavement course is placed over the cement treated subgrade .
Subsequent subbase base or pavement course shall be placed within days after the curing seal is applied .
Transverse construction joints shall be constructed normal to center line of the pavement at the end of each days production and during other work interruptions as directed by the Engineer .
W hen Portland cement concrete pavement is to be placed over lean concrete base longitudinal construction joints in the lean concrete base shall be at least two feet from any subsequent longitudinal joint in the Portland cement concrete pavement . .
Longitudinal joints shall be located SECTION according to the requirements shown in Subsection for pavement joints unless otherwise approved by the Engineer .
SECTION GEOCOMPOSITE EDGE DRAIN Description The work under this section shall consist of furnishing all labor equipment and materials to install a pavement edge drain system .
The purpose of the geocomposite edge drain is to provide drainage for the pavement base course while restricting loss of fines .
The amount of trench excavated at any time shall not exceed the amount of pavement edge drain system which can be installed and the backfill completed in one working day .
All necessary splices and connections are to be made with kits furnished by the manufacturer and in accordance with the manufacturers specifications and directions. . Damage to Pavement The contractor shall not damage the adjacent existing pavement during the excavation and placement operation .
Any damage done to the pavement shall be repaired at no additional cost to the Department in a method approved by the Engineer .
SECTION SECTION PORTLAND CEMENT CONCRETE PAVEMENT Description The work under this section shall consist of furnishing all materials and constructing a pavement surface using Portland cement concrete and shall include coring operations furnishing and placing dowels and tie bars furnishing and placing miscellaneous reinforcing steel and joint materials and constructing joints in accordance with the details shown on the plans and the requirements of these specifications .
Materials Portland cement concrete for pavement shall consist of a mixture of hydraulic cement fine aggregate coarse aggregate water and admixtures .
Unless otherwise provided Portland cement concrete pavement shall conform to the requirements of Section .
General At least days prior to paving the contractor shall furnish the following information for the Engineers review for specification compliance A detailed sequence and schedule of concrete placement operations including but not necessarily limited to width of pavement to be placed proposed equipment production rates SECTION working hours concrete hauling placement methods curing sawing and sealing methods .
A traffic control plan for pavement construction operations which includes provisions for the placement and maintenance of barriers required to protect the pavement from traffic for a minimum of seven days after concrete placement .
Mainline concrete pavement shall be constructed with slipform paving equipment however areas inaccessible to slipform paving equipment may be constructed with fixed side forms .
Ramps and irregular pavement areas shall be constructed with either slipform paving equipment or fixed side forms .
Unless otherwise shown on the plans the main roadway including concrete shoulders or distress lanes shall be placed in a single monolithic pass provided the finished surface of the pavement consistently conforms to the requirements for grade alignment and pavement smoothness as specified herein .
Portland cement concrete pavement shall be constructed as required smooth and true to the required lines grades and dimensions. . Pavement Base The surface of lean concrete base cement treated base or subgrade upon which the concrete pavement is to be placed shall conform to the finish and elevation requirements specified for the material involved .
W hen Portland cement concrete pavement is constructed over lean concrete base curing compound shall be applied to the surface of the lean concrete base at a rate of not less than one gallon per square feet .
This curing compound shall be placed in addition to curing compound placed as part of lean concrete base construction and shall be applied no more than hours prior to placement of Portland SECTION cement concrete pavement .
The curing compound shall be allowed to setup prior to placement of Portland cement concrete pavement .
Curing compound membrane which is damaged during placement of load transfer dowel assemblies or during other operations shall be repaired with a reapplication of curing compound prior to placement of Portland cement concrete pavement .
Portland cement concrete pavement shall not be placed over lean concrete base or cement treated base for at least days after placement of the lean concrete base or cement treated base unless otherwise approved by the Engineer . .
Slipform paving equipment shall be equipped with traveling side forms designed to laterally support the concrete for a length of time which is sufficient to produce pavement of the required cross section .
No abrupt changes in longitudinal alignment of the pavement will be permitted .
Forms shall be made of steel and have an approved section with a base width of at least four inches and a depth equal to or greater than the thickness of the pavement .
Forms shall remain in place until the day after placing the concrete and shall be removed in a manner that will prevent damage to the pavement .
Pry bars shall not be used between the forms and the pavement under any circumstances . .
Immediately prior to placing concrete the contractor shall verify that the elevations of guide wires controlling slipform pavers and the elevations of fixed forms are such that the thickness and finished grade of the pavement will be in accordance with the requirements of the project plans and these specifications .
W hen pavement widths are less than feet and where it is impractical to use mechanical methods manual methods may be used to finish the concrete surface .
Any concrete which is spilled splattered or scattered on existing pavement shall be removed before the end of each days paving operations .
B SlipForm Method The equipment shall spread consolidate screed and floatfinish the concrete so that a minimum of hand finishing will be necessary and a well consolidated and homogeneous pavement is produced .
If correction is not possible while the concrete is plastic pavement with excessive edge slump shall be corrected by one of the following methods The pavement shall be removed by sawcutting a distance not greater than one foot from the pavement edge between adjacent transverse joints .
and the pavement shall be replaced as part of adjacent Portland cement pavement construction .
If excessive edge slump can not be corrected by method one above then the pavement shall be removed for the full lane width between adjacent transverse joints and replaced as specified in Subsection .C .
W hen concrete is being placed adjacent to previously constructed pavement work bridges for placing and finishing the pavement and the tracks on one side of the paver may be allowed on the new pavement provided that The previously placed pavement has been placed for a minimum of hours .
Pressure exerted on the pavement by the paver shall not exceed pounds per square inch .
Tracks on the paver shall be equipped with protective pads or the surface of the existing pavement shall be protected so that the surface is not damaged .
No part of the track shall be operated within one foot of the edge of the existing pavement .
Any pavement which is damaged by the contractors equipment shall be repaired as approved by the Engineer and at no additional cost to the Department .
W ith the exception of saws used for the construction of weakened plane joints no other contractors equipment will be allowed on the pavement until all the requirements specified herein have been met .
Vibrators shall be used adjacent to the longitudinal edge of the pavement .
Vibrators shall not rest on new pavements or side forms or contact any tie bars and power to the vibrators shall be such that when the motion of the machine is stopped vibration will cease .
The spreading or finishing machine shall move over the pavement as many times and at such intervals as may be required to insure thorough consolidation .
After the pavement has been struck off and consolidated it shall be floated with an approved longitudinal float .
The contractor may use a longitudinal float which is worked with a sawing motion while being held in a floating position parallel to the roadway centerline and while passing gradually from one side of the pavement to the other .
E Joint Finishing and Edging The pavement edges and joints shall be edged in accordance with the details shown on the plans .
W hen the pavement will be overlaid with asphaltic concrete prior to opening to traffic only a burlap drag is required .
Burlap shall be in accordance with AASHTO M Class and shall traverse the full width of the pavement to within inches of the pavement edge .
Texture shall be parallel to the center line of the roadway and shall extend over the entire roadway width to within three inches of the pavement edge .
The surface of the pavement shall be kept moist until initial joint sawing is completed fogging done after curing material has been applied shall not begin until the curing compound has set sufficiently to prevent displacement .
Joints A General Requirements Joints in concrete pavement will be designated as transverse expansion joints longitudinal or transverse construction joints or longitudinal or transverse weakened plane joints .
The faces of all joints shall be constructed perpendicular to the surface of the concrete pavement .
C Transverse Joints Transverse expansion joints shall be located at the junction of roadway pavement slabs and bridge approach slabs .
SECTION Sawed joints shall be constructed before uncontrolled pavement cracking occurs however joints shall not be sawed until the concrete has hardened enough to prevent excessive tearing or raveling during sawing operations .
Any sealant spilled on the concrete pavement shall be removed .
SECTION Joints shall be sealed within working days after the concrete has been placed and prior to opening the pavement to any traffic .
A pavement Profile Index shall be obtained as soon as possible after concrete placement .
The profilograph readings shall be taken in the vehicle wheel paths three feet from each lane edge of traffic lanes or inches from the lane edge or pavement edge of distress lanes .
The tested profile will include bridge approaches and feet of any pavement which abuts the new pavement .
If during any days production less than lanefeet of pavement is placed that pavement shall be tested with the subsequent days production .
The contractor shall broom the pavement or clean the pavement by other approved methods immediately prior to profilograph testing .
Profile Indexes greater than nine inches per mile per .mile section shall be reduced to nine inches or less per mile per .mile section by grinding or pavement removal and replacement as specified herein .
W hen pavement will not be overlaid with asphaltic concrete prior to opening to traffic grinding of pavement which has a Profile Index of nine inches or less per mile per .mile section will only be permitted to correct deviations in excess of .
The contractor shall remove high pavement areas with vertical deviations greater than .
High pavement areas shall be removed with grinding devices or multiplesaw devices as approved by the Engineer .
After removal of high areas the affected .mile pavement section shall be reprofiled however if the original Profile Index for the pavement section was within the specified range only that portion of the pavement which originally contained high areas shall be reprofiled .
SECTION Evaluations of pavement depressions will be made based on the presumed correction of adjacent high areas .
W hen the pavement contains depressions greater than .
inches in feet or less the contractor shall grind adjacent pavement as directed by the Engineer and the pavement shall be reprofiled as specified above .
W hen the pavement contains depressions greater than .
inches in feet or less the pavement shall be repaired as directed by the Engineer .
Such repairs may include additional grinding or fulldepth pavement replacement .
Upon completion of repairs the pavement shall be reprofiled as required .
If after the repair of high andor depressed areas the pavement does not conform to the specified profile requirements additional pavement grinding and profile measurements shall be performed as directed by the Engineer .
In addition to the Surface Profile Index requirements the pavement surface will be tested with a foot straightedge .
The pavement shall be ground in a manner that does not form a smooth or polished pavement surface .
All pavement profile repairs shall be made prior to pavement thickness evaluations .
Remedial work required to correct pavement smoothness deficiencies shall be performed by the contractor at no additional expense to the Department .
The contractor shall provide for the maintenance and protection of traffic during pavement profile repairs and subsequent pavement profile measurements as directed by the Engineer and at no additional expense to the Department. . Pavement Cracks A General Cracks penetrating the full depth of the pavement shall be repaired or the cracked pavement shall be removed and replaced as specified herein prior to opening the pavement to public traffic .
SECTION W ithin days after concrete placement and prior to acceptance of the work the Engineer will perform a pavement crack survey .
The pavement shall be cleaned prior to the crack survey .
Cracks which are visible without magnification and which require repair and pavement slabs which require replacement will be marked by the Engineer and shall be repaired or replaced by the contractor as specified and at no additional cost to the Department .
The contractor at its option and at no additional cost to the Department may core cracked pavement as approved by the Engineer to determine the extent of cracking .
Crack repair shall begin within seven days after completion of the pavement crack survey and shall be completed within days after the start of repairs .
Payment for pavement slabs which require repairs will be adjusted as specified in Subsection .
c Cracks Occurring Within Wheel Path Cracks occurring within the wheel paths which are exclusive of the areas defined under subsections a and b above shall be considered unrepairable and the pavement shall be removed and replaced in accordance with the requirements of Subsection .C .
SECTION C Pavement Removal and Replacement Portland cement concrete pavement having cracks not repairable in accordance with Subsection .
Cracked pavement shall be removed and replaced to the limits established by the Engineer and will generally require removal of the full lane width of the slab over a length of at least six feet .
Excessively cracked pavement shall be removed and replaced over the full pavement width as directed by the Engineer .
In order to minimize overcutting fourinch diameter fulldepth cores shall be drilled at the corners of the pavement to be removed as directed by the Engineer .
Base material which is damaged as a result of pavement removal shall be repaired or replaced by the contractor as approved by the Engineer .
Removed pavement and base material shall be disposed of by the contractor as approved by the Engineer .
After removal of cracked pavement dowel bars shall be placed by drilling and anchoring using an approved epoxy at approximately middepth in the existing concrete pavement .
Replacement concrete shall be placed finished and cured in accordance with the requirements specified for the original pavement. . Pavement Thickness SECTION Concrete pavement shall be constructed to the specified thickness .
Method of Measurement Portland cement concrete pavement will be measured by the square yard calculated from the dimensions shown on the plans and adjusted by the amount of any change ordered by the Engineer .
No allowance will be made for pavement placed in excess of the specified dimensions .
Basis of Payment The accepted quantities of Portland cement concrete pavement measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price adjusted as hereinafter provided and shall include full payment for furnishing all labor materials tools equipment and incidentals and for doing all the work involved in constructing the pavement complete in place as shown on the plans and specified herein .
SECTION No separate payment will be made for joints the cost being considered as included in the contract item for Portland cement concrete pavement .
Cracked pavement slabs which require repair in accordance with the provisions of Subsection .
B will be paid for at percent of the contract unit price for the pavement repaired as measured between the original longitudinal and transverse pavement joints abutting the repaired pavement however no adjustment to the contract unit price will be made for pavement slabs which contain only cracks which are observed later than days after concrete placement .
Unit price adjustments for cracked pavement slabs which require repair will be made independently of all unit price adjustments made for compressive strength pavement thickness and pavement smoothness .
SECTION W hen pavement will not be overlaid with asphaltic concrete prior to opening to traffic the unit price paid for pavement on mainline traffic lanes and freewaytofreeway ramps which have a Profile Index less than or equal to .
TABLE Use when pavement will not be overlaid with asphaltic concrete prior to opening to traffic .
The plus unit price adjustment will not be made for pavement placed within each .mile section which has grinding in excess of .
W hen pavement will be overlaid with asphaltic concrete prior to opening to traffic the unit price paid for pavement on mainline traffic lanes and freewaytofreeway ramps which have a Profile Index less than or equal to .
TABLE Use when pavement will be overlaid with asphaltic concrete prior to opening to traffic .
Unit price adjustments for pavement smoothness will not be made for pavement in distress lanes shoulders service interchange ramps tapers cross roads or frontage roads .
SECTION Unit price adjustments for pavement smoothness will be made independently of all unit price adjustments made for pavement thickness compressive strength and cracked pavement slabs which require repair .
Pavement rejected in accordance with this Section or Section shall be removed and replaced with pavement meeting the requirements of both sections .
However within ten days of notification of rejected pavement the contractor may submit a written proposal to accept the pavement at a reduced unit price .
Such proposal shall contain an engineering analysis of the anticipated performance of the pavement if allowed to remain in place .
If the proposal is not accepted the pavement shall be removed and replaced as hereinbefore specified .
SECTION PORTLAND CEMENT CONCRETE PAVEMENT REPAIRS Description The work under this section shall consist of furnishing all labor materials and equipment necessary to repair Portland cement concrete pavement in accordance with the requirements of these specifications and as shown on the project plans or established by the Engineer .
The kind of Portland cement concrete pavement repair may consist of one or a combination of the following Spall Repairs Slab Repairs Pavement Grinding Pavement Grooving Joint and Crack Repair Edge Sealing Spall Repairs .
Description The work shall consist of furnishing all materials and removing loose material and temporary bituminous patch material from potholes damaged joints and spalled areas thoroughly cleaning the repair area SECTION and placing new patch material in accordance with the details shown on the project plans and as specified herein and in reasonably close conformity with the existing pavement crosssection. . Material Requirements A General Patch materials shall attain compressive strength of pounds per square inch within six hours .
shall be submitted. . Construction Requirements A General Spalled areas to be repaired will be designated by the Engineer and shall be repaired prior to any required pavement grinding .
If the depth of the spalled area exceeds half the thickness of the concrete pavement slab the affected pavement shall be removed and replaced as designated by the Engineer and in accordance with the requirements of Subsection .
Patching material shall be confined to the limits of the repair and shall not lap onto the surrounding pavement .
The patch shall be finished to the crosssection of the existing pavement and textured with a stiff bristled brush .
Texturing shall conform to that of the existing pavement .
The patch surface shall be struck off flush with the existing pavement surface .
SECTION The material shall be placed in the area to be patched the surface leveled off even with the surrounding pavement and any excess material removed . .
Basis of Payment The accepted quantities of spall repairs measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price per square foot which price shall be full compensation for the work complete in place including removal and disposal of the old pavement and repair or replacement of shoulder material which is removed or damaged during spall repair work .
Description The work shall consist of furnishing all materials and removing existing concrete pavement and constructing full depth patches of Portland cement concrete pavement at the locations shown on the project plans as specified herein and in reasonably close conformity with the existing pavement crosssections. . Material Requirements Patching material shall be an Accelerated Strength Portland Cement Concrete Mixture which includes Type III Portland Cement and calcium chloride or other accelerator conforming to the requirements of AASHTO M . The patch material shall attain a compressive strength of at least pounds per square inch in six hours .
Liquid membraneforming curing compound shall conform to the requirements of Subsection .. . Construction Requirements Areas to be repaired will be designated by the Engineer and shall be repaired before any specified pavement grinding .
The area inside the wedge shall be removed with light to medium weight jackhammers or other approved equipment prior to removing the larger remaining pavement section .
The remaining pavement shall be lifted out in a manner approved by the Engineer .
The patch shall be finished to the crosssection of the existing pavement and textured with a stiff bristled brush to match the existing pavement .
The patch surface shall be within inch of the existing pavement surface .
No texturing will be required if pavement grinding or grooving is to be done after patching . .
Method of Measurement Slab Repairs will be measured by the square yard of pavement repaired .
The total cumulative measurement of all pavement repaired will be rounded to the nearest square yard . .
Description SECTION The work shall consist of furnishing all materials and grinding the surface of existing concrete pavement at the locations shown on the project plans and in accordance with the requirements of these specifications. . Blank .
The contractor shall grind a test section of pavement where designated by the Engineer to determine that the equipment proposed for use on the project will provide the specified surface texture .
The entire area of pavement designated to be ground shall be ground in a manner that results in a uniform surface appearance .
Grinding shall continue for the full lane width until the pavement surface on both sides of all transverse joints and all cracks is in the same plane .
The ground area of any selected twofoot by foot longitudinal area of pavement specified to be ground shall not be less than percent of the selected area .
After grinding has been completed the pavement surface will be tested in accordance with the requirements of Arizona Test Method .
Additional grinding shall be performed if necessary to reduce the overall Profile Index as measured by the Profilograph to inches per mile in any .mile section or remaining portion thereof along any line parallel to the edge of the pavement .
B Equipment and Procedures Grinding shall be done with diamond blades mounted on a selfpropelled machine that has been designed for grinding and texturing of pavements .
The equipment shall be designed such that it will not cause strain or damage to the underlying surface of the pavement .
Method of Measurement SECTION Pavement grinding will be measured by the square yard of pavement ground and accepted .
Basis of Payment The accepted quantities of pavement grinding measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price which price shall be full compensation for the work complete as specified .
Construction Requirements A General The pavement surface shall be grooved longitudinally .
Longitudinally grooved areas shall begin and end at lines normal to the pavement center line and shall be centered within the lane width .
Dried residue resulting from grooving operations shall be removed from pavement surfaces with a pick up or power broom before such residue is blown by the action of traffic or wind .
B Equipment and Procedures SECTION Grooving shall be done with diamond blades mounted on a multiblade arbor on a selfpropelled machine which has been built for grooving of pavements .
The groover shall have a depth control device which will detect variations in the pavement surface and adjust the cutting head height to maintain the specified groove depth .
The grooved area of any selected twofoot by foot longitudinal area of pavement specified to be grooved shall not be less than ninety percent of that area .
Ungrooved pavement within the selected area shall be limited to that which occurs as a result of pavement irregularities .
C Tolerance Longitudinal grooving shall begin six inches from the outside edge of pavement or reflective marker and run in a continuous pattern across the lane surface to within six inches of the longitudinal joint .
If the pavement profile is very uneven the Engineer may permit a variation in maximum groove depth in areas adjacent to rutted pavement andor faulted joints .
Grooving shall be terminated a minimum of one foot from any device in place in the pavement such as manholes inlet casting valve boxes etc . .
Method of Measurement Pavement grooving will be measured and accepted by the square yard of grooved pavement .
The quantity of grooved pavement will be SECTION determined by multiplying the width times the length of the grooved area .
No deduction will be made for grooving omitted at joints manholes inlets or other similar installations in the pavement surface . .
Basis of Payment The accepted quantities of pavement grooving measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard which price shall be full compensation for the work complete as specified herein .
No. . A rapid set Portland cement concrete pavement patching material may be substituted for epoxy grout as approved by the Engineer. . Construction Requirements A General Joint and crack repairs shall be accomplished by first removing old sealant and joint inserts then refacing and cleaning the joints and SECTION cracks followed by installation of a backer rod if required and installation of new sealant .
Joints shall be sawed as follows Initial Joint Width W Inches Sawed Width Inches Sawed DepthD Inches W D W D W No Sawing Required D W D is distance from pavement surface to bottom of backer rod .
The face of the joint shall be surface dry and the ambient and pavement temperatures shall both be at least degrees F at the time of application of the sealant .
The joints shall be sealed in a neat and workmanlike manner so that upon completion of the work the surface of the sealant material will be inch below the adjacent pavement surface .
Any excess material on the surface of the pavement shall be removed and the pavement surface shall be left in a clean condition .
Vehicular or heavy equipment traffic shall not be permitted on the pavement in the area of the joints during the curing period . .
This work shall be done after the completion of any specified pavement grinding and after any specified rehabilitation of the distress lane or outside shoulder .
D Application of AsphaltRubber Sealant The joint shall be sawed in the asphaltic concrete directly adjacent to the edge of the Portland cement concrete pavement and shall be at least inch wide and one inch deep .
for the average elevation of the project when the existing bituminous surface is dry the pavement surface temperature is at least degrees F and the ambient temperature at the beginning of the application of bituminous material is at least degrees F and rising .
Care shall be taken to prevent the spraying or splattering of bituminous material on adjacent pavements structures curb guardrail trees and shrubbery or any other object outside of the area designated for spraying .
Joints Transverse joints with the preceding work at intersections and at all existing pavements and structures shall be made by a method approved by the Engineer prior to the start of the work .
Tack Coat Tack coat shall be applied prior to placing a bituminous mixture on a primed surface an existing bituminous surface or an existing Portland cement concrete pavement surface .
For asphaltic concrete friction course asphaltic concrete friction course asphaltrubber or SECTION asphaltic concrete asphaltrubber application of asphalt cement tack coat immediately prior to placing such pavements shall not be eliminated although the Engineer may adjust the application rate within the above stated limits .
General Prior to placing road mix bituminous pavement over an existing bituminous surface or a primed base all loose dirt and other objectionable material shall be removed from the existing surface .
Prior to placing road mix bituminous pavement over a base course the base surface shall be smooth and firm and in reasonably close conformity to the lines grades and dimensions required and shall be so maintained throughout the period of placing the road mix bituminous pavement . .
Placing Aggregate Aggregate shall be deposited upon the prepared base or existing pavement and shaped into uniform windrows or shall be uniformly spread by an approved spreading device in the amount necessary to provide a surface of the required width and thickness .
The position of the seat or seats or the placement of the mirrors shall be such as to enable the operator to have the edge of the pavement against which the bituminous road mix is being compacted in the operators full view at all times .
Method of Measurement Road mix bituminous pavement will be measured by the ton for the mixture actually used which will include the weight of aggregate and bituminous material .
Basis of Payment SECTION The accepted quantities of road mix bituminous pavement measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price per ton which price shall be full compensation for the work complete in place including compaction and necessary surface preparation .
SECTION ASPHALTIC CONCRETE Description The work under this section shall consist of furnishing all materials mixing at a plant hauling and placing mixture of aggregate materials mineral admixture and an asphalt cement to form a pavement course or to be used for other specified purposes in accordance with the details shown on the project plans and the requirements of these specifications .
Carbonates Only if the asphaltic concrete is the designed final pavement surface normally used by traffic detours and temporary paving are excluded .
Randomly selected locations will be determined to the nearest onehalf foot in the transverse direction and to the nearest one foot in the longitudinal direction of the pavement course however the outside one foot of the unconfined pavement course will be excluded from testing .
W hen a previously unconfined pavement course is confined by a subsequent pavement course the compacted joint will not be excluded from the testing .
The Special Provisions may require the smoothness of the final pavement surface to be tested in accordance with Subsection ..
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Less Than Reject See Subsection E SECTION ASPHALTIC CONCRETE FRICTION COURSE Description Asphaltic Concrete Friction Course hereinafter asphaltic concrete shall consist of furnishing all materials mixing at a plant hauling and placing a mixture of an aggregate material mineral admixture and a bituminous material to form a pavement course or to be used for other specified purposes in accordance with the details shown on the project plans and the requirements of these specifications and as directed by the Engineer .
The Special Provisions may require the smoothness of the final pavement surface to be tested in accordance with Subsection ..
SECTION BLANK SECTION ASPHALTIC CONCRETE MISCELLANEOUS STRUCTURAL Description Asphaltic concrete shall consist of furnishing all materials mixing hauling and placing a mixture of aggregates mineral admixture and bituminous material to form a pavement course or to be used for other specified purposes in accordance with the details shown on the project plans and as directed by the Engineer .
Average Elevation of Project Feet Beginning and Ending Dates and over March May September October April October June September The existing pavement shall be cleaned in accordance with the requirements of Subsection .. After cleaning and prior to the application of the membrane the existing pavement surface shall be treated with a tack coat as hereinbefore specified .
Placement of the asphaltrubber membrane shall be made only when all of the following conditions are met The pavement surface temperature is above degrees F. The pavement is dry .
SECTION ASPHALTIC CONCRETE FRICTION COURSE MISCELLANEOUS Description Asphaltic Concrete Friction Course hereinafter asphaltic concrete shall consist of furnishing all materials mixing hauling and placing a mixture of aggregates mineral admixture and bituminous material to form a pavement course in accordance with the details shown on the project plans and as directed by the Engineer .
R P x x T W here R Amount of Reduction in Payment dollars T Quantity of asphalt cement in failure tons rounded to nearest tenth P Percent of Contract Unit Price allowed Table SECTION PAVEMENT FABRIC INTERLAYER Description The work under this section shall consist of furnishing and placing a pavement fabric and applying an asphalt binder coat between pavement layers or beneath a pavement overlay to provide a waterproofing and stress relieving membrane within the pavement structure in accordance with the details shown on the project plans and the requirements of these specifications .
Pavement Fabric The pavement fabric shall be supplied in accordance with and conform to the material requirements of Subsections and . . Asphalt Binder Coat The asphalt binder coat is used to bond or tack the fabric to the pavement and perform a sealant function providing a barrier to moisture infiltration .
For placement of the asphalt binder coat the minimum air and pavement temperature shall be degrees F and rising .
Air and pavement temperature shall also be sufficient to allow the asphalt binder coat to hold the fabric in place. . Equipment A Asphalt Distributor Truck The asphalt distributor truck shall meet the minimum requirements of Subsection .A .
Surface Preparation The pavement surface on which the fabric is to be placed shall be cleaned to remove all dirt water oil and any vegetation or debris . .
Application of the Asphalt Binder Coat SECTION The asphalt binder coat shall be uniformly spray applied to the prepared dry pavement surface by means of the asphalt distributor truck at the rate of .
The minimum temperature of asphalt in the distributor tank shall be degrees F. However to avoid damage to the fabric the asphalt temperature in the tank shall not exceed degrees F. The target width of the asphalt binder application shall be the width of the pavement fabric plus six inches .
Brooming andor pneumatic rolling will be required to maximize fabric contact with underlying pavement surface .
Longitudinal joints shall be located in the same manner as normal pavement joints according to Subsection .
Method of Measurement The pavement fabric interlayer will be measured by the square yard inplace .
Basis of Payment The accepted quantities of pavement fabric measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard which price shall be full compensation for furnishing all labor materials and equipment and performing all operations in connection with placing the SECTION pavement fabric interlayer as shown on the project plans and as specified and described herein .
Payment for all measures necessary to direct and escort traffic through the area where the pavement fabric is being placed will be made as specified under Section .
SECTION ASPHALTIC CONCRETE ASPHALTRUBBER Description Asphaltic Concrete AsphaltRubber hereinafter asphaltic concrete shall consist of furnishing all materials mixing at a plant hauling and placing a mixture of aggregate materials mineral admixture and bituminous material asphaltrubber to form a pavement course or to be used for other specified purposes in accordance with the details shown on the project plans and the requirements of these specifications and as directed by the Engineer .
Max Carbonates Only if the asphaltic concrete is the designed final pavement surface normally used by traffic detours and temporary paving are excluded .
The Special Provisions may require the smoothness of the final pavement surface to be tested in accordance with Subsection ..
SECTION ASPHALTIC CONCRETE FRICTION COURSE ASPHALTRUBBER Description Asphaltic Concrete Friction Course AsphaltRubber hereinafter asphaltic concrete shall consist of furnishing all materials mixing at a plant hauling and placing a mixture of aggregate materials mineral admixture and bituminous material asphaltrubber to form a pavement course or to be used for other specified purposes in accordance with the details shown on the project plans and the requirements of these specifications and as directed by the Engineer .
The Special Provisions may require the smoothness of the final pavement surface to be tested in accordance of Subsection ..
SECTION ASPHALTIC CONCRETE ASPHALTRUBBER END PRODUCT Description The work under this section shall consist of constructing Asphaltic Concrete AsphaltRubber hereinafter asphaltic concrete by providing a mix design meeting the design criteria specified herein furnishing all materials mixing at a plant hauling and placing a mixture of aggregate materials mineral admixture and bituminous material asphaltrubber to form a pavement course or to be used for other specified purposes in accordance with the details shown on the project plans and the requirements of these specifications .
Max Carbonates Only if the asphaltic concrete is the designed final pavement surface normally used by traffic detours and temporary paving are excluded .
Randomly selected locations will be determined to the nearest onehalf foot in the transverse direction and to the nearest one foot in the longitudinal direction of the pavement course however the outside one foot of the unconfined pavement course will be excluded from testing .
W hen a previously unconfined pavement course is confined by a subsequent pavement course the compacted joint will not be excluded from the testing .
The Special Provisions may require the smoothness of the final pavement surface to be tested in accordance with Subsection ..
Reject See Subsections A and E Less than Reject See Subsection E SECTION ASPHALTIC CONCRETE END PRODUCT Description The work under this section shall consist of furnishing all materials mixing at a plant hauling and placing a mixture of aggregate materials mineral admixture and an asphalt cement to form a pavement course or to be used for other specified purposes in accordance with the details shown on the project plans and the requirements of these specifications .
Carbonates Only if the asphaltic concrete is the designed final pavement surface normally used by traffic detours and temporary paving are excluded .
Randomly selected locations will be determined to the nearest onehalf foot in the transverse direction and to the nearest one foot in the longitudinal direction of the pavement course however SECTION the outside one foot of the unconfined pavement course will be excluded from testing .
W hen a previously unconfined pavement course is confined by a subsequent pavement course the compacted joint will not be excluded from the testing .
SECTION The Special Provisions may require the smoothness of the final pavement surface to be tested in accordance with Subsection ..
Carbonates Only if the asphaltic concrete is the designed final pavement surface normally used by traffic detours and temporary paving are excluded .
Randomly selected locations will be determined to the nearest onehalf foot in the transverse direction and to the nearest foot in the longitudinal direction of the pavement course however the outside one foot of the unconfined pavement course will be excluded from testing .
W hen a previously unconfined pavement course is confined by a subsequent pavement course the compacted joint will not be excluded from the testing .
The Special Provisions may require the smoothness of the final pavement surface to be tested in accordance with Subsection ..
Preformed bituminous joint filler shall be installed where the catch basin concrete will meet new or existing concrete curb pavement. . Reconstruct Catch Basins Catch basins shall be reconstructed in reasonably close conformity to the lines and grades shown on the plans .
The extension device shall provide positive locking action with the existing frame and shall permit adjustment in height to conform to the new finish pavement surface .
Cuts along the joint between existing asphalt concrete and existing Portland cement concrete pavement will not be required . .
Prior to placing the asphaltic concrete backfill a tack coat of asphaltic emulsion shall be applied to the vertical edges of existing pavement at an approximate rate of .
Other falsework posts shall be considered as adjacent to roadways or railroads only if they are located in the row of falsework posts nearest to the roadway or railroad and the horizontal distance from the traffic side of the falsework to the edge of pavement or to a point feet from the centerline of track is less than the total height of the falsework and forms .
Temporary pavement markings shall be applied in conjunction with changes in the traffic pattern .
Placement of new pavement markings and removal of old markings shall be done immediately when the need for each arises .
Obliteration of the temporary pavement markings shall be in conformance with Subsection .
Temporary Pavement Markings Application and Removal A General Application of temporary pavement markings shall conform to the requirements of Subsection of these specifications the MUTCD and associated ADOT Supplement and other provisions of these specifications as applicable .
On intermediate lifts of overlay projects pavement marking for temporary striping shall consist of fourinch wide by fourfoot long strips of reflective material either pavement marking tape or traffic paint placed at foot intervals .
Temporary pavement marking shall be placed on each subsequent pavement course .
B Raised Pavement Markers The adhesive shall be applied uniformly to the cleaned pavement surface and the raised pavement marker shall be placed in the correct position on the adhesive area with the application of pressure as specified by the manufacturer .
C Preformed Pavement Markings Preformed pavement markings for temporary applications shall be Types II TemporaryRemovable and III TemporaryNonremovable SECTION and shall conform to the requirements of Subsection of these specifications .
Preformed Pavement Markings Type II shall only be used on surfaces or finish pavement courses where eventual removal will be required .
Preformed Pavement Markings Type III shall only be used where removal of markings is not required due to obliteration abandonment or overlaying the pavement surface .
Temporary pavement marking paint may also be used where removal of markings is not required unless otherwise shown on the project plans or in the Special Provisions. . Obliteration of Existing Pavement Markings Pavement marking obliteration shall be accomplished by the contractor as indicated on the plans or as directed by the Engineer .
Pavement markings shall be removed to the fullest extent possible from the pavement by any method that does not materially damage the surface color or texture of the usable pavement .
Abrasive blasting using air or water is an acceptable method for removing pavement markings however other methods may be approved by the Engineer .
Sand or other material deposited on the pavement as a result of removing pavement markings shall be removed as the work progresses .
W here blast cleaning is used for the removal of pavement markings or for removal of objectionable material the residue including dust shall be removed immediately after contact between the sand and the surface being treated .
Obliteration or removal of raised pavement markers shall include removal of the marker and adhesive pad or adhesive pad alone if the marker is missing .
Any damage to the pavement caused by pavement marking removal shall be repaired by methods acceptable to the Engineer .
W hen asphalt slurry is used to repair damage to the pavement caused by pavement marking removal or the obliteration of the marks remaining after the markings have been removed the asphalt slurry shall be placed parallel to the new direction of travel and shall be at least two feet in width .
W hen impacted headon at miles per hour the truckmounted attenuator shall perform as follows For impacting vehicles weighing from to pounds the average overall longitudinal deceleration shall be less than gs the twofoot flail space velocity shall be less than feet per second and the SECTION rollahead distance of the truck with wheels locked and parking brake set on clean dry pavement shall be less than feet .
For impacting vehicles weighing up to pounds the average overall longitudinal deceleration shall be less gs the twofoot flail space velocity shall be less than feet per second and the rollahead distance of the truck with wheels locked and parking brake set on clean dry pavement shall be less than feet .
SECTION Immediately after application of the chip seal coat to the roadway pavement the plastic covers shall be removed exposing the reflective tape surfaces .
Temporary Preformed Markings for Pavement The accepted quantities of Temporary Preformed Markings measured as provided above will be paid for at the unit bid price for the type specified which price shall be full compensation for the work complete in place including necessary pavement cleaning and maintaining Types II and III temporary markings in construction work zones .
Additional reimbursement will be made for replacement of Temporary Markings when the contractor is required by the Engineer to install marking materials on distressed pavements or during adverse weather conditions and subsequent failure occurs .
Distressed pavement conditions are defined as alligator cracking bleeding or spalling of bituminous pavements and spalling of PCC pavements .
Adverse weather conditions are defined as any occurrence where application is SECTION required at pavement temperatures less than degrees F or when precipitation occurs within hours before application .
In the event a second failure occurs when markings have been reapplied on distressed pavements or under weather conditions described above the Engineer shall determine if conditions require primer alternate methods of marking or reapplication of Preformed Markings .
Obliterate Pavement Marking Obliterate Striping measured as provided above will be paid for at the unit bid price per linear foot which price shall be full compensation for the work complete including furnishing all labor and equipment required and restoring the pavement surface to a condition acceptable to the Engineer .
Unless otherwise specified on the project plans when the plans require the attenuation device to be placed on a paved pad the pavement shall be four inches thick and shall be made either of utility concrete or asphaltic concrete at the option of the contractor .
No extra measurement or payment will be made for any concrete reinforcing steel hardware fasteners structural steel pavement pad materials any connection or transition section needed to connect the impact attenuator to guardrail or concrete barriers grading in the area of the impact attenuator and required only to smooth vehicle approach paths to it excavation and backfill required immediately adjacent to the barrier and sand to fill crash cushion modules as the cost thereof will be considered as included in the contract unit price for the impact attenuator complete in place .
SECTION THERMOPLASTIC PAVEMENT MARKINGS Description The work under this section shall consist of cleaning and preparing pavement surfaces and furnishing and applying either white or yellow thermoplastic reflectorized pavement markings using extrusion ribbon or spray dispensing devices of the required shape and thickness to the prepared pavement surface at the locations and in accordance with the details shown on the project plans the manufacturers specifications and the requirements of these specifications .
General Requirements The thermoplastic reflectorized material shall consist of a solid mixture of heatstable resins white or yellow pigment intermixed glass beads filler and other materials in granular or block form specifically compounded for reflectorized pavement markings to be applied to the pavement in a molten state .
Upon cooling to normal pavement temperature this material shall produce an adherent reflectorized marking capable of resisting deformation and wear in the roadway .
This solution shall be free from all skins dirt foreign objects or any other ingredient which would cause bleeding staining blotting or discoloration when applied to the bituminous or concrete pavement surfaces .
The truck shall be equipped with high pressure air spray jets in front of the pavement marking material applicators to remove loose matter from the pavement surface where the marking material is to be applied .
The application equipment shall be so constructed as to assure continuous uniformity in the dimensions of the pavement marking .
The applicator shall provide a means for cleanly cutting off square pavement markings edges and provide a method of applying skip and solid lane lines .
The equipment shall be constructed to provide varying widths and thicknesses of pavement markings .
A glass bead top dressing shall be applied to the completed thermoplastic stripe by an automatic glass bead dispenser attached to the striping machine in such a manner that the beads are applied to the molten thermoplastic material immediately after it has been applied to the pavement .
Placement of symbols and legends on construction joints expansion joints or uneven pavement surfaces shall be avoided .
Loose material including all grindings and obliterated markings shall be removed from the pavement surface and disposed of properly .
W hen thermoplastic markings are to be applied to new Portland cement concrete pavement any curing compound present shall be removed by means of a highpressure water jet or sandblasting followed by sweeping and highpressure air spray .
If any surface dampness is detected during marking activities marking operations shall be stopped until the pavement dries .
SECTION E Primer Application On both old and new Portland cement concrete pavement a primersealer shall be used if recommended by the thermoplastic manufacturer .
The thermoplastic material shall be applied to primed pavement surfaces within the working time specified by the primersealer and thermoplastic materials manufacturers .
Improper primersealer application may result in bond failure between the thermoplastic and the pavement surface and may cause the thermoplastic surface to pinhole or blister .
If at any time during marking operations the air or pavement temperature falls below these requirements all marking operations shall stop .
The contractor shall measure pavement surface temperatures one half hour prior to the start of the striping installation activities and as deemed necessary by the Engineer until the end of the application period .
The pavement surface temperature shall be measured with a standard surface temperature thermometer or a noncontact infrared thermometer .
G Thermoplastic Application SECTION The thermoplastic pavement marking material shall be extruded or sprayed on to the pavement surface at a material temperature between and degrees depending on manufacturers recommendations ambient air and pavement temperatures and the nature of the pavement surface .
Unless otherwise specified thermoplastic pavement markings for legends and symbols and for crosswalks stop bars and other transverse elements shall be extruded and shall be . . inches thick .
Suggested spot check procedures include the following W et Thickness can be field tested immediately after the thermoplastic marking is applied by inserting a thin graduated machinist rule or similar instrument into the molten thermoplastic to the depth of the pavement surface .
The actual width of line shall be within the limits specified in the following table according to the width of line called for on the plans Plan Width Actual Width inches to inches inches to inches Over inches inch After application and sufficient drying time the thermoplastic marking shall show no appreciable deformation or discoloration under local traffic conditions with air and road temperatures ranging from to degrees F. The drying time shall be defined as the minimum elapsed time after application when the thermoplastic pavement markings shall have and retain the characteristics required herein and after which normal traffic will leave no impression or imprint on the newly applied marking .
inches the material shall set to bear traffic in not more than two minutes when the air and pavement surface temperatures are approximately three degrees F and not more than minutes when the air and road surface temperatures are approximately three degrees .
SECTION Method of Measurement Thermoplastic pavement longitudinal and transverse markings such as edge lines lane lines gore lines crosswalks and stop bars will be measured by the linear foot along the center line of the pavement marking line and will be based on a fourinchwide line .
Thermoplastic pavement marking symbols such as diamonds or single double or triple arrows will be measured by each unit applied .
Each pavement symbol as shown on the plans will be considered a unit .
Thermoplastic pavement marking legends defined as a complete letter grouping such as SCHOOL XING STOP RR or ONLY .
Each pavement legend as shown on the plans will be considered a unit .
No separate measurement or payment will be made for cleaning and preparing the pavement surface including abrasive sweeping and highpressure air spray and for disposal of excess materials cleaning fluids and empty material containers the cost being considered as included in contract items .
Removal of curing compound from new Portland cement concrete pavement and the application of primersealer which is to be applied to both old and new Portland cement concrete pavement prior to application of thermoplastic marking shall be measured by the linear foot for striping lines regardless of width or unit each for symbols and legends and in accordance with the items of work established in the bid schedule .
Basis of Payment The accepted quantities of thermoplastic pavement markings of the type specified in the bidding schedule measured as provided above will be SECTION paid for at the contract unit price complete in place including pavement surface preparation and glass beads .
The accepted quantities for removal of curing compound from new Portland cement concrete pavement and the application of primersealer measured as provided above will be paid for at the respective contract unit prices under the items of work established in the bid schedule .
SECTION PREFORMED PLASTIC PAVEMENT MARKING Description The work under this section shall consist of furnishing all materials preparing the pavement surface and applying preformed reflectorized pavement marking tape arrows and legends to the pavement in accordance with the details shown on the project plans and the requirements of these specifications .
Preformed pavement marking tape arrows and legends shall be limited to the following applications unless otherwise specified in the contract documents A Preformed Pavement Markings Type I Permanent Type I shall be a general purpose high durability retroreflective pliant polymer film for preformed striping and markings to be used for finished permanent markings .
B Preformed Pavement Markings Type II Temporary Removable Type II shall be a removable preformed retroreflective pavement marking capable of performing for the duration of a normal construction season .
Type II shall be used on finished pavement surfaces where traffic control or channelization through the construction zone is temporary requiring removal prior to final pavement markings .
Type III shall be used in construction zones where removal is unnecessary due to placement of future paving courses or where pavement will be removed obliterated or abandoned at the completion of the project .
Type I preformed plastic pavement marking material shall consist of a homogeneous extruded prefabricated white or yellow thermoplastic film of specified thickness and width that shall be capable of being affixed to nonbleeding bituminous or Portland cement concrete .
W hether the adhesive is precoated or supplied separately the adhesive shall be such as to allow the plastic film to be repositioned on the pavement surface to which it is applied before permanently fixing it in its final position with a downward pressure .
A list of approved manufacturers and distributors for Type I permanent preformed pavement marking material are shown on the Departments Approved Products List APL .
B Composition Requirements The preformed plastic pavement marking material shall consist of the following components SECTION Minimum Percent by Weight Resins and Plasticizers Pigments Reflective Glass Beads C Physical Requirements Color The pigments shall be selected and blended to provide a white or yellow marking film which conforms to standard highway colors throughout the expected life of the film .
Type II preformed pavement markings shall be a nonmetallic mixture of conformable materials and pigments intended for marking applications where removability is required .
Temporary pavement markings shall be removable from asphalt and concrete pavement intact or in large sections by following the manufacturers instructions .
It shall be removable either manually or with a rollup device at pavement temperatures above degrees F without the use of heat solvents grinding or sand blasting .
Visible adhesive residue remaining after removal of temporary pavement markings shall be easily removable without damaging or scarring the pavement surface and without the use of solvents or grinding .
W hen extruded pavement marking material without adhesive shall be a minimum of .
Type III preformed pavement markings shall be a retroreflective film on a conformable metallic backing intended for marking applications where removal is not a requirement .
During manufacture of the preformed plastic pavement marking material reflective glass beads shall be mixed into the material in the amounts indicated .
A layer of reflective glass beads shall be bonded to the top surface of all types of preformed pavement marking materials .
Index of Reflection The glass beads used with the preformed pavement marking material shall have a reflective index of not less than .
Gradation The size of the glass beads shall be such that performance requirements for the preformed pavement marking material shall be met .
Construction Requirements The contractor shall install preformed pavement markings at the locations shown on the project plans as specified in the Special Provisions or as directed by the Engineer .
Preformed pavement markings shall not be applied over other markings or old paint unless specified in the project plans or directed by the Engineer .
Preformed pavement markings shall be applied to surfaces that are free of moisture and thoroughly cleaned of loose foreign or other material that may adversely affect bonding .
Preformed pavement markings shall be applied immediately after the surface has been prepared or as soon as possible after placement and completion of new pavement .
At the time of application the road surface temperature shall not be less than degrees F and the pavement surface shall be absolutely dry .
Temporary pavement markings shall be maintained and replaced when necessary by the contractor until they are covered with the next overlay course or are removed because they are no longer applicable .
The temporary pavement markings shall be removed immediately when no SECTION longer needed for traffic control or when the temporary pavement markings will be in conflict with the succeeding traffic pattern .
Preformed pavement markings shall be removed by methods recommended by the manufacturer and approved by the Engineer .
Residual adhesive ghosting shadows or pavement scarring which might cause confusion during darkness or adverse weather conditions shall be removed immediately by the contractor when so ordered by the Engineer .
The application of preformed pavement markings shall be in accordance with the recommendations of the manufacturer of the material and these specifications however minor changes will be allowed if such are shown to produce an equal or better application and is approved by the Engineer .
Failure to satisfactorily adhere to the pavement or to be satisfactorily removable shall be reason for disallowing the use of any particular type of marking material .
Method of Measurement Measurement of preformed pavement marking arrows and legends will be made for each arrow or legend as shown on the plans furnished and applied in accordance with the requirements specified herein and on the plans .
Measurement of preformed pavement marking lines will be made by the linear foot along the center line of the pavement line and will be based on a fourinch wide stripe .
Measurement for pavement lines with a plan width greater or less than the basic four inches will be made by the following method Plan W idth of Striping inches x Linear Feet inches W hen Type II or III temporary preformed pavement markings are required for maintaining traffic through a construction work zone and are approved for use by the Engineer but are not listed as pay items in the bidding schedule they will be paid for in accordance with the provisions of Subsection ..
SECTION Basis of Payment The accepted quantities of preformed pavement markings measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price for the type specified in the bidding schedule which price shall be full compensation for the item complete in place including necessary pavement cleaning removal of Type II temporary markings and maintaining Types II and III temporary markings in construction work zones .
W hen Type II or III temporary preformed pavement markings are required for maintaining traffic through a construction work zone but are not listed as pay items in the bidding schedule they will be considered as included in the lump sum paid for Maintenance and Protection of Traffic in accordance with Subsection .
Additional payment will be made for replacement of temporary markings when the contractor is required by the Engineer to install marking materials on distressed pavements or during adverse weather conditions and subsequent failure occurs .
Distressed pavement conditions are defined as alligator cracking bleeding or spalling of bituminous pavements and spalling of PCC pavements .
Adverse weather conditions are defined as any occurrence where application is required at pavement temperatures less than degrees F or when precipitation occurs within hours before or after application .
In the event a second failure occurs when markings have been reapplied on distressed pavements or under weather conditions described above the Engineer shall determine if conditions require primer alternate methods of marking or reapplication of preformed markings .
SECTION RAISED PAVEMENT MARKERS Description The work under this section shall consist of cleaning and preparing the pavement surface furnishing all materials equipment tools and labor and placing raised pavement markers of the type specified at the locations and in accordance with the details shown on the plans and the requirements of these specifications .
General SECTION Certificates of Compliance for raised pavement markers and adhesive conforming to the requirements of Subsection .
The pavement marker samples shall be tested to determine conformance to the applicable standard drawings and these specifications .
The base of the pavement markers shall be free from glass glaze or from substances which may reduce its bond to the adhesive .
inches. . Reflective Pavement Markers Reflective pavement markers shall be of the following type Type C Clear red Type D Yellow twoway Type E Clear yellow Type G Clear oneway Type H Yellow oneway Reflective pavement markers shall be of the prismatic reflector type consisting of a molded methyl methacrylate or suitably compounded acrylonitrile butadiene styrene ABS shell filled with a mixture of an inert thermosetting compound and filler material .
Permanent reflective pavement markers will be tested for compressive strength abrasion resistance and specific intensity .
Permanent reflective pavement markers shall have thin untempered glass or other abrasion resistant material bonded to the prismatic reflector face to provide an extremely hard and durable abrasive resistant reflector surface .
Temporary reflective pavement markers will be tested for compressive strength and specific intensity .
Temporary reflective pavement markers or permanent reflective pavement markers used as temporary will not be tested for abrasion resistance .
SECTION The strength by compressive loading shall be at least pounds for both permanent and temporary reflective pavement markers .
Permanent reflective pavement markers shall be subject to an abrasion resistance test as follows Steel W ool Abrasion Procedure Form a oneinch diameter flat pad using No .
After the lens surface has been abraded the specific intensity of each clear and yellow reflective surface shall be not less than that required above for the original specific intensity. . NonReflective Pavement Markers and Reflectorized Dagmars Nonreflective pavement markers shall be of the following types Type Color A white AY yellow Reflectorized Dagmars shall be of the following types Type J white Type JY yellow Nonreflective pavement markers and reflectorized dagmars shall consist of a heatfired vitreous ceramic base and a heatfired opaque glazed surface which will produce the required properties .
Nonreflective pavement markers and dagmars shall meet the following requirements Glaze Thickness Inches .
Bituminous Adhesive The bituminous adhesive for pavement markers shall be a hotmelt adhesive manufactured by an approved manufacturer .
The method of cleaning the pavement surface and removal of detrimental material is subject to approval by the Engineer and shall include sweeping and the use of highpressure air spray .
On Portland cement concrete pavement and old asphaltic concrete pavements cleaning shall be accomplished by sandblasting followed by sweeping andor air blowing .
Newly placed asphaltic concrete pavement need not be sandblasted unless in the opinion of the Engineer the surface is contaminated with materials that would adversely affect the bond of the adhesive .
The adhesive shall be placed uniformly on the cleaned pavement surface in an amount sufficient to result in complete coverage of the area of contact of the markers with no voids present and with a slight excess after the markers have been placed .
The markers shall be placed in position and pressure applied until firm contact is made with the pavement .
Excess adhesive on the pavement and on the exposed surfaces of the markers shall be immediately removed .
SECTION Markers shall not be installed when the temperature of the pavement surface or the atmosphere is less than degrees F when the relative humidity is percent or higher or when the pavement surface is not dry .
No pavement markers shall be installed over longitudinal or transverse joints of the pavement surface .
Basis of Payment The accepted quantities of pavement markers measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price for the type designated in the bidding schedule complete in place including adhesive and surface preparation .
The base shall not protrude more than four inches above the pavement surface .
It shall be the contractors responsibility to reset those markers that become detached from the pavement at no additional cost to the Department .
SECTION PERMANENT PAVEMENT MARKINGS Description The work under this section shall consist of cleaning and preparing the pavement surface furnishing all materials and applying white or yellow waterborne leadfree rapiddry traffic paint and reflective glass beads at the locations and in accordance with the details shown on the plans MUTCD and associated ADOT Supplement the requirements of these specifications or as directed by the Engineer .
Pavement Marking Paint A General All material used in the formulation of the pavement marking paint shall meet the requirements herein specified .
B Composition Requirements The pavement marking paint shall be a readymixed one component waterborne leadfree traffic line paint of the correct color to be applied to either asphaltic or Portland cement concrete pavement .
No glass beads will be allowed in the pavement marking paint .
C Manufacturing Formulations The manufacturer shall formulate the pavement marking paint in a consistent manner and notify the Engineer of any change of formulation .
Equipment The traffic paint and beads shall be placed on the pavement by a spraytype selfpropelled pavement marking machine except that temporary striping during construction may be placed with other equipment designed for application of paint and beads .
A glass bead dispenser which is capable of placing the glass beads into the paint line as the paint is applied to the pavement shall be utilized .
Application Pavement markings shall be applied when the pavement surface is dry and the weather is not foggy rainy or otherwise adverse to the application of markings .
The contractor shall remove dirt debris grease oil rocks or chips from the pavement surface before applying markings .
The method of cleaning the pavement surface and removal of detrimental material is subject to approval by the Engineer and shall include sweeping and the use of highpressure air spray .
Method of Measurement Pavement marking paint will be measured by the linear foot along the centerline of the pavement stripe .
Length of pavement markings will be based on fourinch wide stripe .
SECTION DUAL COMPONENT PAVEMENT MARKINGS Description The work under this section shall consist of cleaning and preparing pavement surfaces and furnishing and applying either white or yellow SECTION reflectorized dual component pavement markings to the prepared pavement at the locations and in accordance with the manufacturers specifications the details shown on the project plans and the requirements of these specifications .
General Requirements The dual component pavement marking material shall be a liquid or percent solids epoxy or other dual component UVstabilized system formulated and designed to provide a simple volumetric mixing ratio of the two components resin and catalyst .
The material shall be suitable for application to old and new asphaltic concrete and Portland cement concrete pavement surfaces .
A list of approved manufacturers of dual component pavement marking material is shown on the Departments Approved Products List APL .
The most current version is available on the internet from the Arizona Transportation Research Center ATRC through its PRIDE program. . Epoxy Composition Requirements Epoxy pavement marking material shall conform to the following requirements A Composition The epoxy resin material shall be within the following compositional requirements Percent by Weight Component White Yellow W hite Pigment Titanium Dioxide min .
F Hardness The epoxy paint pavement markings material when tested according to ASTM D shall have a Shore D Hardness of between to .
SECTION I Compressive Strength W hen tested according to ASTM D the epoxy pavement marking materials shall have an average compressive strength of not less than pounds per square inch .
The applied epoxy material shall be capable of fully curing at a minimum pavement surface temperature of degrees F. At room temperature degrees F a sample shall be capable of curing to full strength in hours .
shall be submitted for the glass beads to be used on the dual component pavement marking systems .
Equipment The pavement marking equipment for longitudinal lines shall have a system capable of spraying both yellow and white dual component pavement markings .
The equipment shall be provided with a metering device to register the accumulated installed pavement marking for each sprayer each day .
The longitudinal line application vehicle shall be equipped with high pressure air spray jets in front of the striping material and glass bead applicators to remove loose matter on the pavement surface where the marking material is to be applied .
The bottom of the shroud shall be mounted within three to four inches of the pavement surface and be configured to allow for even distribution of glass beads on the applied markings .
Application A Placement Locations Dual component pavement markings shall be as shown on the plans except that marking lines shall not be placed on parallel construction or expansion joints .
B Material Inspection All dual component pavement marking materials and glass beads will be inspected and approved by the Engineer prior to their application .
Existing temporary or permanent traffic markings shall be removed by abrasive blasting or grinding until a minimum of percent of the underlying pavement is visible unless otherwise recommended by the materials manufacturer .
The contractor shall minimize any interference between temporary pavement markings and the permanent dual component pavement markings .
W hen dual component markings are to be applied to new Portland cement concrete pavement any curing compound present shall be removed by means of a highpressure water jet or sandblasting followed by sweeping and highpressure air spray .
E Pavement Temperature and Condition SECTION Dual component pavement markings shall not be applied to new asphaltic concrete pavements for a minimum of days after the pavement has been placed .
The pavement surface temperatures shall be measured one half hour prior to the start of the striping installation activities and every one to two hours after that until the end of the day if the temperature is judged by the Engineer to be critical .
The pavement surface temperature shall be measured with a standard surface temperature or an infrared noncontact thermometer .
Film Thickness and Width Calibration for Longitudinal Lines The required application speed for the pavement marking vehicle shall be determined prior to the start of each days marking operations .
The paint film application thickness width and speed shall be calibrated using the following procedure Step A foot length of four foot wide tar paper shall be rolled out and attached to the pavement in an area where the striping vehicle can achieve and maintain a speed of up to ten miles per hour without impacting traffic .
The tar paper shall be secured to the pavement surface with duct tape so that it is laying flat .
inch into the wet paint to the depth of the pavement surface in accordance with ASTM D . The thickness determined through spot checking shall be within .
inch into the wet paint to the depth of the pavement surface in accordance with ASTM D . The thickness determined through spot checking SECTION shall be within .
G Marking Application The standard application thickness and bead gradations types and rates for dual component markings shall be as follows Longitudinal Lines a Standard For asphaltic concrete pavements placed at elevations under feet dual component markings shall be . . inches thick with a bead application rate of pounds of Type A glass beads per gallon of paint followed immediately with pounds of Type B glass beads per gallon of paint .
For asphaltic concrete pavements placed at elevations equal to or above feet the thickness shall be the same however the bead application rate shall be pounds of Type B glass beads per gallon of paint .
For PCCP pavements placed at elevations under feet dual component markings shall be . . inches thick with a bead application rate of pounds of Type A glass beads per gallon of paint followed immediately with pounds of Type B glass beads per gallon of paint .
For PCCP pavements placed at elevations equal to or above feet the thickness shall be the same however the bead application rate shall be pounds of Type B glass beads per gallon of paint .
b Special when shown on the bidding schedule For asphaltic concrete pavements placed at elevations under feet dual component markings shall be . . inches thick with a bead application rate of pounds of Type A glass beads per gallon of paint followed immediately with pounds of Type B glass beads per gallon of paint .
For asphaltic concrete pavements placed at elevations equal to or above feet the thickness shall be the same however the bead application rate shall be pounds of Type A glass beads per gallon of paint .
No reductions in thickness will be allowed for PCCP pavements .
Transverse Lines Symbols and Legends SECTION The thickness of dual component pavement markings for transverse lines symbols and legends shall be . . inches with a bead application rate of pounds of Type A beads per gallon of paint for all surfaces and at any elevation .
An epoxy application thickness of . . inches may be allowed on bridge decks if the majority of the project is AC pavement and if approved by the Engineer .
The actual width of marking line shall be within the limits specified in the following table according to the width of line called for on the plans Plan Width Actual Width inches to inches inches to inches Over inches inch After application and sufficient drying time the dual component marking shall show no appreciable deformation or discoloration under local traffic conditions in an air or road temperature ranging from to degrees F. The drying time shall be defined as the minimum elapsed time after application when the dual component pavement markings shall have and retain the characteristics required herein and after which normal traffic will leave no impression or imprint on the SECTION newly applied marking .
The contractor shall protect the newly applied dual component pavement markings from traffic during the required drying time .
Method of Measurement Dual component white and yellow longitudinal pavement markings and transverse markings such as crosswalks and stop bars will be measured by the linear foot along the center line of the pavement stripe and will be based on a fourinch wide stripe .
Dual component pavement marking symbols such as a diamond or single double or triple arrow will be measured by the unit applied .
Each pavement symbol as shown on the plans will be considered a unit .
Dual component pavement marking legends defined as a complete letter grouping such as SCHOOL XING STOP RR or ONLY SECTION will be measured by each unit applied .
Each pavement legend as shown on the plans will be considered a unit .
Removal of curing compound from new Portland cement concrete pavement shall be measured by the linear foot for striping lines regardless of width or unit each for symbols and legends in accordance with the items of work established in the bid schedule .
Basis of Payment The accepted quantities of dual component pavement markings of the type specified in the bidding schedule measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price complete in place including pavement surface preparation and glass beads .
The accepted quantities for removal of curing compound from new Portland cement concrete pavement measured as provided above will be paid for at the respective contract unit prices under the items of work established in the bid schedule .
Sidewalk and pavement excavations shall be kept well covered and protected to provide safe passage for pedestrian and vehicular traffic until permanent repairs are made .
Sidewalks curbs gutters pavement base material lawns plants and any other improvements removed broken or damaged by the contractors operations shall be replaced or reconstructed with materials in accordance with these specifications .
All areas of concrete sidewalks and driveways and all areas of Portland cement concrete and asphaltic concrete pavements to be removed shall be outlined and cut to a minimum depth of inches with an abrasive type saw prior to removing the material .
Conduit shall be installed under existing pavement by jacking or drilling methods approved by the Engineer .
Jacking and drilling pits shall be kept two feet clear of the edge of the pavement .
The interconnecting fourconductor cable shall be suitable for installation in a inch wide pavement sawed slot .
B OnePart Elastomeric Sealant SECTION Onepart elastomeric sealant may be used to seal saw cuts in Portland cement concrete pavement and lean concrete base .
The sealant shall provide compressive yield strength to withstand normal vehicular traffic as well as sufficient flexibility to withstand normal movement in concrete pavements while protecting the loop wire from moisture penetration .
The cured encapsulant shall be temperature stable and exhibit no degradation in performance throughout the ambient pavement temperature ranges experienced within the State of Arizona .
The sealant shall be melted and applied to pavements using a pressure feed melter unit .
The sealant shall be a relatively stiff sealant but shall remain flexible at low pavement surface temperatures .
All slots cut in the pavement shall be blown out and dried before installing conductors .
After the conductors are installed in the slots the slots shall be filled to within inch of the pavement surface with the sealant .
SECTION W here pavement or other impervious material is encountered in the excavation of trenches such material shall be removed and wasted as approved by the Engineer .
Prepunched post holes or full depth post driving shall not be used at locations where damage to the curb gutter sidewalk buried items shoulders or pavement might occur .
W here curb gutter sidewalk buried items shoulders or pavement are disturbed in the construction of guardrail the damage shall be repaired as approved by the Engineer .
W hen using Lshaped or Tshaped markers with the ETPLUS in asphalt pavement areas or with the SRT regardless of pavement surface the contractor shall substitute Ushaped markers or flexible vertical delineators for steel Ibeam posts for post number two regardless of project elevation .
Payment for furnishing and placing earthwork and surfacing material for pavement widening associated with new guardrail and at the flares of guardrail terminals will be measured and paid for under the respective contract items .
Expansion joints shall match as nearly as possible the joints in the adjacent pavement or existing concrete curb and sidewalk .
Contraction joints weakenedplane joints shall be constructed at a maximum of foot intervals in curb and gutter and sidewalks and shall coincide with contraction joints in adjacent pavement or existing concrete curb and sidewalk .
W here concrete barrier is not placed on pavement the supporting material shall be shaped and finished in reasonably close conformity to the lines grades and dimensions established by the Engineer or shown on the project plans .
In lieu of the above method for maintaining the barrier grade the extrusion machine may be operated on rails or forms or on existing pavement .
SECTION SECTION CONCRETE GORE PAVING Description The work under this section shall consist of furnishing aggregate base joint filler and Portland cement concrete and constructing gore pavement at the locations and in accordance with the detailed requirements shown on the plans and in the specifications .
General Prior to beginning any survey operations the contractor shall furnish to the Engineer for approval a written outline detailing the method of staking marking of stakes grade control for various courses of materials referencing structure control pavement markings and any other procedures and controls necessary for survey completion .
Throughout the work the contractor shall set all stakes including centerline stakes offset stakes reference point stakes slope stakes pavement lines curb lines and grade stakes stakes for sewers roadway drainage pipe under drains clearing paved gutter guardrail fence survey monuments and culverts blue tops for subgrade subbase SECTION and base courses control points for bridges bridge piers abutments footings pile cutoff pile layout pier caps bridge seats bridge beams girder profiles and screed elevations supplemental bench marks permanent asbuilt elevation marks and all other horizontal or vertical controls necessary for complete and accurate layout and construction of the work .
The contractor shall also provide control points on the roadway satisfactory to the Engineer corresponding to the locations of all transition points for all lines of striping including the beginnings ends breaks and changes in the striping including all tapers in the striping and pavement edges .
A minimum of two weeks prior to any paving activities the contractor the contractors surveyors the pavement marking subcontractor and SECTION the Engineer shall meet to discuss the survey control for the applications of all temporary and permanent striping .
The contractor shall contact the ADOT No Passing Zone Crew at the phone number provided on the project plans at least five working days before placement of the related pavement marking .
On projects where traffic is being carried through the work zone pavements shall be marked for traffic centerline delineation before the end of each work shift .
Temporary pavement markings shall conform with the requirements set forth under Subsection .
The removals shall be accomplished in a manner which does not scar the surface of the adjacent pavement .
Grooves shall not be constructed in new asphaltic concrete pavements for a minimum of three days after placement or days after placement of new asphaltic concrete pavements with asphaltrubber .
Construction of the grooves may be allowed in less time if the contractor can demonstrate that the pavements are sufficiently cured .
Immediately upon completion of the groundin rumble strip installation the pavement and grooves will be cleaned of all milling debris .
Method of Measurement Groundin rumble strips will be measured by the linear foot along the pavement edge line at the locations shown in the project plans and in accordance with the specifications .
Concrete Curing Materials Liquid membrane forming compound shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M . Type compound with either a Class A or Class B vehicle shall be used for concrete pavement bridge decks and approach slabs .
Coarse aggregate for Class P concrete used to construct Portland cement concrete pavement without load transfer dowels shall be separated into two stockpiles .
Coarse aggregate for Class P concrete used to construct Portland cement concrete pavement with load transfer dowels and adjacent shoulders shall meet the requirements for size designation No .
Coarse aggregate for Class P concrete placed in pavement ramp tapers not exceeding a width of feet and in pavement gore areas may be size designation No .
coarse aggregate may be used in concrete placed in other inaccessible pavement areas when approved in writing by the Engineer .
Acceptance and penalties for placed concrete which meets the above mixture requirements or is allowed to remain in place shall be determined by the results of the day compressive strength and additionally in the case of Class P concrete on the measured thickness of concrete pavement in place according to Section .
The hardness test shall be made with the durometer in a durometer stand as recommended in ASTM D . Preformed Expansion Joint Filler Preformed expansion joint filler for concrete structures pavements and incidental items shall conform to the requirements on the plans .
General Requirements Silicone joint sealant shall be a low modulus silicone that is specifically formulated to seal Portland cement concrete pavement joints .
The pavement fabric shall be resistant to chemical attack rot and mildew and shall have no tears or defects which will adversely alter its physical properties .
The fabric shall be specifically designed for the designated pavement application as a stress relieving membrane between two successive asphalt layers .
Longitudinal fabric joints shall meet the same location requirements shown in Subsection for pavement joints .
Longitudinal geogrid joints shall meet the same location requirements shown in Subsection for pavement joints .
Drainage Fabric Drainage geotextile fabric shall be used in the following applications pavement edge drains interceptor drains underdrains wall drains recharge basins and relief wells .
INDEX A Page AASHTO Application of Definition of Abbreviations Acceptance and substantial completion of work Final Partial Adhesive requirements for reflective sheeting Admixtures for Lean concrete base Portland cement concrete Advertisement for bids Definition of Information contained in Aggregate base finishing Aggregate for Base Asphaltic concrete Asphaltic concrete asphaltrubber Asphaltic concreteend product Asphaltic concrete asphaltrubber endproduct Asphaltic concreteend product SHRP volumetric mix Asphaltic concrete friction course Asphaltic concrete friction course asphaltrubber Asphaltic concrete friction course miscellaneous Asphaltic concrete miscellaneous structural Blotter material Cement treated base Cover material Lean concrete base Portland cement concrete pavement Sacked concrete riprap Shotcrete Structural concrete Subbase Aggregate Stockpiling for Asphaltrubber endproduct Asphaltic concrete friction course Asphaltic concrete friction course asphaltrubber Asphaltic concrete asphaltrubber Structural concrete Air and noise pollution prevention of Airentraining admixture Alkali content in portland cement concrete Alterations of contract Anchor bolts Guardrail Light poles Sign supports Structures Anticipated compressive strength Cement treated base Lean concrete base Structural concrete Application of Bituminous material Bituminous material traffic control Cover material Paint Tack coat time defined W ater prewetting material pits Approval of Falsework plans Prestressing systems W orking drawings Approved products list Arbitration Arch Corrugated metal pipe Structural plate pipe Archaeological features Arrow panels flashing Asphalt Binder coat Cement Cutback Dampproofing and waterproofing concrete surfaces Emulsified Emulsified recycling agents Liquid Mixing plants Recycling agents Rubber material Asphaltic concrete Asphalt rubber Asphaltrubber endproduct Endproduct Endproduct SHRP volumetric mix Friction course Friction course asphalt rubber Friction course miscellaneous Hot Plant requirements Miscellaneous structural Statistical acceptance Asphaltrubber stressabsorbing membrane ASTM Application of Definition of Attenuation devices Authority and duties of District Engineer Inspector Resident Engineer Award of contract B Backer rod Backfill Compaction Definition of For guardrail posts For minor structures Placement Slurry Structure Trench Ballast Ballast wiring enclosure luminaire housing Bank protection Bank protection fabric Bar reinforcement Barbed wire fence Barricades and warning signs Barrier concrete Base courses Aggregate base and subbase Cement treated base Definition of Lean concrete base Basins concrete catch Batch mixing cement treated base Bearing pads Elastomeric Preformed Bearing surfaces planing of Bearing values determination of Bidder Definition Disqualification Prequalification Bidding requirements and conditions Bidding schedule interpretation of quantities in Bidding electronic Bidding suspension from Bids Advertisement for definition of Irregular W ithdrawal of Bituminized cotton fabric Bituminous Adhesive for raised pavement markers Coated corrugated metal pipe Joint filler Material for curing seal Material application of Prime coat Road mix pavement Tack coat Treatments Blasting Controlled Use of explosives Blotter material Application of Requirements of Bolts Anchor light poles Anchor structural Highstrength steel Borrow Adjustment Compaction Description of Embankment Breakaway sign posts Brick for manhole Bridge decks Curing concrete Finishing Placing concrete W idening Bridge removal Brooming Bulletin board Buried and bolted guardrail anchors C Cable And wire for traffic signal Messenger Calendar day definition of Cancellation of award Cantilever sign structure foundation Care and protection of trees shrubs and plants Casing removal drilled shaft Castinplace concrete Minor structures Piles Pipe Catch basins concrete Catch basins reconstruct to grade Cattle guards New or reconstruct to grade Temporary Cement Hydraulic Storage of Cement treated base Cement treated subgrade Cementtreated slurry bedding material Ceramic pavement markers Certificates of compliance andor analysis Chain link cable barrier Chain link fence and gates Changeable message board Channel protection bank Character of workers Chemical fertilizer Chip seal coat Chip seal pavement marker Circuit continuity testing Claims Arbitration Decision on Mediation Notice of claim Submission of Classes of finish structural concrete Cleaning up pit sites Clearing and grubbing Removal and disposal of materials Collected stock Commercial source Compaction and density requirements for Aggregate bases and subbases Asphaltic concrete Asphaltic concrete asphaltrubber Asphaltic concreteend product Asphaltic concrete asphaltrubber endproduct Asphaltic concreteend product SHRP volumetric mix Asphaltic concrete friction course Asphaltic concrete friction course asphaltrubber Asphaltic concrete friction course miscellaneous Asphaltic concrete miscellaneous structural Cement treated base Cement treated subgrade Embankment Grading roadway for pavement Lime treated subgrade Road mix pavement Structure backfill Compensation for altered quantities Complete in place definition of Completion date Determination of Failure to meet Compressive strength acceptance for concrete Concrete Asphaltic Barrier transition Barriers Beams tolerances Catch basin Catch basin reconstruct Curbs gutters sidewalks and driveways Curing compound End sections Finishing Gore paving Packaged dry highearly strength Packaged dry normal strength Packaged dry rapid hardening Packaged dry very rapidhardening Pavement deficiency Pavement repairs Pipe nonreinforced Pipe nonreinforced castinplace Placing Posttensioning castinplace Prestressing Sidewalk and sidewalk ramp Slope protection bank Structures Utility for miscellaneous construction Valley gutter Vibrating Concrete curing Castinplace Liquid membrane Lowpressure steam Radiant heat with moisture W ater method Concrete structures Bridge deck Bridge deck widening Compressive strength Construction joints Dimensional tolerances Falsework and forms Finishing Joints Materials Minor Opening to traffic Placing concrete for Placing concrete in water for Price adjustment low strength concrete Removal of forms Surface finish Concrete portland cement Acceptance sampling and testing Admixtures Aggregates Compressive strength acceptance for Curing compounds Cylinders cores Design procedures Materials Mixing Pavement Proportioning Sampling frequency Testing for minor precast structures W eather limitations Conductors electrical Conduit Electrical highway lighting Electrical water distribution system Embedded in concrete structures Jacked under pavement Polyvinyl chloride Conformity Reasonably close W ith plans and specifications Consideration of proposals Consistency of concrete Construct chain link fence from salvage Construct guardrail from salvage Construction stakes lines and grades Construction surveying and layout Contents of proposal pamphlet Continuous mixing Asphaltic concrete Cement treated base Contract Alterations of Award and execution Bond definition of Bond requirement of Cancellation of award of Default of Definition of Execution of Failure to execute Intent Subletting of Termination of Time of execution Time Definition of Time determination and extension of Contractor Cooperation of Definition of Quality control Records Responsibilities for utilities Responsibility for work Contractorfurnished source Control cabinet Control of material Control of work Controlled blasting Controlling item definition of Cooperation Contractor by Contractors between Utility companies Coordination of contract documents Cores Corrugated metal pipe Bituminous coated End sections Laying and joining Precoated galvanized Cost reduction incentive Cover material Application of Removing loose Requirements for Rolling Crack repair Crown dike Crown ditches Curb concrete Embankment Curing Bridge deck Cement treated subgrade Lean concrete base Lime treated subgrade Materials portland cement concrete Materials portland cement concrete pavement Nonreinforced castinplace pipe Portland cement concrete pavement Precast concrete Shotcrete Structural concrete Curing seal Bituminous material for For cement treated base For cement treated subgrade For lime treated subgrade Cutback asphalt D Dagmars reflectorized Damage by storm flood or earthquake Occurrence Payment for repair work Repair work Damage claims responsibility for Dampproofing and waterproofing concrete surfaces Deck joint assemblies Decomposed granite Default termination of contract for Deficiency adjustment for Lean concrete base Portland cement concrete Structural concrete strength Definitions and terms Delineators and markers Department definition of Departmentfurnished materials Departmentfurnished source Detectors Detectors installation Determination and extension of contract time Determination of bearing values piling Devices For sampling Patented Differing site conditions Director definition of Disqualification of bidders Distributor truck Dowels Downdrains embankment Drainage excavation Drainage fabric Drawings working and supplemental Drilled shaft foundations Drilling slurry Driving piles Dumped riprap Duties Inspector Resident Engineer E Earthwork Adjustments Blasting Roadway excavation Slopes Surplus material Unsuitable material Edge drains Edge sealing Elastomeric bearing pad Electrical Conductors Conduit Tests Underground material Eliminated items Embankment Compaction Construction requirements Curb Downdrains Inlets and outlets Moisture content Spillways Tolerances Emitter Emulsified asphalt Encasement of new pipe Energy absorbing terminal Engineer field laboratory Engineers field office Engineer definition of Environmental analyses Epoxy adhesives Resin base Resin base anchoring Epoxy coating for reinforcing steel Epoxy resin base binder Equipment definition of Equipment force account Erosion Examination of plans specifications and site work Excavation Disposal of Drainage Erosion control For drilled shafts For trees shrubs and plants Landscape Roadway Structural Surplus material from Execution of contract Expansion joint filler Expansion joints in major structures Expansion joints portland cement concrete pavement Explosives use of Extension of contract time Extraction of pit material F Failure to Complete work on time Execute contract Maintain roadway or structure Falsework and forms Falsework removal Federal aid participation Fence Barbed wire Chain link construct from salvage Gate Hardware Posts W ire Fertilizer chemical Field painting Filler expansion joint Filter fabric Filter material pipe Final clean up Final payment Fine aggregate for portland cement concrete Finishing concrete Bridge decks Formed Fire plan Fixed form method for constructing portland cement concrete pavement Flared end section Flasher Flasher controller Flashing arrow panels Flood gates Flood plain material Fly ash Fog coat Followers Force account work Equipment and rates Equipment standby time Labor Materials W ork by subcontractors Forest protection Forms for structural concrete Formulas for determining bearing values Foundation for signs Frames and covers Frames and covers for manholes Frames and grates for catch basins Furnish water supply Furnishing rightofway G Gabions Galvanizing Sign structures Structural steel Gaskets Gate valve Gates fence and Geocomposite edge drain Geocomposite wall drain Geogrid Geosynthetics Geotextile fabric separation Glass spheres preformed pavement markings Gore paving concrete Grader ditch Grading roadway for pavement Grading landscaping Granite mulch Grass seed Grinding pavement Grooving pavement Ground rubber edge sealing concrete pavement Grouted riprap Grouting of posttensioned members Grubbing clearing and Guardrail Elements End terminal assemblies Guardrail terminals Miscellaneous materials Nested Painting damaged galvanized areas Posts Reconstruct Reconstruct from salvage Removal of Roadway Transition section Gutter Concrete curb and Valley H Hammers for driving piles Handling materials Hazardous materials Headwalls Basis of Payment Construction requirements Heating aggregate for asphaltic concrete Heating requirements bituminous materials Highway lighting Anchor bolts Ballast Base plates Cable Conductor Conduit Conduit embedded in concrete structures Conduit jacked under pavement Control lighting Electrical tests Equipment list and drawings Foundations Grounding bonding Installation of conduit and pull boxes Installation of poles Junction box Lamps Load center cabinets Luminaire Mast arms and tie rods Photo electric controls Pull box Regulations and codes Removal salvage or reinstallation Service system components Testing Transformer W iring procedures splices Holidays definition of Holidays epoxy coating Hotpoured joint sealant Humus Hydraulic cement Hydroseeding I Illumination value sign lighting Immigration and Nationality Act Incidental electrical work Increase or decrease of quantities Independent approved laboratory definition of Inlets and outlets embankment Inspection of the plant Inspection of work Inspection surface portland cement concrete pavement Inspector definition of Installation of Corrugated metal pipe Nonreinforced castinplace concrete pipe Precast concrete pipe Structural plate pipe Temporary cattle guards and fence Insulation water distribution system Insurance Intent of contract Interpretation of quantities in bidding schedule Irregular proposals Irrigation system establishment Issuance of proposals Item pay item definition of Items of special manufacture J Jetting and drilling Jiggle bars Joint and crack repair Joint filler expansion Bituminous Nonbituminous Joint material for concrete pipe Joint sealant Cold application Hotpoured Silicone Joint seals bridge deck Joints Cellular polychloroprene neoprene Expansion Sawed portland cement concrete Joints in Asphaltic concrete Asphaltic concrete friction course Concrete barriers Deck units Major structures Nonreinforced concrete pipe Portland cement concrete pavement Precast manhole sections Rubber gaskets reinforced concrete pipe Junction boxes metal L Laboratory definition of Lamps High pressure sodium Signal Landscape Establishment Excavation Grading Irrigation system establishment Irrigation system installation Plating materials Topsoil Lapping and splicing reinforcement Lawn mowing and weeding Laws to be observed Lean concrete base Lean concrete base thickness Legal relations and responsibility to public Legal rights no waiver of Light pole wood marking Lighting highway Lime Lime treated subgrade Lime treated subgrade safety program Limitation of operations Liquid asphalt Liquid membrane forming compound Liquidated damages schedule of Load center cabinet Load restrictions Load test for piles Load transfer dowels Local stock Loop detector Installation Pavement cutting Saw cut sealant Unit W ire Losses prestressed concrete Luminaire Adjusting and aiming device High pressure sodium Housing Removal salvage reinstallation Lump sum payment for structures M MAG Magnetometer detector unit Maintain changeable message board Maintenance of traffic Maintenance of traffic during Construction Suspension of work for the winter season Major item definition of Manhole Reset frame and cover Markers object Markers rightofway Markings thermoplastic stripes and Mast arms and tie rods Material sources Categories of Cleaning up Clearing and stripping Commercial Contractorfurnished Departmentfurnished In flood plains Royalty charges Materials Certification of Definition of Departmentfurnished Extraction of from pit Information available on Patented Rights in and use of found on work Source of supply and quality requirements Storage of Unacceptable W eighing Measurement and payment Measurement of quantities Methods and equipment Milepost markers Mill inspection Mineral admixture for Asphaltic concrete Asphaltic concrete miscellaneous structural Asphaltic concreteend product Asphaltic concrete asphaltrubber endproduct Mineral aggregate for Asphaltic concrete Asphaltic concrete asphaltrubber Asphaltic concreteend product Asphaltic concrete asphaltrubber endproduct Asphaltic concreteend product SHRP volumetric mix Asphaltic concrete friction course Asphaltic concrete friction course asphaltrubber Asphaltic concrete friction course miscellaneous Asphaltic concrete miscellaneous structural Minimum cement content structural concrete Minor item definition of Minor structures concrete Minor structures steel Mix design for Asphaltic concrete Asphaltic concrete asphaltrubber Asphaltic concreteend product Asphaltic concrete asphaltrubber endproduct Asphaltic concreteend product SHRP volumetric mix Asphaltic concrete friction course Asphaltic concrete friction course asphaltrubber Asphaltic concrete miscellaneous structural Lean concrete base Portland cement concrete Previously utilized asphaltic concrete Revisions Shotcrete Mix design deviations from Mixing Asphaltic concrete Asphaltic concrete friction course Bituminous road mix Cement treated base Cement treated subgrade Lean concrete base Lime treated subgrade Portland cement concrete pavement Road mix bituminous pavement Shotcrete Structural concrete Mobilization Monuments survey Mortar Packaged dry high strength Packaged dry rapidhardening Packaged dry very rapidhardening Mortar joints precast concrete pipe Mulch materials Mulching MUTCD N Neoprene joint seal Nestable corrugated steel pipe No waiver of legal rights Nonbituminous joint filler Noncollusion certification Nonreinforced concrete pipe Nonshrink grout materials Notice of award definition of Nursery stock O Object markers Obliterate pavement marking Obstructions removal of structures and Occupational safety and health standards Officials personal liability of public Opening concrete pavement to traffic Opening lean concrete base to traffic Overhead sign structures P Paint Acrylic emulsion Aluminum For pavement marking General requirements Threepaint coating system Zinc Painting Concrete surfaces Damaged galvanized coat Damaged galvanized coat guardrail Metal surfaces Surfaces other than metal or concrete Structural steel Surface cleaning W eather conditions Panels flashing arrow Partial payment Partial payment for material on hand Partnering Patented devices materials and processes Pavement fabric Pavement marker chip seal Pavement markings Dual component Glass beads for pavement marking paint Obliteration of existing Paint Preformed Raised Temporary raised or painted line Pavement markings thermoplastic Application Method of measurement stripes and symbols Reflective glass spheres Pavement structure definition of Pavement bituminous road mix Pavement portland cement concrete Base for Cracks Curing Edge Sealing Forming fixed form Forming slipform Grinding Grooving Joint and crack repair Joints Load transfer dowel assemblies Materials Opening to traffic Placing and finishing Removal and replacement Repair of Sealing joints Setting forms Slab repair full depth Smoothness Statistical acceptance Surface texturing Thickness Payment partial Payment partial for material on hand Pedestal cabinet meter Pedestrian push button detector Perforated sign posts Performance bonds Permits licenses and taxes Personal liability of public officials Photo electric lighting controls Piles Bearing value determination Castinplace Cutoff Defective Driving of Embankment Load tests for Painting metal Precast Splices Steel Timber Pilot trucks Pipe Aluminum Backfilling and compacting Bedding Bituminous coated Concrete nonreinforced castinplace Concrete reinforced Concretelined corrugated metal Corrugated high density polyethylene Corrugated metal Corrugated polyethylene Encasement of new Excavation for Gaskets for Installation of Iron Nonreinforced concrete Polyvinyl chloride Precoated galvanized steel Removal Slotted Spiral rib corrugated metal Structural plate pipearches and arches Pipe corrugated metal Construction requirements Material Pipe nonreinforced castinplace Curing Excavation Placement Repair W all thickness Pipe perforated for underdrains Aluminum Clay Plastic Steel Placing and finishing Asphaltic concrete Lean concrete base Portland cement concrete pavement Placing structural concrete Plain rubber waterstops Plans and working drawings Plans approval of Plans definition of Plant inspection Planted stock and seeding establishment Planting Care and protection of trees shrubs and plants Collected stock and local stock Nursery stock Pruning and Staking Planting season Plants inspection Plants shipping and handling Plants trees shrubs and Pneumatic tired rollers Poles steel Pollution prevention Portland cement concrete Portland cement concrete pavement Statistical acceptance Posts Fence Guardrail Metal wood Posttensioning castinplace concrete Precast concrete barriers Precast concrete piles Precast concrete pipe Preconstruction conference Preformed expansion joint filler Preformed plastic pavement markings Preparation of proposal Prepared soil Prequalification of bidder Preservation of seeded areas Preservative treatment timber piles Prestressing concrete Approval of prestressing systems Ducts Grouting posttensioned members Posttensioning castinplace concrete Pretensioning precast concrete Steel for Prevailing wage force account work Prevention of landscape defacement Price adjustments Prime coat Prismatic reflectors Profile grade definition of Profile index portland cement concrete pavement Project plans definition of Project definition of Proposal Combination or conditional Definition Delivery of Guaranty Guaranty definition of Irregular Issuance of Pamphlet contents of Public opening of W ithdrawal of Proprietary products trade names and substitutions Prosecution and progress Protection And restoration of property and landscape Of trees shrubs and plants Pruning and staking Public convenience and safety Public officials personal liability of Pugmill Pull box Pumping concrete Q Quality control and acceptance terms Quality control contractor Quantities Approximate in advertisement for bids Compensation for altered Earthwork adjustments Increase or decrease of Interpretation of in bidding schedule Measurement of R Radiant heat curing precast concrete Rail bank protection Railwayhighway provisions Raised pavement markers Bituminous adhesive for Ceramic Dagmars reflectorized Jiggle bars Reflective Reasonably close conformity definition of Reconstruct Catch basins Cattle guards Fence chain link Guardrail Guardrail from salvage Recycling agent Reduction for noncompliance asphalt cement Reference markers Reflective glass beads pavement marking paint Reflective glass spheres Reflectorized raised pavement markers Reflectors prismatic Reimbursement traffic control Reinforced concrete pipe Reinforcement Reinforcing steel Bending Clearance Dowel placement Epoxy coated For drilled shaft Placing Splicing and lapping Supports W elded wire fabric Removal and disposal of materials Removal of Bituminous pavement Bridges Concrete barriers Concrete curb and gutter Embankment curb Falsework and forms Fence Guardrail Light poles and bases Loose cover material Materials clearing and grubbing Miscellaneous concrete Pipe Portland cement concrete pavement Signs and delineators Structural concrete Structures and obstructions Unacceptable and unauthorized work Removal construction requirements Remove and salvage guardrail Removing electrical equipment salvage or reinstall Repair of damaged work Requirement of contract bond Reset frame and cover for Manhole Survey monuments Reshaping and grading existing improvements Responsibility for damage claims Restoration of surfaces opened by permit Retaining wall removal of Retroreflective sheeting Return of proposal guaranty Rightofway Definition of Furnishing Markers Rights in and use of materials found on the work Riprap Dumped Grouted Sacked concrete Slope mattress W ire tied Road mix bituminous pavement Roadbed definition of Roadside development definition of Roadside sign supports Roadside definition of Roadway Definition of Excavation Rock mulch Rollers Pneumatic tired Tandem power steel wheel Rolling Method Asphaltic concrete Asphaltic concrete asphaltrubber Asphaltic concreteend product Asphaltic concrete asphaltrubber endproduct Asphaltic concreteend product SHRP volumetric mix Asphaltic concrete friction course Asphaltic concrete friction course asphaltrubber Asphaltic concrete friction course miscellaneous Asphaltic concrete miscellaneous structural Cover material Road mix bituminous pavement Rounding of slopes Royalty charges Rub rail Rubbed finish concrete Rubber gasket joints precast concrete pipe Rumble strip groundin S Sacked concrete riprap Safety plan contractors Safety program for lime treated subgrade Sampling device Sand barrel crash cushion Sanitary health and safety provisions Saw cut sealant detector installation Saw cutting Sawed joints Schedule of liquidated damages Scope of payment Scope of work Seal Cracks in portland cement concrete pavement Edge of portland cement concrete pavement Seal coat Chip Fog Season planting Seeding Selfpropelled paving machine asphaltic concrete Separation geotextile fabric Septic tanks Sewer pipe Sewerage system Sheeting retroreflective Shielded cable Shipping and handling of stock plants Shop drawings Definition of Requirements of Shop inspection structural steel Shotcrete Shoulder definition of Shoulders landscape grading Shrubs trees and plants Sidewalks concrete and driveways Sign Fabrication Panel installation Panels Retroreflective sheeting Sign lighting and electrical signs Ballast Changeable message board Conduit Flasher assembly Housing Load center cabinets Luminaire Manualoffphoto switch Photo electric control Switches Uplight shield Sign panels Sign supports Foundations concrete Overhead Posts breakaway Posts perforated Posts uchannel Silicone joint sealant Silt fence temporary Fabric Slab repairs Slipform method For embankment curb For lean concrete base For portland cement concrete pavement For single curb curb and gutter and sidewalk Slope and channel protection bank Slope plating Slopes earthwork Slotted pipe Slump concrete Slump shotcrete Slurry backfill Slurry bedding material Smoothness Asphaltic concrete Asphaltic concreteend product Asphaltic concreteend product SHRP volumetric mix Snow markers Soil anchor stakes Sound barrier walls Soundness test for portland cement concrete aggregate Sources Material Operation at Spall repairs Special provisions definition of Specifications Conformity with plans and Definition of Spillways embankment Splicing and lapping reinforcement Spreading Bituminous road mix Cover material Staking pruning and Standard drawings definition of Standard specifications definition of Standpipes Start of work State definition of Steam curing precast concrete member Steel reinforcement Steel shells for castinplace concrete piles Steel structures Stock plants nursery collected and local Stockpiling aggregate for Asphaltic concrete friction course Asphaltic concrete friction course asphaltrubber Asphaltic concrete asphaltrubber Structural concrete Storage of materials Storm flood or earthquake damage by Stripping material source Structural Concrete Concrete removal of Excavation and structure backfill Pipe Plate structures Structural steel Bolts high strength Certification Cleaning Erection Fabrication Galvanizing Joints bolts for Painting Shop and working drawings Shop inspection Straightening of Test reports W elding Structures Castinplace Concrete Drainage of Overhead sign Precast barriers Precast piles Prestressed Steel Structures lump sum payment for Stud shear connectors Subcontractor definition of Subcontractor records Subgrade Compaction Construction Drainage Lime treated Moisture and density control Subletting of contract Substitution proprietary products trade names and Substructure definition of Superstructure definition of Supplemental agreement definition of Supplemental drawings Supplier definition of Surety definition of Surface requirements and tolerances Asphaltic concrete Asphaltic concrete asphaltrubber Asphaltic concreteend product Asphaltic concrete asphaltrubber endproduct Asphaltic concreteend product SHRP volumetric mix Asphaltic concrete friction course Asphaltic concrete friction course asphaltrubber Asphaltic concrete miscellaneous structural Road mix bituminous pavement Surface test inspection portland cement concrete pavement Surface treatment bituminous Surfacing bituminous materials for Surge protector Surplus material excavation Survey monuments Suspension from bidding Switches T Tack coat Tacking existing surfaces Tar Temperature limitations weather and portland cement concrete Temporary Concrete barrier Fence Fence and cattle guards Impact attenuation devices Preformed pavement markings Raised pavement markers Traffic signal devices Tensioning prestressed concrete bridge members Termination of contract Terms definitions and Testing irrigation system Testing water distribution system Thermoplastic stripes and markings Pavement markings Traffic stripes Thrie beam barrier Tie bars Timber piles Timber posts and blocks guardrail Time contract determination and extension of Tolerances Asphaltic concrete friction course Asphaltic concrete surface Bituminous road mix surface Castinplace concrete Portland cement concrete pavement Precast concrete beams Precast minor structures Topsoil Tracer W ire Trade names and substitutions proprietary products Traffic Cones and drums Control plan Maintenance and protection of Maintenance directed by Engineer Maintenance of On chip seal Paint Pavement marking Traffic control Elements of work completeinplace Elements of work in use Reimbursement Reimbursement exceptions Relocation services Traffic signal controller material Cabinet Cable Conductors Conflict monitor Connectors Controller assembly Flasher Flasher controller Lightning protection Load switch Power breaker Reflectors Traffic signal controllers Assembly Cabinets Switches Synchronization functions Testing and prequalification Traffic signal equipment Control cabinet Department testing of Foundations Installation of electrical conduit and pull boxes Lamps Maintaining Optical equipment Pedestrian signals Poles Poles base plates Power service Pull boxes Removal storage or reinstallation Signal face Signal lamps Temporary Testing Traffic signal indications and mounting assemblies Transverse construction joints portland cement concrete pavement Traveled way definition of Traveling plant mixing bituminous road mix Cement treated subgrade Lime treated subgrade Treated base Cement Lean concrete Treatment Bituminous Surface W ood preservative for timber piles Tree staking materials Trees shrubs and plants Tremie concrete Trench backfill Trench during milling operations Trench open utility Trenching pipe installation Truck mounted attenuator Tubular marker Turnout construction U Unacceptable materials Unauthorized work removal of Unsuitable material removal and disposal of Uplight shield Usage of material in designated material sources Use of curb and gutter machines Use of explosives Utilities cooperation with Utility concrete for miscellaneous construction Utility property and services contractors responsibility for V Valley gutter Value engineering proposals Values bearing determination of Valve boxes Valves water distribution Vertical panels Vertical restrainers Vibrating portland cement concrete W W arning signs barricades and W arning marker and regulatory sign panels W arranties and guaranties W ater distribution Bedding and cover material Components construction requirements Components materials Installation Permits warranties and guaranties Testing Testing prior to backfilling W ater for dust control W ater stops rubber synthetic W ater supply furnish W ater curing structural concrete W ater Payment for W ater portland cement concrete pavement W aterproofing concrete surfaces dampproofing and W eakened plane joints portland cement concrete pavement W eather and temperature limitations Asphaltic concrete Asphaltic concrete asphaltrubber Asphaltic concreteend product Asphaltic concrete asphaltrubber endproduct Asphaltic concreteend product SHRP volumetric mix Asphaltic concrete friction course Asphaltic concrete friction course asphaltrubber Asphaltic concrete friction course miscellaneous Asphaltic concrete miscellaneous structural Concrete pavement Painting Pavement fabric interlayer Road mix bituminous pavement Shotcrete Structural concrete W eeds control of W eight of steel reinforcement W elded wire fabric W elding W ire Barbed Fabric Fence and gates Loop detector Reinforcement Rope Steel used as spirals or ties Tied riprap W iring procedures electrical W ithdrawal of proposals W ood Forms structural concrete Posts and blocks guardrail W ood poles lighting Defects Definitions wood terminology Dimensions Inspection Installation Manufacturing requirements Preservatives W ood poles temporary traffic signal W ork Contractors responsibility for Control of Definition of Extra Failure to complete on time Inspection of Limitations of Prosecution and progress of Scope of Start of W orking and supplemental drawings definition W orking day definition of W orking forces and working stresses W oven wire fabric W oven wire fence
