i Erection a assembly drawings of the product tested including tolerances anchorages end parts where relevant installation height above pavement andor ground levels other installation details appropriate to the installation for the specific locations including changes relevant to different set backs from the edge of carriageway etc .
provisions for use under certain conditions h description of the soil pavement andor foundations characteristics and conditions suitable for the system and information about conditions which can influence the behaviour of the product i details of any testing of the installation or other on installation specific testing e.g .
Slotsingratingsorbetweengratingsandframesshall notbeorientatedparalleltothedirectionoftraffic exceptwheretheslotsarelessthanmmlongorless thanmmwide.Minimumwaterwayareasshallbeas specifiedinAppendix.Unlessotherwisespecifiedin Appendixallgratingsandframesshallbesupplied inafinecastuncoatedcondition.Whereacoatingis specifiedinAppendixthecoatingshallonlybe appliedwhenthesurfacesofthecastingarecleanfree fromrustanddry.Framesshallbebeddedonmortar complyingwithsubClause .. Brickworkshall complywithsubClause .. Backfillingtoprecastgulliesshallbecarried outuptosubformationlevelwithgeneralfillmaterial ClassasdescribedinTablecompactedin compliancewithClause.Wheremechanical compactionisimpracticablethebackfillingshallbein STconcrete.Theremainderofthebackfillingshallbe inappropriatecappingandroadpavementmaterials exceptthatwheremechanicalcompactionofcappingor unboundmixtureforsubbaseisimpracticableST concreteshallbeused .
Such extra compaction shall unless otherwise described in contract specific Appendix either be carried out for the full width of the embankment or in other areas of fill which are to receive a pavement between the outer extremities of the verges .
During all operations of filling compaction road pavement construction and of any other traffic movements which affect the shape of the structure the changes in the horizontal and vertical diameters of the structure shall not exceed for circular structures and for structures of other crosssections .
Pavement Construction Road pavements shall be constructed from one of the permitted options described in contract specific Appendix and in compliance with this Series and the appropriate Clauses of Series and .
The Contractor shall programme the laying and compaction of the subbase and the subsequent pavement courses and take such other steps as may be considered necessary to afford protection to the base subbase and subgrade .
Horizontal Alignments Surface Levels and Surface Regularity of Pavement Courses Horizontal Alignments Horizontal alignments shall be determined from one edge of the pavement surface as described in contract specific Appendix .
The edge of the pavement as constructed and all other parallel alignments shall be correct within a tolerance of mm therefrom except for kerbs and channel blocks which shall be laid with a smooth alignment within a tolerance of mm .
Surface Levels of Pavement Courses The design levels of pavement courses shall be calculated from the vertical profile crossfalls and the pavement course thicknesses described in contract specific Appendix .
The level of any point on the constructed surface of the pavement courses shall be the design level subject to the appropriate tolerances stated in Table .
TABLE Tolerances in Surface Levels of Pavement Courses Road surfaces general adjacent to a surface water channel mm mm Binder course mm Base mm Subbase under concrete pavement surface slabs laid full thickness in one operation by machines with surface compaction mm Subbases other than above mm Where a surface water channel is laid before the adjacent road pavement layer the top of that layer measured from the top of the adjacent edge of the surface water channel shall be to the tolerances given in Table .
Notwithstanding the tolerances permitted in surface levels of pavement courses the cumulative tolerance shall not result in a reduction in thickness of the pavement excluding the subbase by more than mm from the specified thickness nor a reduction in the thickness of the bituminous surface course by more than mm from that specified .
In any length of pavement compliance shall be deemed to be met for all surfaces other than the final road surface when not more than one of ten consecutive measurements taken longitudinally or one in any transverse line exceeds the tolerances permitted in Table provided that this one measurement shall not exceed by more than mm the tolerance for the course concerned .
Prior to checking any final road surface binder course or top surface of base in pavements without binder course for level regularity or macrotexture depth it shall be cleaned of loose or extraneous materials .
These operations shall be carried out without damaging the surface of the pavement as soon as possible and within days of construction of the pavement .
Compliance with Table shall be checked by the rolling straightedge along any line or lines parallel to the edge of pavement on sections of m at regular intervals as stated in contract specific Appendix whether or not it is constructed in shorter lengths .
Sections shorter than m forming part of a longer pavement shall be assessed using the number of irregularities for a m length prorata to the nearest whole number .
Where the total length of pavement is less than m the measurements shall be taken on m lengths .
The maximum allowable difference between the pavement surface and the straightedge shall be mm .
A straightedge metres long shall be used to check longitudinal surface regularity in the following cases i for lengths of less than m of surface course binder course and concrete slabs ii where use of the rolling straightedge or equivalent apparatus is impracticable iii for all lengths of subbase under concrete pavement slabs laid full thickness in one operation by machine with surface compaction .
The maximum allowable difference between the surface and the underside of the straightedge when placed parallel with or at right angles to the centre line of the road shall be for pavement surfaces mm for binder courses mm for subbases under concrete pavements as in iii above mm Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements General TABLE Maximum Permitted Number of Surface Irregularities Surfaces of each lane of carriageway each hard strip and each hard shoulder for each irregularity limit Surfaces of each lane of bituminous binder courses for carriageway hard strip and hard shoulder for each irregularity limit Surfaces of laybys service areas and associated bituminous binder courses for each irregularity limit Irregularity Limits mm mm mm mm mm mm Length m Category A Roads Category B Roads The Category of each section of road is described in contract specific Appendix .
Rectification Where any pavement area does not comply with the specification for regularity surface tolerance thickness macrotexture depth material properties or compaction the full extent of the area which does not comply with the specification shall be made good and the surface of the pavement course shall be rectified in the manner described below i Unbound and hydraulically bound materials The top mm shall be scarified reshaped with material added or removed as necessary and re compacted .
If the period is hours or more the full depth of the layer shall be removed from the pavement and replaced with material in accordance with the specification .
Alternatively for subbases under concrete pavements the Contractor may make up low areas to a level within the tolerances of this Clause with a cement and sand mortar or with an AC fine surface course complying with Clause .
Remedial works involving the placing of fresh concrete shall be completed in sufficient time for the concrete strength to have developed as required in Clause before that section of pavement is opened to traffic .
Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements General Excavations Excavations in existing pavements and other paved areas except those described in subClause of this Clause including surfacing base and subbase shall be cut to neat lines to dimensions at least mm greater on each side than the dimensions of any further excavation below formation level .
Junctions Between New Pavement Construction and Existing Pavement or Other Paved Areas Where new pavement construction abuts an existing bituminous pavement which has to be reduced in level or overlaid to match alignment and levels the existing surface shall be trimmed by the minimum amount of coldmilling planing to a depth which will allow the specified thickness of new construction to be laid the edge being trimmed and treated in compliance with this Clause .
Junctions between concrete pavements and between concrete and bituminous pavements shall be constructed as described in contract specific Appendix .
Junctions between porous asphalt surfacing and other pavement surfaces shall be constructed as described in contract specific Appendix .
Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements General Compressed Air When compressed air is used to clean dust dirt and debris from prepared faces of existing concrete or bituminous pavements which are otherwise ready for reinstatement only oilfree compressed air shall be used and this shall be at a pressure of not less than .
Breaking Up or Perforation of Redundant Pavement Where redundant pavement construction is to be perforated or broken up the pavement shall be treated as described in contract specific Appendix .
Not used Coldmilling Planing of Bituminous Bound Flexible Pavement Where coldmilling of bituminous bound flexible pavement is required the area of carriageway to be milled shall be removed by a suitable milling machine to the requirements specified in contract specific Appendix .
Sawcut and Seal Bituminous Overlays on Existing Jointed Concrete Pavements General Where shown on the drawings listed in contract specific Appendix a bituminous overlay or inlay as specified in contract specific Appendix shall be laid over the existing concrete pavement which has been either treated or prepared as specified in Clause .
This requirement shall not apply to work to this Clause to correct reflection cracking to existing bituminous surfacing exceeding mm thickness in rigid composite pavements where so specified in contract specific Appendix .
Preparatory work to the existing concrete pavement including joints shall comply with Clause .
Before any tack or bond coating commences the Contractor shall ensure that there are adequate stable accurate reference marks delineating all existing transverse pavement joints or sawcuts and that they have been clearly marked and agreed with the Overseeing Organisation for purposes of accurately locating the positions of sawcuts after overlaying to subClause of this Clause .
The centre line of the crackinitiation slot in the overlay shall be aligned with each existing joint in the underlying concrete pavement to within the tolerance specified in contract specific Appendix .
Preparation of Jointed Concrete Pavements Prior to Overlaying and Sawcut and Seal of the Bituminous Overlays General Where specified in contract specific Appendix and shown on the drawings the existing jointed un reinforced or reinforced cementitious pavement shall be prepared in accordance with this Clause before receiving a bituminous overlay which will then be sawcut and sealed in accordance with Clause .
Sawcut Crack and Seat Existing Jointed Reinforced Concrete Pavements General Where shown on the drawings listed in contract specific Appendix the existing reinforced concrete pavement layers shall be sawcut and cracked and seated with plant and equipment to which the Overseeing Organisations consent has been given and shall comply with this Clause .
The sequence of operations shall be i preplanning and marking of the positions of intended transverse sawcuts ii sawcutting of the concrete pavement at the spacing and depths specified in contract specific Appendix iii verification of sawcut depths iv inducing transverse cracks v extracting cores and vi seating .
The road shall be neither overlaid nor reopened to highway traffic without the Overseeing Organisations written confirmation that his interpretation of the FWD measurements is complete and that the condition of the treated pavement is in accordance with the design requirements .
Sawcutting of Concrete Pavement Transverse sawcutting of the concrete pavement shall be carried out to comply with this Clause including the particular requirements in contract specific Appendix .
Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements General The depth of all sawcuts shall be measured from the top surface of the concrete pavement slab .
The minimum depth of sawcuts shall be just sufficient to cut completely through the longitudinal steel reinforcement but this depth shall in no circumstances exceed of the nominal depth of the concrete pavement layer .
Cracking Induced cracking of existing pavement layer or layers shall be carried out to comply with this Clause including the particular requirements in contract specific Appendix .
The plant used to crack the concrete pavement layer or layers shall be selfpropelled and have all wheels fitted with rubber tyres .
Where the full width of any existing pavement layer can not be cracked transversely with one pass of the crack inducing plant further parallel passes shall be made as necessary so that all subsequent transverse cracks are aligned with those from the preceding pass within the tolerances specified in contract specific Appendix .
All holes from which core samples have been extracted shall be filled with new hydraulically bound material equivalent to that in the surrounding pavement and adequately compacted in layers each not exceeding mm thickness .
Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements General Seating Following cracking all the cracked pavement layer shall be seated with a multiwheeled pneumatic tyred roller with a weight of not less than tonnes compliant with contract specific Appendix and with the number of passes specified in contract specific Appendix .
Where voids under the pavement permit rocking at the ends of the slabs that is not remedied by the seating operation under subClause of this Clause this shall be deemed to be unstable seating .
Once sawcutting and cracking and seating and any remedial work under subClause of this Clause have been completed the pavement shall be prepared to Clause before overlay .
This shall be demonstrated by first executing a main trial over an area neither less than m nor greater than m of existing pavement .
If the road pavement to be treated contains known areas where there are significant differences in the concrete thickness or the concrete strength or in the conditions of the reinforcement or foundations then a main trial shall be conducted in each such area .
The cracked pavement shall then be seated in accordance with the method in subClauses and v of this Clause .
iv Seating After cracking the pavement shall be seated with the number of passes of the roller specified in contract specific Appendix as described in subClause of this Clause .
iv The depth of the sawcut and the depth and vertical direction of cracking shall be determined by coring through the full depth of the concrete pavement layer or layers symmetrically at any transverse position along the length of the sawcut .
The Contractor shall remove all debris from the cracked pavement in the main trial lengths before FWD measurements are made .
Consent to use the plant equipment and methods of sawcutting and cracking and seating will be given by the Overseeing Organisation following a successful demonstration in the main trial that the sawcutting and the cracking and seating complies with the requirements of this Clause and that the effective stiffness modulus of the cracked and seated pavement andor underlying foundation derived from FWD testing meets the design criteria .
The seating operation shall be completed by rolling the pavement with the number of passes specified in contract specific Appendix .
The Contractor shall remove all debris from the cracked pavement before FWD measurements are made .
iii The depth of sawcut and the depth and the vertical direction of cracking through the full depth of the concrete pavement layer or layers shall be determined symmetrically at the sawcut position .
If the number of roller passes required for seating is less than the number of passes specified in contract specific Appendix at each and every point on the pavement then the Contractor shall roll the entire area again with not less than the number of passes of the roller specified in contract specific Appendix unless otherwise instructed by the Overseeing Organisation .
The reassessment trial described in this subClause and in subClauses and of this Clause shall require the Contractor to demonstrate that the plant equipment and method to which consent was given by the Overseeing Organisation for use in the main production work are capable of producing the required effective stiffness modulus in the existing concrete layer or layers by executing this trial over an area of neither less than m nor greater than m of existing pavement .
The Contractor shall remove debris from the cracked pavement in the reassessment trial length before FWD measurements are made .
The Contractor to either a Produce a record of the measured effective stiffness modulus for i the concrete pavement and ii the foundation combination after the saw cutting and cracking andor seating or b Produce a record of measurements of vertical movement at joints before and after treatment .
The Contractor to either a Produce a record of the measured effective stiffness modulus for i the concrete pavement and ii the foundation combination both before and after the sawcutting and cracking and or seating or b Produce a record of measurements of vertical movement at joints before and after treatment .
TABLE Sawcut Crack and Seat Existing Jointed Reinforced Concrete Pavements Assessment Criteria for Acceptance of Trials and for the Main Production Work continued Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements General Cracking and Seating of Existing Jointed Unreinforced Concrete Pavements and Hydraulically Bound Mixture HBM Bases General Where shown on the drawings listed in contract specific Appendix the existing unreinforced hydraulically bound pavement layer or layers shall be cracked and seated with plant and equipment to which the Overseeing Organisations consent has been given and shall comply with this Clause .
After the main trial the Contractor shall locate all bay joints and repair joints or existing cracks in the concrete pavement or HBM and shall preplan and mark the positions of the intended induced cracks at these locations using the transverse crack spacing determined from the main trial .
The road shall be neither overlaid nor reopened to highway traffic without the Overseeing Organisations written confirmation that the Overseeing Organisation has completed its interpretation of the FWD measurements and that the condition of the treated pavement is in accordance with the design requirements .
If due to variations in the strength or other physical characteristics of the hydraulically bound pavement layer or of the foundation or otherwise the crack pattern varies from that confirmed in the main trial the equipment shall be adjusted as described in subClauses and of this Clause to produce the required crack pattern .
If the crack pattern obtained in the main trial is not Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements General reestablished within bays for jointed unreinforced concrete pavements or within m for HBM bases then production cracking shall stop immediately .
Cracking Induced cracking of existing pavement layer or layers shall be carried out to comply with this Clause including the particular requirements in contract specific Appendix .
The plant used to crack the hydraulically bound pavement layer or layers shall be selfpropelled and have all wheels fitted with rubber tyres .
Where the full width of any existing pavement layer can not be cracked transversely with one pass of the crack inducing plant further parallel passes shall be made as necessary so that all subsequent transverse cracks are aligned with those from the preceding pass within the tolerances specified in contract specific Appendix .
For all trials and for all production cracking operations the Contractor shall provide clean water and shall saturate the surface area of the pavement which is to be cracked .
All holes from which core samples have been extracted shall be filled with new hydraulically bound material equivalent to that in the surrounding pavement and adequately compacted in layers each not exceeding mm thickness .
Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements General Seating Following cracking all of the cracked pavement layer shall be seated with a multiwheeled pneumatic tyred roller with a weight specified in contract specific Appendix and with the number of passes specified in contract specific Appendix .
Once cracking and seating and any remedial work under subClause of this Clause have been completed the pavement shall be prepared to Clause before overlay .
This shall be demonstrated by first executing a main trial over an area of neither less than m nor greater than m of existing pavement .
If the road pavement to be treated contains known areas where there are differences in the concrete thickness or strength or in the foundation conditions then a main trial shall be conducted in each such area .
The work on the main trial length shall proceed as follows i Cracking shall proceed in stages as directed by the Overseeing Organisation in groups of four to six bays in jointed concrete pavements or in lengths of m for HBM bases .
iii In Stage and each subsequent Stage of the main trial a group of four bays in jointed concrete pavements or a length of m for HBM bases shall be cracked starting from one end to produce transverse cracks at each of the spacings stated in item i of contract specific Appendix .
iv Seating After cracking in both Stage and Stage the pavement shall be seated with the number of roller passes specified in contract specific Appendix and as described in subClause of this Clause .
iv The depth and the vertical direction of cracking shall be determined by coring through the full depth of the hydraulically bound pavement layer symmetrically at the crack position .
The Contractor shall remove all debris from the cracked pavement in the main trial lengths before FWD measurements are made .
Consent to the plant equipment and methods of cracking and seating will be given by the Overseeing Organisation following a successful demonstration in the main trial that the cracking and seating complies with the requirements of this Clause and that the effective stiffness modulus of the cracked and seated pavement andor underlying foundation derived from FWD testing meets the design criteria .
The seating operation shall be completed by rolling the pavement for the number of passes specified in contract specific Appendix .
The Contractor shall remove all debris from the cracked pavement before FWD measurements are made .
If the agreed crack pattern is not restored within bays in jointed concrete pavements or within m in HBM bases production cracking shall cease in accordance with subClause of this Clause .
iii The depth and the vertical direction of cracking shall be determined through the full depth of the hydraulically bound pavement layer or layers symmetrically at the crack position .
Unless stated otherwise in contract specific Appendix the Contractor to produce a record of the measured effective stiffness moduli for i the concrete pavement and ii the foundation both before and after cracking andor seating .
Unless stated otherwise in contract specific Appendix the Contractor to produce a record of the measured effective stiffness moduli for i the concrete pavement and ii the foundation combination both before and after cracking and seating .
TABLE Sawcut Crack and Seat of Existing Jointed Unreinforced Concrete Pavements and CBM Bases Assessment Criteria for Acceptance of Trials and for the Main Production Work continued Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements General If the number of roller passes required for seating is less than the specified minimum at each and every point on the pavement or less than such other increased number of passes which has been specified by the Overseeing Organisation following a trial or otherwise then the Contractor shall roll the entire area again with not less than the number of passes specified in contract specific Appendix unless otherwise instructed by the Overseeing Organisation .
The Production Cracking Reassessment Trial described in this subClause and in subClauses and of this Clause shall require the Contractor to demonstrate that the plant equipment and method to which consent was given by the Overseeing Organisation for use in the main work are capable of producing the required type and pattern of cracks in the existing hydraulically bound layer or layers by executing this trial over an area of neither less than m nor greater than m of existing pavement .
The Contractor shall remove all debris from the cracked pavement in the reassessment trial length before FWD measurements are made .
The cracking and seating operation shall be completed ahead of the FWD testing at a distance of not less than m from the FWD equipment in order to minimise the effect of pavement vibration .
For the monitoring of the crack and seat operation on jointed unreinforced concrete pavements and on HBM bases the load level shall be set at kN .
Care shall be taken to ensure that the whole area of the FWD loading plate is in contact with the pavement surface .
Measurements of pavement temperature at mm depth should be recorded at no less than hourly intervals .
On jointed concrete pavements FWD measurements shall be made along the centre line of the bays .
After completion of the FWD measurements on the Main Trial the deflection data and layer thickness details derived from cores taken in accordance with Clause and supplemented by Ground Penetrating Radar GPR measurements when required by contract specific Appendix shall be used by the Contractor to calculate effective stiffness moduli of the pavement layers in accordance with Clause .
For jointed unreinforced concrete pavements the analysis will also provide the location on each bay where FWD measurements shall be made following production cracking and seating in the main works .
FWD measurements shall be made along the centre line of every bay of jointed concrete pavement after cracking and seating at the bay location determined by the Overseeing Organisation from the results of the main trial .
If the crack characteristics or patterns vary from those to which consent was given in the main trial or from any relevant subsequent production cracking reassessment trial and are not restored within bays in jointed concrete pavements or within m in HBM bases production cracking shall cease in accordance with subClause of Clause .
After completion of the FWD measurements on the Main Production Work the deflection data and layer thickness details derived from cores taken in accordance with Clause and supplemented by Ground Penetrating Radar GPR measurements when required by contract specific Appendix shall be used by the Contractor to calculate effective stiffness moduli of the pavement layers in accordance with Clause .
Assessment of Production Cracking Reassessment Trial After completion of the FWD measurements on the reassessment trial the deflection data and layer thickness details derived from cores taken in accordance with Clause shall be used by the Contractor to calculate effective stiffness moduli of the pavement layers in accordance with Clause .
For jointed Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements General unreinforced concrete pavements the analysis will also provide the location on individual bays where FWD measurements will be made following cracking and seating in the main works .
The cracking and seating operation shall also be completed ahead of the FWD testing at a distance of not less than m from the FWD equipment in order to minimise the effect of pavement vibration .
Care shall be taken to ensure that the whole area of the FWD loading plate is in contact with the pavement surface .
After completion of the FWD measurements on the main trial the deflection data and layer thickness details derived from cores taken in accordance with Clause and supplemented by Ground Penetrating Radar GPR measurements when required by contract specific Appendix shall be used by the Contractor to calculate effective stiffness moduli of the pavement layers in accordance with Clause .
After completion of the FWD measurements on the Main Production Work the deflection data and layer thickness details derived from cores taken in accordance with Clause and supplemented by Ground Penetrating Radar GPR measurements when required by contract specific Appendix shall be used by the Contractor to calculate effective stiffness moduli of the pavement layers in accordance with Clause .
Assessment of Production Cracking Reassessment Trial After completion of the FWD measurements on the reassessment trial the deflection data and layer thickness details derived from cores taken in accordance with Clause shall be used by the Contractor to calculate effective stiffness moduli of the pavement layers in accordance with Clause .
Backanalysis of Falling Weight Deflectometer FWD Measurements Made on Concrete Pavements Treated by Fractured Slab Techniques General For the purposes of this Clause Fractured Slab techniques shall comprise the following i Crack and seat of jointed unreinforced concrete pavements and HBM bases in accordance with Clause .
ii Sawcut and crack and seat of jointed reinforced concrete pavements in accordance with Clause .
The pavement deflection data to be backanalysed shall be divided into uniform sections with similar total thicknesses of hydraulically bound material for the purposes of backanalysis .
The pavement shall be neither overlaid nor reopened to highway traffic without the Overseeing Organisations written confirmation that he has completed his assessment of the FWD measurements and that any required remedial action has been completed .
Following production of a suitable .OUT file the Contractor shall backanalyse the FWD deflection data obtained from a length of pavement defined in accordance with subClause of this Clause .
Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements General N NATIONAL ALTERATIONS OF THE OVERSEEING ORGANISATION OF NORTHERN IRELAND NI Horizontal Alignments Surface Levels and Surface Regularity of Pavement Courses Horizontal Alignments Horizontal alignments shall be determined from one edge of the pavement surface as described in contract specific Appendix .
The edge of the pavement as constructed and all other parallel alignments shall be correct within a tolerance of mm therefrom except for kerbs and channel blocks which shall be laid with a smooth alignment within a tolerance of mm .
Surface Levels of Pavement Courses The design levels of pavement courses shall be calculated from the vertical profile crossfalls and the pavement course thicknesses described in contract specific Appendix .
The level of any point on the constructed surface of the pavement courses shall be the design level subject to the appropriate tolerances stated in Table NI .
TABLE NI Tolerances in Surface Levels of Pavement Courses Road surfaces general adjacent to a surface water channel mm mm Binder course mm Top surface of base in pavements without binder course mm Base mm Subbase under concrete pavement surface slabs laid full thickness in one operation by machines with surface compaction mm Subbases other than above mm Where a surface water channel is laid before the adjacent road pavement layer the top of that layer measured from the top of the adjacent edge of the surface water channel shall be to the tolerances given in Table NI Notwithstanding the tolerances permitted in surface levels of pavement courses the cumulative tolerance shall not result in a reduction in thickness of the pavement excluding the subbase and filter layer by more than mm from the specified thickness nor a reduction in the thickness of the bituminous surface course by more than mm from that specified .
In any length of pavement compliance shall be deemed to be met for all surfaces other than the final road surface when not more than one of ten consecutive measurements taken longitudinally or one in any transverse line exceeds the tolerances permitted in Table NI provided that this one measurement shall not exceed by more than mm the tolerance for the course concerned .
Prior to checking any final road surface binder course or top surface of base in pavements without binder course for level regularity or macrotexture depth it shall be cleaned of loose or extraneous materials .
These operations shall be carried out without damaging the surface of the pavement as soon as possible and within days of construction of the pavement .
Compliance with Table NI shall be checked by the rolling straightedge along any line or lines parallel to the edge of pavement on sections of m at regular intervals as stated in contract specific Appendix whether or not it is constructed in shorter lengths .
Sections shorter than m forming part of a longer pavement shall be assessed using the number of irregularities for a m length prorata to the nearest whole number .
Where the total length of pavement is less than m the measurements shall be taken on m lengths .
The maximum allowable difference between the pavement surface and the straightedge shall be mm .
A straightedge metres long shall be used to check longitudinal surface regularity in the following cases i for lengths of less than m of surface course binder course and concrete slabs ii where use of the rolling straightedge or equivalent apparatus is impracticable iii for all lengths of subbase under concrete pavement slabs laid full thickness in one operation by machine with surface compaction .
The maximum allowable difference between the surface and the underside of the straightedge when placed parallel with or at right angles to the centre line of the road shall be for pavement surfaces mm for binder courses mm for subbases under concrete pavements as in iii above mm TABLE NI Maximum Permitted Number of Surface Irregularities Surfaces of each lane of carriageway each hard strip and each hard shoulder for each irregularity limit Surfaces of each lane of bituminous binder courses for carriageway hard strip and hard shoulder for each irregularity limit Surfaces of laybys service areas and associated bituminous binder courses for each irregularity limit Irregularity Limits mm mm mm mm mm mm Length m Category A Roads Category B Roads The Category of each section of road is described in contract specific Appendix .
Rectification Where any pavement area does not comply with the specification for regularity surface tolerance thickness macrotexture depth material properties or compaction the full extent of the area which does not comply with the specification shall be made good and the surface of the pavement course shall be rectified in the manner described below Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements General N i Unbound and Hydraulically bound materials The top mm shall be scarified reshaped with material added or removed as necessary and re compacted .
If the period is hours or more the full depth of the layer shall be removed from the pavement and replaced with material in accordance with the specification .
Alternatively for subbases under concrete pavements the Contractor may make up low areas to a level within the tolerances of this Clause with a cement and sand mortar or with an AC fine surface course complying with Clause .
The area rectified shall be the full width of the paving laid in one operation and at least m long if binder course or base on pavements without binder course or m if surface course .
Remedial works involving the placing of fresh concrete shall be completed in sufficient time for the concrete strength to have developed as required in Clause before that section of pavement is opened to traffic .
Excavations Excavations in existing pavements and other paved areas except those described in subClause of this Clause including surfacing base and subbase shall be cut to neat lines to dimensions at least mm greater on each side than the dimensions of any further excavation below formation level .
Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements General N Reinstatement of Paved Areas The layers of capping and pavement and other paved area materials shall be reinstated consecutively as soon as possible in compliance with the appropriate Clauses in the and Series to match the thicknesses and constituents of the existing material or as otherwise described in contract specific Appendix .
To allow for settlement in backfill under concrete pavements temporary repairs to the pavement shall be carried out using bituminous materials .
Where an existing pavement has been trimmed for a new pavement to abut it regulating layers for changes in crossfall or level shall comply with the requirements for the appropriate subbase base or surface layer .
Junctions Between New Pavement Construction and Existing Pavement or Other Paved Areas Where new pavement construction abuts an existing bituminous pavement which has to be reduced in level or overlaid to match alignment and levels the existing surface shall be trimmed by the minimum amount of coldmilling planing to a depth which will allow the specified thickness of new construction to be laid the edge being trimmed and treated in compliance with this Clause .
Junctions between concrete pavements and between concrete and bituminous pavements shall be constructed as described in contract specific Appendix .
Junctions between porous asphalt surfacing and other pavement surfaces shall be constructed as described in contract specific Appendix .
Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements General NF Compressed Air When compressed air is used to clean dust dirt and debris from prepared faces of existing concrete or bituminous pavements which are otherwise ready for reinstatement only oilfree compressed air shall be used and this shall be at a pressure of not less than .
TABLE Compaction Requirements for Unbound Mixtures Type of Compaction Plant Category Number of passes for layers not exceeding the following compacted thicknesses mm mm mm Smoothwheeled roller or vibratory roller operating without vibration Mass per metre width of roll over kg up to kg over g unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable Pneumatictyred roller Mass per wheel over kg up to kg over kg up to kg over kg up to kg over kg unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable Vibratory roller Mass per metre width of vibrating roll over kg up to kg over kg up to kg over kg up to kg over kg up to kg over kg up to kg over kg up to kg over kg up to kg over kg unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable Vibratingplate compactor Mass per square metre of base plate over kgm² up to kgm² over kgm² up to kgm² over kgm² unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable Vibrotamper Mass over kg up to kg over kg up to kg over kg unsuitable Power rammer Mass kg kg over kg unsuitable Use of Surfaces by Construction Plant and Other Traffic Construction plant and other traffic used on pavements under construction shall be suitable in relation to the material condition and thickness of the courses it traverses so that damage is not caused to the subgrade or the pavement courses already constructed .
The wheels or tracks of plant moving over the various pavement courses shall be kept free from deleterious materials .
Any permanent thickening shall be across the whole width of the pavement .
Asphalt planings are defined as materials derived from the asphalt layers of the pavement using a mobile machine fitted with milling cutters .
Granulated asphalt is defined as asphalt bound material recycled from roads under reconstruction or surplus asphalt material destined for bound pavement layers but unused which has been granulated .
Where the pavement is made up of two or more layers of HBM with induced cracks the cracks in the overlying HBM layer shall align with the induced cracks in the layer below with a tolerance of mm .
The transverse cracks shall be induced by grooving the fresh material to form straight vertical grooves not more than mm wide to a depth of between one half and two thirds of the layer thickness over the full width of the pavement .
When required by contract specific Appendix an existing pavement layer that is to used to produce HBM shall be tested to confirm compliance with subClause .. Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Unbound Cement and Other Hydraulically Bound Mixtures Amendment February TABLE Aggregate Requirements for HBM Clause reference HBM designation CBGM A CBGM B CBGM C FABM HRBBM SBM B FABM HRBBM SBM B FABM HRBBM SBM B B B B Categories for aggregate properties BS EN Crushed or broken particles and totally rounded particles in coarse aggregate CNR Note CNR unless otherwise specified in contract specific Appendix C or C as specified in contract specific Appendix Note CNR Note C or C as specified in contract specific Appendix Resistance to fragmentation of coarse aggregate LANR LA or LA as specified in contract specific Appendix LA LA or LA as specified in contract specific Appendix LA LANR LA Acidsoluble sulfate content Note Aircooled blastfurnace slag AS Other aggregates AS Total sulfur content Note Aircooled blastfurnace slag S Other aggregates S Other requirements BS Fines quality Note NR Note Nonplastic NR Note Nonplastic Proportion of components Clause Maximum glass content ClassRgG Maximum impurities content Class X NOTES .
The depth of mixing shall be referenced to the design levels for the pavement by precise leveling of the stabilized soil interface or other techniques approved by the Overseeing Organisation to ensure that the level at the underside of the stabilized layer is in accordance with the specified requirements .
Determination of the Coefficient of Linear Thermal Expansion Scope The test method described in this Clause shall be used to determine the coefficient of linear thermal expansion of HBM within the normal range of temperature for pavement layers .
Bituminouspavementsshallbeconstructedusingthematerialsspecifiedincontractspecific Appendix and shall be laid by contractors that are registered to the BS EN ISO Sector Scheme for the Laying of Asphalt Mixes listed in Appendix A .
When laying binder course or surface course the paver shall be taken out of use whilst laying the remainder of the pavement up to the joint and the corresponding area beyond it .
Joints For new pavement construction all longitudinal joints in all layers shall be situated outside wheel trackzones.Whereanexistingroadpavementisresurfacedjointsinthesurfacecourseshallcoincidewitheither thelaneedgethelanemarkingorthemiddleofatrafficlanewhicheverisappropriate.Jointsshallnotcoincide withthewheelpath.ForthepurposesofthisClausethewheeltrackzonesshallbetakentobebetween.mand .mandbetween.mand.mfromthecentreofthenearsidelanemarkingsforeachtrafficlaneorinthe absence of lane markings lane edges .
UnlessotherwisespecifiedincontractspecificAppendixasealantasspecifiedinsubClauseof thisClauseshallbeappliedtothewholeofanyfreestandingedgeontheoutsideofthefinishedpavementonthe highsideofthecamberandwhenspecifiedincontractspecificAppendixonthelowside .
Constructionplantandtrafficusedonpavementsunderconstructionshallbesuitableinrelationtothe material condition and thickness of the courses it traverses so that damage is not caused to the subgrade or the pavement courses already constructed .
The wheels or tracks of plant moving over the various pavement courses shall be kept free from deleterious materials .
Regulating Course Regulating courses which may consist of one or more layers of a bituminous material shall have their finishedsurfaceslaidtoachievetheappropriatetolerancesforhorizontalalignmentssurfacelevelsandsurface regularity for pavement layers in accordance with Clause .
Bond coat shall be visible after aggregate application to ensure bond is still achieved between the pavement layers .
WhenrequiredincontractspecificAppendixsamplesofaggregatebondcoatorbindermodified orunmodifiedbitumenfromeitherthespraybarorstoragetankormixedbituminousmaterialsfromthepavement surface or other suitable sampling point shall be supplied to the Overseeing Organisation .
Nominal Aggregate size mm Design target thickness mm Minimum Maximum WhererequiredintheInstallationMethodStatementorincontractspecificAppendixtoachieve finalpavementlevelsandorthicknessestheexistingsubstratesurfaceshallbestrengthenedorregulatedin accordance with Clause .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Bituminous Bound Materials Amendment May The assessments shall be undertaken by an assessment team that includes a lead assessor with experience in pavement inspections and a minimum of two additional suitably experienced persons to comprise an inspection panel for the visual condition of the SIPT installation and interim inspections .
This mixture can be laid at lower layers within special pavement types e.g bridge decks when it is unchipped .
Trafficking Newly Laid Surfacing The Contractor shall ensure the pavement material has adequately cooled and hardened before the road isopenedtotraffic.UnlessotherwiseagreedbytheOverseeingOrganisationtheroadshallnotbeopenedtotraffic if its surface temperature exceeds C unless the maximum temperature within the mat has fallen below C. Not Used Weather Conditions for Laying of Hot Bituminous Mixtures The Contractor shall take account of the weather conditions when planning his working methods .
In Situ Cold Recycled Bitumen Bound Material Scope In situ cold recycled bitumen bound material shall be designed and produced to form the foundation or main structural layer of the road pavement .
Prior to commencing the pulverisation and stabilisation works the Contractor shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Overseeing Organisation using the results of mix design procedures described in subClauses toofthisClausethattheexistingpavementmaterialsinthesectionsoftheworksdefinedincontractspecific Appendix are capable of being recycled by pulverisation to form the primary aggregate component of an in situcoldrecycledbitumenboundmaterialwhichcanmeetthespecifiedendproductperformancerequirements .
Component Materials Aggregates and Fillers Thepulverisedpavementmaterialandanysupplementaryaggregateandorfillershallnormallybe granular material with not less than and not more than passing the .
Additionally before proceeding with construction of the overlying pavement the valuation process shall be repeated to demonstrate that the elastic modulus value at all points and that of the mean value have increasedovertherespectiveasinstalledvaluesbynotlessthanthepercentagevaluesstatedincontractspecific Appendix .
WithindaysofcompletionofthesurfacingworksaFallingWeightDeflectometersurveyshallbe carried out and analysed in general accordance with HD DMRB In particular the measurements shall betakenonthefinishedroadsurfaceinthenearsidewheelpathatauniformandmaximumspacingofm.The survey shall be carried out during a period when the pavement temperature at a depth of mm is within the range Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Bituminous Bound Materials Amendment May to ºC .
The FWD results shall be analysed using a linear elastic FWD back analysis computer program with the pavement modelled as a two layer system .
Where thesiteinvestigationhasidentifiedsignificantvariationofexistingpavementmaterialsbetweendifferentsections of the site a mix design shall be submitted for each section of the site .
TABLE Testing Standards for the Design and Characterisation of In Situ Cold Recycled Bound Material Test Standard Moisture content BS Bulk density BS EN Air voids content BS EN and subClause of this Clause Grading and Binder Content BS EN Indirect Tensile Stiffness Modulus BS EN The aggregate used in the design and characterisation process shall be obtained from the appropriate section of the works and shall be representative in terms of component material proportions of the pavement layers to be pulverised .
Not Used Method for Laboratory Determination of Interface Properties Using the Modified Leutner Shear Test Scope ThisClausespecifiesalaboratorytestmethodtoassessthebondingbetweenadjacentasphaltpavement layers using cylindrical samples .
Specimens shall be cored from an inservice pavement or from a slab manufactured using a laboratory roller compactor in accordance with BS EN and BS EN .
The binder samples are then aged at a lower temperature and samples removed at intervals and tested to obtain an AgeingProfile.Thisisparticularlyusefulforasphaltbecausedifferentairvoidcontentsandbindercontentsina road pavement result in different ageing rates .
Preservatives penetration grade bitumen used as a control is subjected to Shortterm Ageing in the MRTFOT followed by an extended period at a lower temperature to simulate the ageing of the bitumen in a road pavement .
The bitumen is subjected to Shortterm Ageing followed by an extended period in the RTFO to simulate the ageing of the bitumen in a road pavement .
Strength Classes of Concrete and Constituent Materials for Pavement Layers Concrete in rigid or rigid composite pavements shall be one of the classes given in Table in accordance with the pavement design alternatives permitted in contract specific Appendix .
TABLE Pavement Layers Concrete Strength Classes Pavement Layer BS EN BS BS EN BS BS EN Clause Designed Concrete Standardised Prescribed Concrete Designated Concrete i Surface slabs Unreinforced concrete URC Jointed reinforced concrete JRC Continuously reinforced concrete pavement CRCP CC C to and ii Continuously reinforced concrete base CRCB CC C iii CRCP and CRCB ground beam anchorages C iv v vi vii Wet lean concrete Wet lean concrete Wet lean concrete Wet lean concrete For bases or subbases as required in contract specific Appendix CC .
Admixtures Concrete in at least the top mm of surface slabs shall incorporate an airentraining admixture complying with BS EN except i for pavements with an exposed aggregate concrete surface constructed to Clause where at least the top mm of the surface slab shall be air entrained or ii for surface slabs of pavements with at least a class C concrete iii for surface slabs of pavements with a class C concrete which are to be overlaid by a mm minimum thickness thin surface course system complying with Clause and iv for surface slabs of pavements with a class C concrete which are to be overlaid by a mm minimum thickness thin surface course system complying with Clause .
Aggregate Aggregates for all pavement concrete including wet lean shall comply with BS EN .
Crushed concrete which complies with the quality and grading requirements of BS EN and Table of BS may also be used in all pavement concretes except aggregate concrete surface complying with Clause .
Irrespective of source the aggregate will be considered suitable if i the resistance to freezing and thawing complies with BS EN clause .. for pavement and wet lean concrete and ii the resistance to fragmentation complies with category LA of BS EN clause .
This requirement will not apply for pavements with an exposed aggregate concrete surface constructed to Clause or if it can be shown that the sand ie fine aggregate retained on or the fraction passing the .
Chemical Requirement Acidsoluble sulfate Acidsoluble sulfate content of the aggregates and filler aggregates for concrete pavements including wet lean shall comply with BS EN clause .. and shall be Category AS for aircooled blast furnace slag and for other aggregates Category AS .
Density The density of a saturated core cut from the full depth of the concrete pavement shall not be less than of the average density of at least six fully compacted saturated moulded specimens made from the same concrete and tested at the same age .
The density of the concrete pavement shall be determined in accordance with BS EN .
The density of a saturated core cut from the full depth of the concrete pavement shall be determined in accordance with BS EN .
CC CC. . CC CC . . CC Overlapping groups of four consecutive day corrected core strengths shall be used for assessing the pavement for compliance with the criteria in Table A. of BS EN .
The pavement shall be accepted if both the criteria in Table A. are satisfied for four results derived from strength tests on cores taken from the constructed pavement .
To assess the time for use of a concrete slab by traffic the strength development rate may be predetermined by cubes stored at C made from trial concrete mixes and maturity meters placed in the pavement .
Alternatively pairs of cubes may be made for each m² or less and stored alongside the pavement in containers or in such a way that their sides are well insulated .
Concrete pavement layers shall be isolated from fixed structures by expansion joints or earthworks or a granular layer over the structure or by bridgetype expansion joints or by lengths of fully flexible pavement construction .
End of pavement surface slabs shall have a transition bay as shown on the drawings leading into the fully flexible construction .
The dowel bars which have been coated shall be cast centrally into concrete specimens x x mm made of the same concrete mix proportions to be used in the pavement but with a maximum aggregate size of mm and cured in accordance with BS EN .
Where the spacing between longitudinal reinforcement and the extra m long bars is less than mm the nominal size of aggregate shall be mm for a sufficient number of concrete batches to complete that section of pavement .
Nmm nor more than Nmm for material to be used in pavements and not less than .
Hotapplied Type N sealants may be used in joints in asphalt kerbs laid on concrete pavements .
For joints in kerbs and joints other than in pavements seals may be any of the pavement sealants if they have the suitable characteristics for the application or gunning grade cold applied plasticised bituminous rubber sealant or gunning grades of two part polysulphidebased sealants complying with BS may be used .
Joints at Manhole and Gully Slabs Manhole covers gullies and their frames shall be isolated from the pavement slabs and be contained in separate small slabs which shall be larger than the exterior of the manhole and gully shafts including any concrete surround less than mm below the underside of the subbase layer .
The forms shall be straight within a tolerance of mm in m. The forms shall be bedded on low moisture content cement mortar or concrete class C and set to the pavement surface level as shown on the drawings within a tolerance of mm .
The horizontal alignment for forms shall be to the required alignment of the pavement edge as shown on the drawings within a tolerance of mm .
Additionally one of the wires shall be at a constant horizontal distance from the required edge of the pavement as shown in the drawings within a lateral tolerance of mm .
Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Concrete Materials The initial regulation and finish to the surface of the slab shall be effected by means of a beam oscillating transversely or obliquely to the longitudinal axis of the pavement .
In continuously reinforced concrete pavement the slab shall be marked with the chainage at intervals not greater than m apart .
Finished Surface Requirements Macrotexture of Running Surfaces The finished surface of the pavement shall comply with the requirements of Clause .
Where a pavement area does not comply with the specification in any respect the full extent of the surface which does not comply shall be rectified in accordance with Clause .
Brush Finish Macrotexture SubClauses to of this Clause shall only apply to the reconstruction of existing concrete pavements .
All new concrete pavement constructions shall comply with subClauses to .
Tests shall be taken within m of commencement of paving and thereafter at least once for each days paving at the times after construction as given below and in the following manner individual measurements of the macrotexture depth shall be taken at least m apart anywhere along a diagonal line across a lane width between points m apart along the pavement .
ii The maximum number of permitted irregularities of pavement surfaces shall comply with the requirements of Table for m lengths .
Rejection and Further Trials Trial lengths which do not comply with the specification with the exception of areas within the pavement surface which can be remedied in accordance with Clause shall be removed and the Contractor shall construct a further trial length .
Texturing of Hardened Concrete Worn rain damaged or inadequately textured surface slabs shall be macrotextured by sawing grooves in the hardened concrete surface at right angles to the longitudinal axis of the pavement with machines using diamond or other abrasive cutting discs .
A bay shall be that portion of the concrete pavement bounded by adjacent longitudinal and transverse joints .
The concrete shall be normal or high early strength pavement concrete complying with Clauses to and shall achieve the required characteristic strength prior to opening to traffic .
Bay Replacement For the replacement of concrete pavement bays the Contractor shall undertake the work listed in this Clause .
Place spread compact and finish pavement quality concrete in accordance with the requirements of this Series and the contract specific Appendices flush with the surface of the adjacent slab and to within a tolerance of mm and with a difference of not more than mm between the surface of the repair and a m straight edge .
Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Concrete Materials Slab Lifting Using Space Frames For concrete pavement slab lifting using space frames the Contractor shall undertake the work listed in this Clause .
Place and evenly spread high early strength pavement quality concrete to the appropriate surcharge compact using internal and surface vibration and finish flush with the surface of the adjacent slab and to within a tolerance mm and with a difference of not more than mm between the surface of the repair and a m straight edge .
Apply a wire brushed surface texture or texture to match surrounding pavement surface and cure immediately by the application of resin based aluminized curing compound .
Samples for testing shall be taken at the point of placing or from the relevant pavement layer .
Foamed concrete used for backfilling excavations including trench reinstatement under road pavements shall have the following compressive strengths i A minimum cube compressive strength of Nmm at an age of days .
Finished Surface Requirements The finished surface of the pavement shall comply with the requirements of Clause .
Where a pavement area does not comply with the specification for regularity surface tolerance thickness material properties or compaction or contains surface depressions the full extent of the surface which does not comply with the specification shall be rectified by cutting out the full depth of the slab .
Protection of the Surface after the Application of the Retarder The finished surface of the pavement concrete after application of retarder shall be protected against precipitation moisture loss contamination and dispersal of the retarder by air movements as stated in contract specific Appendix .
Weather Conditions for Laying of Cementitious Materials Road pavement materials in a frozen condition shall not be incorporated in the works but may be used if acceptable when thawed .
Road pavement materials shall not be laid on any surface which is frozen or covered with ice .
The temperature of concrete in any pavement layer shall not be less than ºC at the point of delivery .
to Not Used Use of Surfaces by Traffic and Construction Plant Construction plant and traffic used on pavements under construction shall be suitable in relation to the material condition and thickness of the courses it traverses so that damage is not caused to the subgrade or the pavement courses already constructed .
The wheels or tracks of plant moving over the various pavement courses shall be kept free from deleterious materials .
Concrete slabs may be used by traffic when the cube compressive strength is assessed to have reached Nmm for pavement surface slabs or Nmm for bases with asphalt surfacing .
Vehicles with rubber tyres with an axle loading less than tonnes or wheels or tracks of concreting plant shall not use any part of a newly constructed pavement within days .
The above periods before traffic may run on the pavement shall be increased if the day cube strength is below that required in the specification .
They shall be laid and bedded in accordance with BS on a mortar bed on a concrete pavement slab a base or a C or ST in accordance with BS concrete foundation .
Precast concrete kerbs which are to be bonded to the pavement surface shall conform to BS EN .
The clear distance between unsupported pavement edge and back of kerb shall be not less than mm .
They shall be bonded to the pavement surface with a resilient adhesive compatible with the pavement materials and be capable of withstanding a static pushoff load of kNm applied parallel to the pavement surface at right angles to the kerb .
Joints shall be provided in kerbs channels edgings and backing which are laid on or adjacent to a concrete pavement to coincide with the pavement transverse contraction warping and expansion joints .
The joints shall be the same width as the joint sealing grooves of the pavement and shall be caulked and sealed as described in Clauses and .
Concrete foundations to kerbs channels and edgings laid adjacent to a concrete pavement shall be provided with joint filler board complying with Clause placed vertically through the full extent of the concrete foundation at positions coinciding with the pavement joints .
Vertical expansion and contraction joints shall be formed in kerbs laid on unreinforced concrete slabs and jointed reinforced concrete slabs to coincide with the pavement transverse expansion and contraction joints .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Kerbs Footways and Paved Areas Amendment August For kerbs channels and edge details i Constructed before the adjacent road pavement surface the surface level adjacent to the future road surface shall not deviate from the design level by more than mm .
ii Constructed after the adjacent road pavement surface the surface level shall not deviate from the finished level of the adjacent pavement surface by more than mm .
Vertical expansion and contraction joints shall be formed in kerbs channels and edge details laid on integral with or adjacent to unreinforced concrete slabs and jointed reinforced concrete slabs to coincide with the pavement transverse expansion warping and contraction joints .
Joints may be omitted from channels cast integral with a CRCP concrete pavement .
Vertical expansion joints at m spacings and intermediate contraction joints at m spacings shall be formed in kerbs channels and edge details laid on or adjacent to other types of concrete and flexible pavement .
They shall be laid and bedded in accordance with BS on a mortar bed on a concrete pavement slab a base or a strength class C or ST in accordance with BS concrete foundation .
Precast concrete kerbs which are to be bonded to the pavement surface shall conform to BS EN .
The clear distance between unsupported pavement edge and back of kerb shall be not less than mm .
They shall be bonded to the pavement surface with a resilient adhesive compatible with the pavement materials and be capable of withstanding a static pushoff load of kNm applied parallel to the pavement surface at right angles to the kerb .
Joints shall be provided in kerbs channels edgings and backing which are laid on or adjacent to a concrete pavement to coincide with the pavement transverse contraction warping and expansion joints .
The joints shall be the same width as the joint sealing grooves of the pavement and shall be caulked and sealed as described in Clauses and .
Concrete foundations to kerbs channels and edgings laid adjacent to a concrete pavement shall be provided with joint filler board complying with Clause placed vertically NATIONAL ALTERATIONS OF THE OVERSEEING ORGANISATION OF NORTHERN IRELAND through the full extent of the concrete foundation at positions coinciding with the pavement joints .
Property BS EN Reference Requirement Value Skid Resistance Table Class S The pavement shall be prepared in accordance with the following i Where the marking is to be applied on concrete carriageways the transverse texturing shall be freed from all traces of curing compound by wire brushing or other approved means .
Property BS EN Requirement Value Reference Skid Table Class S Resistance The pavement shall be prepared in accordance with the following i where the marking is to be applied on concrete carriageways the transverse texturing shall be freed from all traces of curing compound by wire brushing or other approved means .
Plant for compaction of material within metre or within one fifth of the span if greater of the arch ring shall conform to subClause .. For bridges carrying public highways a minimum depth of fill of mm shall be provided between the crown of the arch and the underside of the pavement as described in Appendix .
Street trees in pavements tree grilles and those planted as specimens within a plot are defined as individual trees as well as any other existing young or semi mature trees identified in Appendix or by the Overseeing Organisation .
ii All weeds around the base of the tree shall be removed to a radius of mm in grass or to a whole tree station if in the pavement or a tree grille .
