ROADBED The graded portion of a highway within top and side slopes prepared as a foundation for the pavement structure and shoulders .
SUBGRADE The top surface of a roadbed upon which the pavement structure and shoulders including curbs are constructed .
SURFACE COURSE One or more layers of a pavement structure designed to accommodate the traffic load the top layer of which resists skidding traffic abrasion and the disintegrating effects of climate .
Within the project limits the Contractor will comply with the above referenced weight limitations and with special weight limitations imposed by the contract for the hauling of material and the movement of equipment over bridges and box culverts and the courses making up the pavement structure .
Weight restrictions will not be imposed for the hauling of materials or movement of equipment on an earth subgrade select subgrade topping select granular backfill or temporary granular CONTROL OF WORK Page material that will be removed and will not make up a portion of the final pavement structure .
The Contractor may submit a written request to the Engineer to cross bridges box culverts or the courses making up the pavement structure with equipment or loads that exceed the weight limitations .
Unless otherwise specified in the Contract the Contractors responsibility for project maintenance will be as follows When the work begins on the roadbed or pavement structure the Contractor will maintain the entire project including but not limited to all surface maintenance drainage weed control and temporary traffic control .
Mobilization of equipment material stockpiling clearing topsoil stockpiling and fencing will not constitute work on the roadbed or pavement structure .
In the case of a contract involving the placement of material on or the utilization of a previously constructed subgrade base course pavement or structure the Contractor will maintain the previously constructed work during construction operations .
The Engineer will adjust burner fuel based on the original contract prices of the plant mix asphalt concrete pavement bid items .
Original Contract Costz Total original contract cost for all plant mix asphalt concrete pavement bid items combined excluding bid items for asphalt binder stabilizing additive and hydrated lime .
Estimate Costz Amount to be paid on the biweekly pay estimate for all plant mix asphalt concrete pavement bid items combined excluding bid items for asphalt binder stabilizing additive hydrated lime sawing and sealing joints compaction samples and all pay adjustments made for incentive disincentive price adjustments pay factor adjustments liquidated damages and royalties .
Estimate Costz Amount to be paid on the biweekly pay estimate for all plant mix asphalt concrete pavement bid items combined excluding bid items for asphalt binder stabilizing additive hydrated lime sawing and sealing joints compaction samples and all pay adjustments made for incentive disincentive price adjustments pay factor adjustments liquidated damages and royalties .
DESCRIPTION This work consists of removal and disposal of buildings fences structures pavements abandoned pipe lines pipe culverts other obstructions which are not designated or permitted to remain and other obstructions which are not removed and disposed of under other items in the contract .
Where new PCC pavement or new AC pavement is placed adjacent to existing AC or PCC pavement the existing pavement shall be sawed full depth to a true line with a vertical face .
Where curb and gutter adjoins Portland cement concrete pavement to be removed the curb and gutter will be considered as pavement and will be measured as such . .
Adjacent to PCC Pavement Granular material placed adjacent to Portland cement concrete pavement shall be processed by the central plant mix method and placed with a spreader approved by the Engineer .
Adjacent to AC Pavement Granular material placed adjacent to asphalt concrete pavement shall be processed and placed by one of the following methods Granular material shall be processed by the central plant mix method and placed with a spreader approved by the Engineer .
When granular material is placed on the shoulder and the final finished surface is to remain granular surface next to either PCC pavement or AC pavement the Contractor may use either of the methods described in .
The Contractor will be responsible for interpreting the depths and including all costs to process the required depth of existing pavement and granular material .
DESCRIPTION These requirements are applicable to all types of hot mixed asphalt pavements irrespective of class type asphalt material or pavement use .
Hydraulic extendable screeds may be used for variable width pavements .
A shoe attachment on the paver shall be used to automatically match the elevation of asphalt concrete shoulders with concrete pavements .
Grinding shall be day lighted to the outside edge of the pavement .
K. Shoulder Joints When specified a continuous groove shall be constructed by forming sawing or routing the joint between the Portland cement concrete pavement and the asphalt concrete shoulder .
All costs related to the testing for labor test equipment laboratory tools and all incidentals required to satisfactorily perform the required work shall be incidental to the asphalt concrete pavement items .
DESCRIPTION The work consists of constructing one or more courses of gyratory controlled QCQA hot mixed asphalt concrete pavement on a prepared foundation. . MATERIALS Mineral aggregate shall conform to the requirements of Section .. All other materials and their use shall conform to Section .. . CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS The construction requirements shall be as prescribed in Section .
Contractor Furnished Quality Control Program QC for the asphalt concrete pavement is the responsibility of the Contractor .
The program shall assure that all asphalt concrete materials and constructed pavement submitted for acceptance conforms to the contract requirements .
The Contractor shall be responsible for all asphalt concrete materials and constructed pavement including aggregate process control and handling .
c. A summary sheet showing all test results from the gradations completed and the average gradation of each mineral aggregate stockpile produced along with the proposed bin splits to be used in the production of asphalt concrete pavement .
The cores will be taken the next working day after the asphalt pavement is placed .
The Contractor shall fill all core holes before the end of the next working day with hot asphalt concrete and compact the mix to a density close to that of the surrounding pavement .
The asphalt concrete pavement contract unit price will be adjusted according to Section .. Payment for the asphalt concrete will be made at a price determined by multiplying the contract unit price by the composite pay factor .
Deductions will be made for all rejected and wasted asphalt concrete pavement .
QC Laboratory The laboratory used by the Contractor for QC testing shall be incidental to the asphalt concrete pavement items .
gallons per square yard on existing pavement or milled asphalt concrete surface and at a rate of .
gallons per square yard on new asphalt concrete pavement .
C. Construction Methods The existing surface of the pavement shall be removed by milling to the depth width cross section and grade specified .
The final pavement surface shall have a transverse pattern of inch center to center of each strike area .
Application of the sealant material will only be allowed when the pavement surface temperature is at least F and rising .
DESCRIPTION This work shall consist of milling asphalt pavement mixing the reclaimed asphalt pavement RAP material with emulsified asphalt placing the recycled mixture and compacting the recycled mixture according to these specifications and the typical sections in the plans. . MATERIALS A. Reclaimed Asphalt Pavement RAP Section .
Mill the bituminous pavement and pick up the RAP . .
C. Equipment Performance The milling unit shall be capable of milling the asphalt concrete pavement at least inches deep and a minimum of feet wide in a single pass .
DESCRIPTION This work consists of constructing Portland Cement Concrete Pavement of sufficient quality to serve the purpose for which the concrete pavement was designed on a prepared surface. . MATERIALS Materials shall conform to the requirements specified in the following Sections A .
Type II cement shall be used for all concrete pavement .
The paving equipment shall spread consolidate screed and finish the freshly placed concrete to provide a dense and homogenous pavement with a minimum amount of hand finishing .
For a contract which has a minimum of square yards of pavement that is feet or more wide an electronic internal vibrator monitoring device shall be provided .
Forms Forms shall have a depth not less than the prescribed edge thickness of the pavement .
Insert Steel Bar in PCC Pavement When specified in the plans and at the locations specified in the plans the Contractor shall insert steel bars into drilled holes in the existing concrete pavement .
L. PORTLAND CEMENT CONCRETE PAVEMENT Page The diameter of the drilled holes in the existing concrete pavement for the steel bars shall not be less than inch nor more than inch greater than the overall diameter of the steel bar .
Holes drilled into the existing concrete pavement shall be located at middepth of the slab and true and normal .
Low areas shall be filled and compacted to a condition similar to that of surrounding grade or filled with concrete integral with the pavement .
PORTLAND CEMENT CONCRETE PAVEMENT Page The finished subgrade surface shall be maintained in a smooth and compacted condition until the pavement is placed. . Slip Form Method The surface on which the concrete is to be placed shall be brought to final grade by an automatic subgrader operating from a preset grade line or automatic grade control .
The finished subgrade surface shall be maintained in a smooth and compacted condition until the pavement is placed .
Tie bars will not require supports if inserted into the side of the pavement during slip form paving of the longitudinal construction joint operation .
Dowel bar assemblies shall be precoated on projects which have quantities of Portland cement concrete pavement of square yards or greater .
Dowel bars shall be placed parallel to the subgrade and parallel to the centerline of the pavement as specified in the plans .
The concrete shall be struckoff consolidated and finished so the surface of the pavement conforms to the cross section and elevation specified .
Concrete shoulders shall not be constructed above or more than inch lower than adjacent concrete pavement .
Finishing at Joints The concrete adjacent to joints shall be placed without voids or segregation against the joint material under and around all load transfer devices joint assembly units and other features designed to extend into the pavement .
The machine shall go over each area of pavement as many times and at the intervals necessary to produce a surface of uniform texture to provide proper consolidation and to provide a dense homogenous mixture free of segregation holes voids and layers .
The Contractor will be responsible to remove and replace pavement that is not properly consolidated or contains segregation holes voids and layers .
Floating Long handled floats shall be used to smooth and fill opentextured areas in the pavement .
The use of longhandled floats shall be kept to a minimum and shall not be used to float the entire surface of the pavement .
Care shall be taken so the crown is not worked out of the pavement during the operation .
PORTLAND CEMENT CONCRETE PAVEMENT Page Excess water and laitance shall be removed from the surface of the pavement by a straightedge feet or more in length .
The drag shall be mounted on a bridge and shall be sized so that a strip of the carpet at approximately feet wide is in contact with the pavement surface while the drag is operated .
Plain Jointed concrete pavement shall be either longitudinally or transversely tined as specified in the plans .
Continuously reinforced concrete pavement shall be longitudinally tined .
The broom shall be drawn transversely across the pavement with adjacent strokes slightly overlapping .
a. Transverse Tining Immediately following the carpet drag the surface of the concrete pavement shall be given a transverse metaltine finish with a separate selfpropelled mechanical device .
The broom shall be drawn transversely across the pavement with adjacent strokes slightly overlapping .
b. Longitudinal Tining Immediately following the carpet drag the surface of the concrete pavement shall be given a longitudinal metaltine finish with a wire broom or comb attached to a separate selfpropelled mechanical device .
Edging at Forms and Joints After the final finish and while the concrete is still plastic the edges of the pavement along each side of the slab and on each side of transverse construction joints shall be worked with an approved tool and rounded to PORTLAND CEMENT CONCRETE PAVEMENT Page the specified radius .
K. Protection of Concrete For the protection of the pavement surface the Contractor shall have available covering materials including but not limited to insulating blankets curing blankets and plastic sheeting .
The pavement shall not be opened to traffic until meeting the requirements of Section .
The Contractor shall protect the concrete pavement and its appurtenances against all traffic .
This shall include watchmen to direct traffic and the erection and maintenance of warning signs lights pavement bridges crossovers etc .
Any damaged or defective pavement shall be repaired or removed and replaced as directed .
When pavement must be removed and replaced the Engineer will determine the dimensions of the pavement to be removed .
Repair or correction of uncontrolled cracks shall be as directed by the Engineer and at the expense of the Contractor. . Longitudinal Construction Joints When adjacent lanes of pavement are constructed separately a keyway shall be formed along the construction joint .
P. When adjacent lanes of pavement are constructed separately epoxycoated deformed steel tie bars of specified length size spacing and material shall be placed across the longitudinal construction joint to tie the lanes together .
The Engineer will not require the Contractor to complete the saw cut to the final required depth at joint locations where the early entry saw cut resulted in the concrete pavement cracking as determined by the Engineer .
Longitudinal random cracks penetrating the full depth of the pavement shall be repaired to the satisfaction of the Engineer .
Cross stitching and epoxy injection repair methods will not be allowed for pavement panels cracked into more than two pieces or pavement panels where the random crack is diagonal in orientation approximately from the centerline or transverse joint .
If an uncontrolled crack develops within feet of the contraction joint a minimum of feet of pavement removal and replacement will be required .
Removal and replacement of the pavement shall be done at the Contractors expense .
If cracking PORTLAND CEMENT CONCRETE PAVEMENT Page occurs on both sides of the joint the dowel bar assembly and a minimum of feet of pavement each side of the joint shall be removed and replaced .
Removal and replacement of the pavement shall be done at the Contractors expense .
Removal and replacement of the pavement shall be done at the Contractors expense .
No section of pavement less than feet in length will be allowed to remain in place .
M. Curing Immediately after the finishing operations have been completed and marring of the concrete will not occur the entire surface and exposed edges of the pavement shall be properly cured .
Curing Blankets and White Polyethylene Sheeting Method The surface of the concrete pavement and both pavement edges shall be covered with curing blankets .
Impervious Membrane Method The entire surface of the pavement shall be sprayed uniformly with white pigmented curing compound immediately after the finishing of the surface .
If the pavement is cured initially with curing blankets the impervious membrane shall be applied immediately upon removal of the curing blankets .
Curing membrane damaged or protective cover removed on the surface of the pavement during the sawing operation shall be repaired or replaced by the Contractor as directed by the Engineer at no cost to the Department .
The sides of the exposed slab shall be protected with a curing treatment equal to that provided for the surface. . White Opaque Polyethylene Sheeting Method The top surface and sides of the pavement shall be entirely covered with polyethylene sheeting .
The sheeting shall be sized so each unit as laid will extend beyond the edges of the slab at least twice the thickness of the pavement .
Forms shall be removed without damaging the pavement .
Surface Test The pavement surface shall be checked for deviations using either a foot straightedge or a profilograph when specified .
Foot Straightedge The pavement surface shall be tested with a foot straightedge .
The permissible longitudinal and transverse surface deviation for pavement used in rest areas weigh stations ramp entrances shoulders and other similar areas shall be inch in feet .
The permissible transverse surface deviation on the outer inches of the edge of pavement shall be inch under a foot straightedge except where the edge will become a longitudinal crown joint .
The Contractor shall day light corrective grinding to the outside edge of the pavement .
When limestone is used as the coarse aggregate in the pavement and the current average daily traffic ADT shown on the plans is greater than the Contractor shall reestablish the tining with a mechanical tining machine in all areas where the corrective grinding exceeds feet measured longitudinally along the centerline of the road .
The Contractor will replace all permanent pavement markings damaged destroyed or removed during corrective grinding at no additional cost to the Department. . Profilograph When the profilograph is specified the following provisions shall apply .
Results shall be furnished to the Engineer within working days after placement of the pavement and again within working days after corrections are made .
c. Requirements The pavement shall conform to the following profile index requirements Pavement on tangent alignment and pavement on horizontal curves having a centerline radius of feet or more and pavement within their respective superelevation transitions shall not exceed an average profile index of .
Areas excluded from profilograph testing shall be shoulders transitions area within feet of existing pavement and bridges existing curb and gutter sections ramps pavements on horizontal curves having a centerline radius less than feet and their respective superelevation transitions .
The Contractor shall PORTLAND CEMENT CONCRETE PAVEMENT Page day light corrective grinding to the outside edge of the pavement .
When limestone is used as the coarse aggregate in the pavement and the current ADT shown on the plans is greater than the Contractor shall reestablish the tining with a mechanical tining machine in all areas where the corrective grinding exceeds feet measured longitudinally along the centerline of the road .
The Contractor will replace all permanent pavement markings damaged destroyed or removed during corrective grinding at no additional cost to the Department .
g. Coring for pavement thickness measurement will be performed after all corrective action has been completed by the Contractor .
Joints shall be sealed immediately after completion of the curing period before the pavement is opened to traffic .
After cleaning the spalled surface shall be primed and an epoxy resin mortar of troweling consistency shall be placed in the spalled area and finished as the original pavement surface .
Joint sealer application will not be permitted when the air or pavement temperature near the joint is less than F or is F and falling .
Sealant on the surface of the concrete pavement shall be removed immediately and the pavement surface cleaned .
Shoulder joints between Portland cement concrete pavement and asphalt concrete shoulders shall be sealed in accordance with Section .
The sealant surface shall be tooled to produce a slightly concave surface below the pavement surface .
Silicone sealing operations will only be permitted when the air and pavement surface temperatures are F or greater and rising .
Application of Live Load The pavement shall not be opened to traffic until the concrete has attained a compressive strength of psi .
The pavement shall be cleaned prior to opening to traffic .
When concrete is placed adjoining a previously constructed pavement the paving machines mechanical spreaders and other heavy equipment shall not be operated on the existing pavement until the existing concrete has attained a compressive strength of psi .
Equipment operated on a previously constructed pavement that has attained a compressive strength of at least psi but less than psi shall be tracked type equipment .
R. Tolerance in Pavement Thickness The pavement thickness will be determined by average caliper measurement of cores tested in accordance with AASHTO T . Cores shall be sampled in accordance with AASHTO T . Cores may be taken in areas believed to be deficient in thickness .
These core measurements will not be used to determine pavement thickness as set forth in the following For the purpose of establishing an adjusted unit price for pavement units are to be considered separately .
For concrete shoulders see paragraph below. . Width The width of the pavement represented shall be the pavement surface between adjacent longitudinal construction joints between a longitudinal construction joint and the pavement edge or between two pavement edges where the entire width is poured in one operation .
Length measurements shall start at the end of the pavement bearing the smaller station number . .
Ramps Gore Areas Acceleration Lanes and Deceleration Lanes Each ramp consisting of the ramp gore area and acceleration lane or deceleration lane shall be considered separate from the mainline pavement following the limits in Table for the ramp areas. . Irregular Areas Irregular areas such as intersections entrances crossovers etc .
inch from the plan thickness two additional cores at intervals specified in Table for the width of pavement represented will be taken .
The point at which the pavement is deficient by exactly .
Measurements of cores that are in excess of the specified pavement thickness by more than .
Concrete Shoulders The foregoing provisions for tolerance in pavement thickness will apply to Portland cement concrete shoulders with the following exceptions a .
When an item for miscellaneous PCC pavement is provided in the contract the areas of concrete pavement to be measured under this item will be described on the plans .
C. Insert Steel Bar in PCC Pavement Insert steel bar in PCC pavement will be measured by the actual number of steel bars furnished and installed . .
If a cement factor is not shown on the plans the amount bid shall be based on pounds per cubic yard for pavement shoulders and pavementmiscellaneous .
C. Insert Steel Bar in PCC Pavement Insert steel bar in PCC pavement will be paid for at the contract unit price per each steel bar .
Sealing operations will only be permitted when the air and pavement surface temperatures are F or greater and rising .
The pavement shall be dry before starting the concrete patch .
The patch shall be screeded from existing pavement to existing pavement .
The patch shall be screeded from existing pavement to existing pavement .
DESCRIPTION This work consists of filling existing voids under PCC pavement by drilling injection holes and pumping a cementfly ash grout under the pavement slab. . MATERIALS A .
If a loaded vehicle is used as a measuring device a gauge mount shall be positioned with one gauge referenced to the corner of each slab on both sides of the joint near the shoulder edge perpendicular to the pavement joint .
A loaded truck shall then be moved into position with the center of the kip axle foot behind the joint and the outside test wheel foot from the pavement edge both gauges shall be read .
C. Weather and Seasonal Limitations Grout undersealing shall not be performed when the pavement surface temperature is below F or if the subgrade or base course is frozen .
gallons per minute or have the system modified by adding a recirculation hose and valve at the discharge of the pump. . Drilling An air compressor and rock drills or other devices capable of drilling the injection holes through the pavement shall be required .
Holes shall be drilled in a manner that prevents breakout at the bottom of the pavement .
F. Subsealing During subsealing operations the upward movement of the pavement shall not exceed .
This equipment shall be capable of detecting simultaneously the movement of the pavement edge or any two outside slab corners adjacent to a joint and the adjoining shoulder .
The discharge end of the packer or hose shall not extend below the lower surface of the concrete pavement .
One bag of cement pounds of PCC pavement undersealing ½ bags of cement shall of PCC pavement undersealing .
DESCRIPTION This work consists of hydraulic pressure jacking PCC pavement to correct the pavement profile .
The use of material with an efflux time between and seconds shall be discontinued prior to movement of the pavement .
The high density closed cell polyurethane shall be hydrophobic and shall exhibit the following physical characteristics and properties The polyurethane foam shall be designed for pavement jacking have a free rise density of .
General The Contractor or subcontractor performing the pavement jacking shall have prior experience with pavement jacking operations and shall have personnel on the project with expertise in determining injection hole patterns and jacking sequences .
The Contractor upon Department request shall be required to submit a list of at least three projects on which the Contractor or the pavement jacking subcontractor have satisfactorily completed similar work .
If PCC pavement foam jacking is specified foam may be used to underseal adjacent areas .
Weather and Seasonal Limitations Pavement jacking shall not be performed when the pavement surface temperatures are below F or if the subgrade or base course is frozen .
Pavement jacking shall not be performed when the subgrade contains an abnormal amount of moisture from recent rainfall as evidenced by standing water on the pavement or in the joints or cracks .
The colloidal mixing machine shall operate between and RPM creating a high shearing action and subsequent pressure release to make a homogeneous mixture. . Drilling An air compressor and rock drills or other devices capable of drilling the injection holes through the pavement shall be required. . Pumping Unit When Jacking Foam is specified the Contractor shall furnish a truckmounted pumping unit capable of injecting the highdensity polyurethane formulation between the concrete pavement and the subbase and capable of controlling the rate of rise of the pavement .
The Engineer may delete any location or add new locations of pavement to be raised .
Holes shall be drilled in a manner that prevents breakout at the bottom of the pavement .
The Engineer may delete any location or add new locations of pavement to be raised .
Holes shall be drilled in a manner that prevents breakout at the bottom of the pavement .
E. Slurry Pavement Jacking String lines shall be established and blocked up from the pavement high points to monitor movement .
The discharge end of the packer or hose shall not extend below the lower surface of the concrete pavement .
The Contractor shall pump in a pattern and in the amount required to raise the pavement to within .
After the pavement has been raised to the desired elevation all holes shall be injected to ensure complete filling of voids .
If the pavement is bonded to the subbase brief pressure rises seconds or less up to psi will be allowed .
The Contractor shall inject in a pattern and in the amount required to raise the pavement to within .
After the pavement has been raised to the desired elevation all holes shall be injected to ensure complete filling of voids .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT PCC pavement jacking slurry will be measured to the nearest cubic foot .
One bag of cement pounds shall equal cubic foot of PCC pavement jacking slurry .
PAVEMENT JACKING Page PCC pavement jacking foam will be measured to the nearest pound . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT PCC pavement jacking slurry will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic foot .
PCC pavement jacking foam will be paid for at the contract unit price per pound .
DESCRIPTION The work consists of cracking and seating concrete pavement prior to placing an asphalt concrete leveling course. . MATERIALS Not Specified .
The pavement shall be seated on the same working day that it is cracked .
The asphalt concrete leveling course shall be placed within hours after the pavement has been cracked and seated .
PCC pavement crossovers shall be cracked with the same pattern used for the driving lanes .
Prior to cracking the concrete pavement existing asphalt concrete overlays shall be removed .
The breaker shall be capable of fracturing the pavement to the full depth while maintaining the fractured face interlock of the aggregate. . Roller A pneumatic roller with a minimum loaded weight of ton shall be used to seat the cracked pavement .
Cracking shall be full pavement depth without loss of interlock .
CRACKING AND SEATING OF PCC PAVEMENT Page E. Seating The cracked pavement shall be seated by a minimum of two passes with the pneumatic roller .
If two roller passes have not provided a firm seating of the cracked pavement the rolling shall continue until the Engineer determines that the seating is adequate or pavement removal is required .
F. Cleaning The cracked and seated pavement shall be cleaned of dirt spalls and loose material by power brooming prior to tack coating .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT A. Cracking and Seating PCC Pavement Cracking and seating PCC pavement will be measured to the nearest .
BASIS OF PAYMENT A. Cracking and Seating PCC Pavement Cracking and seating PCC pavement will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard and shall be inclusive of cracking seating test strips surface cleaning and all tools equipment and labor necessary to perform the work .
DESCRIPTION This work consists of rubblizing the existing concrete pavement in preparation for an overlay. . MATERIALS Not Specified .
General Rubblization of the concrete pavement shall be accomplished across the width and full depth of the pavement .
Requirements for all breakers Rubblize the existing PCC pavement using either a selfcontained selfpropelled multihead pavement breaker or a selfcontained self propelled resonant frequency pavement breaker .
The breaker shall be equipped with a screen to ensure debris will not enter the adjacent lane during the fracturing process if traffic is maintained. . Multi Head Breaker Breaking of the concrete pavement shall be accomplished with a selfcontained selfpropelled unit with hammers mounted laterally in pairs with half the hammers in a forward row and the remainder diagonally offset in a rear row so that there is continuous breakage from side to side .
C. . Resonant Breaker Breaking the concrete pavement shall be accomplished with a selfcontained selfpropelled resonant frequencybreaking unit capable of producing low amplitude pound force blows at a nominal frequency of not less than cycles per second .
The resonant RUBBLIZE PCC PAVEMENT New Section Page breaker must be capable of rubblizing the full width of the pavement in multiple passes to the degree specified in Section .
C. Rubblization Prior to rubblization a joint shall be cut full depth at an existing joint on ramps or mainline where rubblization abuts concrete pavement which is to remain in place .
In areas where the roadway must be covered one lane at a time initial rubblization will extend a minimum of inches beyond the width of the pavement to be covered .
The Contractor shall break the concrete pavement uniformly across the pavement width into particles that have a maximum dimension less than or equal to inches .
Break the test strip using sufficient energy and an operating speed such that the existing pavement is rubblized fulldepth to the degree specified above .
If necessary to achieve the above rubblization size requirements in areas where the concrete pavement is not able to deflect the Engineer and Contractor may mutually agree to precrack the concrete pavement with a device meeting the requirements of Section .
B .. Reinforcement in the rubblized pavement if any shall be left in place .
D. Seating Seat the rubblized pavement using vibratory steel wheel and pneumatic tired rollers .
A roller coverage is defined as forward and back over the entire surface area of the rubblized pavement .
Additional coverages may be required by the Engineer to satisfactorily seat the rubblized pavement . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT Rubblize PCC Pavement Rubblize PCC pavement will be measured to the nearest .
BASIS OF PAYMENT Rubblize PCC Pavement Rubblize PCC pavement will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard and shall include the cost of furnishing all labor equipment materials and incidentals necessary for rubblizing the PCC pavement precracking the pavement if required all rolling and seating dust control breaking and excavation of test holes fill material and compaction of test holes and any subsequent test holes required by the Engineer to demonstrate specification compliance sawing at retained pavement and appurtenances removing exposed reinforcing steel and removal and satisfactory offsite disposal of waste materials .
Installation Requirements After the existing approach pavement has been removed and the ground surface has been shaped for placement of the granular bridge end backfill material the Engineer shall inspect the area .
Concrete for sidewalks curb and gutter drop inlets manholes ditch checks pipe headwalls sleeper slabs approach slabs pavement etc .
Continuous Reinforced Concrete Pavement On continuous reinforced concrete pavement the Contractor shall use continuous high chair CHCP and beam bolsters BBP with earthbearing bases or sand plates P or an approved alternate .
The grinding shall remove the existing surface conditions as defined by the plan notes including but not limited to rubberized asphalt chip seal epoxy chip seal polymer chip seal pavement markings and tining and shall be to the satisfaction of the Engineer .
Grinding of the bridge deck shall be accomplished utilizing diamond blades mounted on a selfpropelled machine designed for grinding and texturing pavement .
Drilling postholes in pavement shall be done without damage to the surrounding pavement .
Drilling postholes in pavement shall be done without damage to the surrounding pavement .
DESCRIPTION This work consists of furnishing and applying pavement marking materials and surface grooving of Portland cement concrete pavement or asphalt concrete pavement. . MATERIALS Materials shall conform to the following Sections A .
The plastic markings shall be manufactured and packaged in a manner which will permit storage at normal temperatures for up to one year after purchase. . Lane Lines Lane lines shall not be placed over a longitudinal pavement joint and shall not be installed closer than ½ inches from the joint .
Molding and Sealing The material shall mold to the pavement contours breaks and faults by the action of traffic .
Filling tanks pouring paint or cleaning of equipment shall not be allowed on the pavement .
The pavement marking shall be applied during daylight hours when the ambient air temperature is above F and the road surface is dry .
The pavement shall be cleaned of dirt loose stones and other foreign material before the paint is applied .
During pavement marking operations on sections of roadway open to traffic the Contractor shall protect the markings from tracking either by placing suitable traffic control devices or by utilizing a shadow vehicle .
PAVEMENT MARKING Page The Contractor shall take the steps necessary to ensure that the permanent pavement markings will match the markings on the existing surface .
The Contractor may be required to remove and replace pavement markings not meeting the specifications and tolerances at no additional expense to the Department .
Removal methods shall minimize damage to the surface and shall be approved by the Engineer The pavement marking paint shall be applied at a minimum wet thickness of mils equivalent to a dry thickness of to mils .
Restriping of pavement markings to meet this requirement and to provide a quality retroreflective line shall be at the expense of the Contractor with no additional cost to the Department .
The paint shall be capable of being applied at a paint temperature up to F. When applied with glass beads at pavement temperatures above F and at a relative humidity of up to the paint shall dry to a notrack condition within minutes .
No additional payment will be made for the repair work or any reapplication of the pavement marking in the area of the repair .
The grooving shall be performed within the following specifications and tolerances Description Specification Tolerance Depth of Groove Marking Thickness mils mils Width of inch Groove ½ inches inch Width of inch Groove ½ inches inch Width of inch Groove ½ inches inch Width of inch Groove ½ inches inch Width of inch Groove ½ inches inch Length of Skip Lines foot inches inch Tapers at ends of lines to inches Between Double Lines inches inch The grooving alignment and straightness tolerances shall be the same as required for the cold applied plastic pavement marking as specified in Section .
The grooving light grinding and sand blasting operations shall provide the surface preparation required for the application of the new cold applied plastic pavement markings . .
Cold Applied Plastic Pavement Marking Cold applied plastic pavement marking of the width and color specified will be measured by the foot .
Cold Applied Plastic Pavement Marking Arrow Cold applied plastic pavement marking arrow will be measured by count of each type specified .
C. Cold Applied Plastic Pavement Marking Message Cold applied plastic pavement marking message will be measured by count of each complete word specified .
PAVEMENT MARKING Page D. Cold Applied Plastic Pavement Marking Area Cold applied plastic pavement marking area of the color specified will be measured to the nearest square foot .
F. Grooving for Cold Applied Plastic Pavement Marking Grooving for cold applied plastic pavement marking will be measured to the nearest footalong the length of the groove for the width of grooving specified in the plans .
G. Grooving for Cold Applied Plastic Pavement Marking Arrow Grooving for cold applied plastic pavement marking arrow will be measured by the count of each arrow type specified .
H. Grooving for Cold Applied Plastic Pavement Marking Message Grooving for cold applied plastic pavement marking message will be measured by the count of each complete word specified .
I. Grooving for Cold Applied Plastic Pavement Marking Area Grooving for cold applied plastic pavement marking area will be measured to the nearest square foot . .
Cold Applied Plastic Pavement Marking Cold applied plastic pavement marking of each width specified will be paid for at the contract unit price per foot .
Cold Applied Plastic Pavement Marking Arrow Cold applied plastic pavement marking arrow of the type specified will be paid for at the contract unit price per each .
C. Cold Applied Plastic Pavement Marking Message Cold applied plastic pavement marking message will be paid for at the contract unit price per each word .
D. Cold Applied Plastic Pavement Marking Area Cold applied plastic pavement marking area will be paid for at the contract unit price per square foot .
E. Pavement Marking Paint and Beads Paint and beads will be paid for at the contract unit price per gallon for each color of pavement marking paint .
F. Grooving for Cold Applied Plastic Pavement Marking Grooving for cold applied plastic pavement marking will be paid for at the contract unit price per foot for the width PAVEMENT MARKING Page of groove specified .
G. Grooving for Cold Applied Plastic Pavement Marking Arrow Grooving for cold applied plastic pavement marking arrow will be paid for at the contract unit price per arrow type specified .
H. Grooving for Cold Applied Plastic Pavement Marking Message Grooving for cold applied plastic pavement marking message will be paid for at the contract unit price per each word specified .
I. Grooving for Cold Applied Plastic Pavement Marking Area Grooving for cold applied plastic pavement marking area will be paid for at the contract unit price per each square foot .
Paint used for temporary pavement marking shall meet the same specification for permanent pavement marking in Section .
Temporary pavement marking tape shall conform to Section .
General The Contractor shall furnish install and maintain required traffic control devices and pavement marking material. . All traffic control devices shall be kept in proper position clean and legible at all times .
Channelizing Devices Channelizing devices shall be reasonably plumb to the pavement safely and neatly ballasted as needed clearly visible and legible .
General Temporary pavement markings shall be maintained in good condition until the permanent pavement marking is in place or until the Area office issues the letter of Acceptance of Field Work .
For prime coats the existing signing shall remain in place until the prime coat has cured for hours and temporary pavement marking is installed .
Unless otherwise shown on the plans centerline and the applicable lane lines may be temporarily marked by temporary pavement marking tape temporary raised pavement markers temporary flexible vertical markers tabs or temporary pavement marking paint .
For lane roadways with average daily traffic volumes of or less no passing zones may be identified using DO NOT PASS and PASS WITH CARE signs rather than pavement markings .
These may be utilized in place of the pavement markings normally used to identify no passing zones for no longer than calendar days .
The Engineer will determine locations and limits of no passing zones in accordance with Part of the MUTCD. . Materials for Temporary Pavement Marking Temporary pavement marking tape temporary raised pavement markers temporary flexible vertical markers tabs and temporary pavement marking paint shall be of the type specified and shall meet the following requirements .
Temporary Pavement Marking Tape Temporary pavement marking tape shall be applied according to the manufacturers recommendations .
Temporary Raised Pavement Markers Temporary raised pavement markers shall be applied according to the manufacturers recommendations .
If temporary raised pavement markers are used to substitute for dashed centerlines the dashed centerline shall be a foot long line with a cycle length of feet .
Two temporary raised pavement markers shall represent the dashed centerline one at each end of the line .
d. Temporary Pavement Marking Paint Temporary pavement marking paint shall be applied in accordance with Section except as modified by the following Dashed centerlines shall be applied in inch widths feet long at cycle lengths of feet .
Pavement markings shall be removed from the pavement by methods that do not damage the surface or texture of the pavement .
When sand blasting is used for removal of pavement markings or objectionable material and the removal operation is performed within feet of a lane occupied by the traveling public the residue including dust shall be removed immediately by a vacuum attachment operating concurrently with the sand blasting operation .
Damage to the pavement surface caused by pavement marking removal shall be repaired at the expense of the Contractor . .
Temporary Pavement Marking Measurement for tape paint tabs and raised pavement markers will be made either by the foot or by the mile depending on the unit designated by the contract quantity .
The resulting single measured distance will be the quantity used for payment for all temporary pavement markings including but not limited to temporary dashed centerline lane lines edge lines gore lines no passing zone lines and Do Not Pass and Pass With Care signing if utilized .
Separate measurement and determination of quantity for each individual temporary pavement marking line will not be made .
Each surface course or surface treatment receiving temporary pavement marking will be measured to the nearest .
Temporary pavement markings applied to sections of the roadway due to the application of tack will not be measured for payment .
The temporary pavement markings placed near the centerline on the unsurfaced portion of the roadway when only one lane of the final surface course or surface treatment is complete will not be measured for payment .
K. Remove Pavement Marking Measurement for removal of pavement markings will not be made .
The plan quantity will be used for payment unless additional pavement marking removal is ordered by the Engineer . .
Temporary Pavement Marking Payment for temporary pavement marking will be by the mile or foot .
Payment will be considered total payment for all required temporary pavement markings including but not limited to temporary dashed centerline lane lines edge lines gore lines no passing zone lines and Do Not Pass and Pass with Care signing if utilized .
Payment will be full compensation for all costs to furnish install and remove when required temporary pavement markings including costs to TEMPORARY TRAFFIC CONTROL Page remove and properly dispose of temporary road marker covers temporary road markers and temporary pavement marking tape .
K. Remove Pavement Marking Payment for removal of pavement markings will be by the foot each word or square foot depending on the bid item unit description .
Payment will be full compensation for all costs to remove and properly dispose of the pavement markings .
The use of the trenching method for placement under existing roadway pavements will be permitted only after jacking or drilling attempts have failed .
The cost of removing and replacing these materials shall be incidental to the bid price for the conduit. . Where trenching operations require the removal of concrete pavement or sidewalk the concrete shall be sawed full depth along the removal lines or the concrete shall be removed to existing joints. . Conduit entering through junction or pull box walls shall terminate approximately inches in from the inside wall and not less than inches above the bottom .
c. Saw slots in the pavement shall be blown out with compressed air and shall be clean and free of loose grit and moisture when wires are placed and sealer is applied .
In new roadways the preformed loops and leadin conduits shall be placed in the base course or gravel cushion with the top of the conduit flush with the top of the base and then covered with hot mix asphalt or Portland cement concrete pavement .
Preformed loops and leadin conduits shall be protected from damage prior to and during pavement placement .
In existing pavement the preformed loops shall be placed in a saw slot ¼ inches minimum width cut into the existing pavement .
On asphalt or concrete resurfacing projects the preformed loops shall be placed in a saw slot ¼ inches minimum width cut into the existing pavement .
When PCC pavement is adjacent to the curb and gutter the joints shall match the contraction joints of the pavement .
Measurement for separate gutters and combined curb and gutter will be on the inside edge next to the pavement .
FERTILIZING Page B. Cleanup The Contractor shall sweep all fertilizer misplaced on adjacent pavement onto the seedbed .
Class C Fly Ash Class C fly ash conforming to AASHTO M will only be allowed in grout for pavement jacking undersealing or when specified .
Maximum Note These modifications shall not apply to fly ash used in slurry for pavement jacking or undersealing operations .
Coarse aggregate for continuously reinforced concrete pavement shall conform to Size .
Coarse aggregate for all other PCC pavements shall conform to Size .
e Under pavements .
Hot Poured Elastic Joint Sealer The sealant shall conform to the requirements of ASTM D Type II or Type IV or be on the Departments Approved Products List for joint sealants for asphalt over long jointed concrete pavement .
Products on the Departments Approved Products List for joint sealant for asphalt over long jointed concrete pavement may also be used .
The material shall be sound durable particles of ledge rock gravel recycled concrete pavement RCA removed from within the project limits and sand .
When applied under the following conditions the line shall show no visual tracking when viewed from feet after driving a passenger vehicle over the line at a speed of mph Fifteen mils wet film thickness Eight pounds of glass beads per gallon of paint Paint temperature at nozzle between to ºF Pavement dry pavement temperature to ºF Relative humidity of maximum Directional Reflectance min .
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS Glass beads for use with pavement marking paint shall be moisture resistant and shall meet the requirements of AASHTO M Type II .
The marking material shall be designed to adhere to Portland cement concrete pavement or asphalt concrete pavement .
Reflectorized plastic pavement marking shall consist of a homogeneous extruded prefabricated pliant polymer material of specified thickness and width which shall contain abrasion resistant ceramic or ceramic coated beads bonded in a highly durable polyurethane topcoat .
The pavement marking material shall be capable of being affixed to the pavement surface by means of a pre coated pressure sensitive adhesive .
E. Temporary Pavement Marking Tape Temporary pavement marking tape Types I and II shall conform to the requirements of ASTM D. The film without adhesive shall have a minimum thickness of mils .
F. Temporary Raised Pavement Markers Temporary raised pavement markers shall consist of a yellow or white plastic body providing a horizontal width and length of approximately inches in both dimensions and approximately inch high .
Bar Reinforcement Structures and Paving excluding dowel and tie bars Bar reinforcement for structures and concrete pavement shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M ASTM A Grade .
C. Tie Bars Tie bars for concrete pavement shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M Grade except rail steel shall not be used for tie bars that are to be bent and restraightened .
Dowel bars for concrete pavements shall be epoxy coated and shall conform to AASHTO M Type B except the film thickness shall be from to mils after cure .
