AAN American Association of Nurserymen AASHTO American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials AC Asphalt Cement pavement Alternating Current traffic ACBFS Air Cooled Blast Furnace Slag aggregate ACI American Concrete Institute ACIA Asynchronous Communications Interface Adapter traffic controller ADT Average Daily Traffic ADTT Average Daily Truck Traffic AIC Amps Interrupting Capacity AISC American Institute of Steel Construction AISI American Iron and Steel Institute ANFO Ammonium Nitrate and Fuel Oil ANSI American National Standards Institute AOS Apparent Opening Size fabric AREA American Railway Engineering Association AMRL AASHTO Material Reference Library ASCE American Society of Civil Engineers ASME American Society of Mechanical Engineers ASTM American Society for Testing and Materials AWG American Wire Gauge AWPA American Wood Preservers Association AWS American Welding Society AWWA American Water Works Association BBR Bending Beam Rheometer asphalt binder test BMP Best Management Practice erosion BOF Basic Oxygen Furnace aggregate BSG Bulk Specific Gravity BTEX Benzene toluene ethyl benzene and xylene a soil test BUSTR Bureau of Underground Storage Tank Regulations Division of Fire Marshal CMS Construction and Material Specifications CAPWAP Case Pile Wave Analysis Program CBAE Cut Back Asphalt Emulsion CCRL Cement and Concrete Reference Laboratory CCS Crushed Carbonate Stone CECI Contactors Erosion Control Inspector CFR Code of Federal Regulations CIE Commission Internationale dEclairage illumination CPESC Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control CRS Cationic Rapid Set asphalt emulsion CRSI Concrete Reinforcing Steel Institute CSS Cationic Slow Set asphalt emulsion CVN Charpy Vnotch steel test CWT Hundred Weight lbs DC Direct Current DCA District Construction Administrator DCE District Construction Engineer DDD District Deputy Director DET District Engineer of Tests DGE District Geotechnical Engineer DLS Data Logging System traffic markings DNR Department of Natural Resources DRC Dry Rodded Condition asphalt aggregate test DSR Dynamic Shear Rheometer asphalt binder test DZA Deficient Zone Average concrete test EAF Electric Arc Furnace EDA Earth Disturbing Activity EEI Edison Electric Institute EIA Electronic Industries Alliance EPA Environmental Protection Agency EQS Exceptional Quality Solids compost FAA Fine Aggregate Angularity asphalt aggregate FCM Fracture Critical Member steel test FEMA Federal Emergency Management Agency FHWA Federal Highway Administration Department of Transportation FRP Fiber Reinforced Polymer FSS Federal Specifications and Standards General Services Administration GGBFS Ground Granulated Blast Furnace Slag GS Granulated Slag HDPE High Density Polyethylene HMWM High Molecular Weight Methacrylate ICEA Insulated Cable Engineers Association IEEE Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers IES Illuminating Engineering Society IMSA International Municipal Signal Association IPCEA Insulated Power Cable Engineers Association IPS International Pipe Standard ISSA International Slurry Seal Association ITE Institute of Transportation Engineers IZEU Inorganic Zinc Epoxy Urethane JMF Job Mix Formula LED Light Emitting Diode LWT Loaded Wheel Test asphalt test MBF Thousand Board Feet wood MC Medium Cure asphalt emulsion MCB Microchannel Bus traffic controller MOV Metal Oxide Varistor traffic controller MPI Magnetic Particle Inspection steel test MSG Maximum Specific Gravity asphalt MTD Maximum Theoretical Density asphalt NACE National Association of Corrosion Engineers NCHRP National Cooperative Highway Research Program NEMA National Electrical Manufacturers Association NHI National Highway Institute NIST National Institute of Standards and Technology NOI Notice of Intent NPDES National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System OAC Ohio Administrative Code ODOT Ohio Department of Transportation OEPA Ohio Environmental Protection Agency OH Open Hearth aggregate OHWM Ordinary High Water Mark OMM Office of Materials Management the Central Office Laboratory OMUTCD Ohio Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices ORC Ohio Revised Code ORDC Ohio Rail Development Commission OSHA Occupational Safety and Health Administration OTE Office of Traffic Engineering OWPCA Ohio Water Pollution Control Act OZEU Organic Zinc Epoxy Urethane PAT Project Average Thickness concrete test PAV Pressure Aging Vessel asphalt binder test PB Polybutylene conduit PCC Portland Cement Concrete PCS Petroleum Contaminated Soil PDA Pile Dynamic Analysis steel piling PE Polyethylene conduit PG Performance Grade asphalt binder grading system pH Potential of Hydrogen PLS Pure Live Seed PVC Polyvinyl chloride QA Quality Assurance QC Quality Control QCFS Quality Control Fabricator Specialist structures QCP Quality Control Program or Plan or Points steel test QCQC Quality Control Qualification Committee QPL Qualified Products List RAP Reclaimed Asphalt Pavement RAS Reclaimed Asphalt Shingles RC Rapid Cure asphalt emulsion REA Rural Electrification Administration RFI Radio Frequency Interference traffic controller RH Relative Humidity RMS Root Mean Square traffic controller RPCC Recycled Portland Cement Concrete RPM Raised Pavement Marker traffic RS Rapid Set asphalt emulsion RTFO Rolling ThinFilm Oven asphalt binder test RUS Rural Utilities Service SAE Society of Automotive Engineers SBA Styrene Butadiene Amine SBR Styrene Butadiene Rubber SBS Styrene Butadiene Styrene SCD Standard Construction Drawing SDS Safety Data Sheets SF Standard Fabricated members structures SI International System of Units Metric SM AASHTOWare Project Sitemanager SMA Stone Matrix Asphalt SPD Surge Protection Device traffic controller SPST Single Pole Single Throw traffic controller SS Slow Set asphalt emulsion SSD Saturated Surface Dry aggregate SSPC Society for Protective Coatings SWPPP Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan TAP Traffic Authorized Product TCE Trichloroethylene TMPTA Trimethyolpropane Triacrylate paint TNP Total Neutralizing Power TODS TouristOriented Directional Signs TSEC Temporary Sediment and Erosion Control TSR Tensile Strength Ratio asphalt mix test UF Unique Fabricated members structures UL Underwriters Laboratories Inc. USACE United States Army Corps of Engineers USC United States Code VA Verification Acceptance VAC Volts Alternating Current VCA Volume of Coarse Aggregate asphalt mix test VECP Value Engineering Change Proposal VMA Voids in the Mineral Aggregate VME VersaModule Eurocard traffic controller WDT Watchdog Timer WEAP Wave Equation Analysis steel piling WPS Welding Procedure Specification steel test WZRPM Work Zone Raised Pavement Marker traffic XCU Explosion Collapse and Underground .
The graded portion of a highway within top and side slopes prepared as a foundation for the pavement structure and shoulder .
The portion of a Roadbed upon which the pavement structure and shoulders are constructed .
Do not use off road vehicles on bases or pavements unless permitted by the DCA in writing .
Do not haul on concrete pavement base or structures before the expiration of the curing period .
Maintain the previous courses or subgrade during all construction operations when placing a course upon other courses of embankment base subgrade concrete or asphalt pavement or other similar items previously constructed .
F. Changes the type or buildup of permanent pavement .
Prior to the initiation of abrasive coating removal pavement cutting or any other construction operation that generates dust demonstrate to the Engineer that construction related dust will be controlled with appropriate Reasonable Available Control Measures RACM as described in OEPA Engineering Guide .
These safety items include but are not limited to signs pavement markings guardrail attenuators and signals .
Raised pavement markers RPM are required safety items if the roadway section involved had RPMs before the project started .
All safety items are in place including permanent pavement markings. . Traffic is in its final pattern. . A completed portion of the project constitutes a completed geographic section of the project or a direction of traffic on a divided highway. . Is in accordance with other contract provisions .
All work on the bridge and approaches are complete including all safety items and permanent pavement markings . .
This work consists of removing entirely or in part and disposing of all buildings fences guardrails structures old pavements abandoned pipe lines storage tanks septic tanks privy vaults and other obstructions not designated or permitted to remain except for utilities and obstructions to be removed and disposed of under other items in the Contract .
Raze remove and dispose of all buildings and foundations structures fences guardrails old pavements abandoned pipe lines storage tanks septic tanks privy vaults and other obstructions within the RightofWay except for utilities and those items where other provisions have been made for removal .
Use Item Structural Backfill when the removed item is under the proposed pavement or paved shoulder and when the site limits the use of compaction equipment larger than an ton metric tons roller otherwise the Contractor may use Item embankment material .
As designated remove and dispose of the existing wearing course concrete base course concrete pavement asphalt wearing course on brick or concrete base concrete walks concrete steps concrete gutters stone or concrete curbs and concrete traffic dividers .
If removing only a portion of an existing pavement walk step gutter curb or traffic divider saw or otherwise cut a neat joint at the removal limit if it does not occur at an existing joint .
If Item Pavement Removed is specified in the Contract remove all asphalt concrete or brick from the surface to the bottom of the pavement courses as shown on the plans .
When removed pavement is replaced with embankment material the Department will pay for the embankment material under the applicable or pay item .
When pipe is removed from beneath existing pavement the Department will pay for pavement removal under the applicable pay item for pavement removal or excavation and the Department will pay for new pavement under the applicable pavement pay item .
Recycled asphalt pavement RAP that is blended to meet the requirements in .. B .
Selected material of planned thickness placed on the subgrade as a foundation for other bases or asphalt or concrete pavements .
The base is a part of the pavement structure .
Remove all existing pavement before the embankment construction .
Keep new and existing pavement and the paved area of the berm clear of earth stockpiles or other berm materials .
Locate sound pavement edges and cut and trim pavement to a neat line .
However the cross section may vary below the plan grades by less than inch mm at the pavement edge and by less than inches mm elsewhere .
Construct or fine grade the subgrade to within inch mm of the plan grade as measured with a foot m straightedge applied to the surface parallel to the centerline of the pavement .
Compact the subgrade under pavements to a depth of inches mm below the subgrade surface and inches mm beyond the edge of the surface of the pavement paved shoulders or paved medians .
If an aggregate base is not a part of the pavement design excavate the subgrade feet .
If an aggregate base is part of the pavement design reduce the above foot .
m below the bottom of the asphalt or concrete pavement .
The Department will measure inches mm beyond the edge of the pavement surface paved shoulders and paved medians .
For areas not under pavements or paved shoulders the Contractor may use a spring tooth or disk harrow in place of the powerdriven rotary type mixer by modifying the above procedure as follows .
Trim unsound or broken edges of asphalt concrete or concrete pavement to a line established by the Engineer .
The Department will measure Linear Grading Reshaping Under Guardrail and Preparing Subgrade for Shoulder Paving by the number of either stations or miles meters or kilometers completed and accepted along each side of the pavement .
This work consists of partial depth removal of existing pavement in areas exhibiting deterioration at the surface applying tack coat and placing and compacting asphalt concrete . .
Remove pavement to the depth shown on the plans .
Remove the pavement to the specified depth within the designated limits without loosening or otherwise damaging adjacent pavement .
Dispose of removed pavement according to .
Place and compact approved asphalt concrete meeting the design requirements of the item shown in the pay item description in one or more lifts as necessary to finish flush with the adjacent pavement surface .
Thoroughly compact the final lift using a Type I pneumatic tire roller conforming to .. As the rolling progresses add additional asphalt concrete as necessary to produce a smooth surface flush with the adjacent pavement surface .
The Department will measure the quantity of Partial Depth Pavement Repair by the number of square yards square meters or cubic yards cubic meters of pavement repaired in the complete and accepted work calculated using the dimensions established by the Engineer . .
This work consists of the full depth removal of existing rigid pavement correcting the subgrade placing and compacting asphalt concrete and restoring the shoulders . .
Clean all vertical faces of the existing pavement and coat them with asphalt material according to .. . Placement of Asphalt Concrete .
Construct the pavement replacement by placing and compacting Item Type or mm material in two or more lifts according to ..
Thoroughly compact the final lift using a pneumatic tire roller conforming to .. As the rolling progresses add additional asphalt concrete as necessary to produce a smooth surface flush with the adjacent pavement surface .
The Department will measure the quantity of Full Depth Rigid Pavement Removal and Flexible Replacement by the number of square yards square meters of rigid pavement repaired in the complete and accepted work calculated using the dimensions established by the Engineer .
The Department will not measure additional cuts made to facilitate the removal of the pavement .
Payment is full compensation for furnishing all materials including aerosol spray paint removing pavement correcting the subgrade placing flexible pavement sealing and restoring the shoulders .
Include the cost of removal disposal and replacement of pavement damaged adjacent to the repair area in the contract unit price for Full Depth Rigid Pavement Removal and Flexible Replacement .
This work consists of removing existing asphalt concrete brick portland cement concrete or aggregate pavement courses shaping and compacting the exposed material and placing new asphalt concrete pavement or aggregate and asphalt concrete pavement courses .
Repair the full depth of the pavement unless otherwise shown on the plans .
Cut the existing pavement at the limits specified and as necessary to prevent disturbing or undermining the remaining pavement during removal .
Completely remove pavement in the repair area to the specified depth without displacing undermining or otherwise damaging the remaining pavement .
Dispose of removed pavement according to .
Before placing asphalt concrete clean all vertical faces of the existing pavement and coat them with asphalt material according to .. Place the replacement material in lifts as the Engineer directs .
Finish the final lift flush with the adjacent pavement surface .
Thoroughly compact the final lift using a pneumatic tire roller conforming to .. As the rolling progresses add additional asphalt concrete as necessary to produce a smooth surface flush with the adjacent pavement surface .
The Department will measure the quantity of Pavement Repair by either the number of square yards square meters or cubic yards cubic meters of pavement repaired in the complete and accepted work calculated using the dimensions established by the Engineer . .
Payment is full compensation for furnishing all materials including aerosol spray paint and replacement and restoration materials cutting removing and disposing of existing pavement shaping and compacting the exposed underlying material placing new pavement and restoring the shoulders .
The Department will not pay for additional work to repair damage caused by the pavement sawing or pavement removal .
Remove irregularities such as bumps corrugations and wheel ruts when required to establish a new pavement surface elevation or crossslope .
Implement effective measures to control dust pavement contamination and the scattering of loose particles during planing and cleaning operations .
If planing damages the adjacent pavement repair the damaged area to the Engineers satisfaction .
Ensure that the repaired area matches the adjacent pavement in terms of smoothness and mix type . .
Patch areas of the planed surface that the Engineer designates that have spalling or dislodged unsound pavement .
Level and compact new material flush to the adjacent planed pavement . .
This work consists of full depth removal of existing pavement removing subbase where specified compacting the subgrade furnishing and placing dowels tiebars and mesh where specified placing consolidating finishing and curing new portland cement concrete to the level of the adjacent portland cement concrete pavement replacing wearing course where required and restoring affected shoulders. . Materials .
Saw cut the existing rigid pavement to the full depth at the limits of the area designated by the Engineer using a diamond saw blade .
Where there is an existing asphalt concrete overlay on top of the concrete pavement to be removed the Contractor may make either a full depth saw cut through the asphalt concrete overlay and the concrete pavement or make an offset saw cut through the asphalt concrete overlay .
If making an offset saw cut through the asphalt concrete overlay remove the overlay as necessary to provide clearance for the full depth saw cut through the concrete pavement .
The Contractor may elect to make additional cuts to facilitate the removal of the pavement .
Remove pavement in the repair area by the liftout method without damaging or undermining the remaining pavement .
Vertically lift the pavement out of the repair area .
Dispose of removed pavement according to Item .
Do not break the pavement and clean out the material using a backhoe unless the Engineer determines that the liftout method is not feasible due to deteriorated pavement or existing asphalt concrete repairs .
If the bottom face of the adjacent concrete pavement is deteriorated for a height greater than onefourth the thickness of the rigid pavement make additional full depth saw cuts as directed by the Engineer along the full width of the lane or lanes to remove the deteriorated areas .
Repair pavement damaged during the pavement sawing or pavement removal according to Item or Item . .
After removing the pavement full depth and before installing dowels or tiebars shape and recompact the subgrade to the satisfaction of the Engineer .
Use concrete to replace any subgrade material removed as part of the rigid pavement replacement . .
Do not place any portland cement concrete for rigid pavement replacement until the grout around the dowels and tiebars has hardened .
Place the straightedge parallel to the pavement centerline with half of the straightedge resting on the adjacent pavement and draw the straightedge across the patch to test the patch edges .
Texture the new concrete surface similar to that of the surrounding pavement .
If maintaining traffic in adjacent lanes schedule work in order to place the concrete in the prepared repair area within hours after removing pavement .
The Department will not measure additional cuts made to facilitate the removal of the pavement . .
Payment is full compensation for furnishing all materials including paint developing and testing the concrete mix removing pavement by any method removing subbase for undercut replacement compacting subbase and subgrade placing rigid pavement including concrete necessary to replace removed subbase or subgrade furnishing and placing dowels tiebars and mesh performing maturity testing and acceptance placing maintaining removing and disposing of temporary patches and restoring the shoulders .
The Department will not pay for additional work to repair damage caused by pavement sawing pavement drilling or pavement removal .
This work consists of bonded patching of portland cement concrete pavements at spall areas adjacent to cracks or joints or other areas of the pavement as designated by the Engineer .
Operate chipping hammers at an angle of less than degrees measured from the surface of the pavement .
During removal of unsound concrete remove all pavement reinforcing exposed in the patch areas using a cutting tool or a torch . .
Place the straightedge parallel to the pavement centerline with the ends resting on the adjacent pavement and draw the straightedge across the patch .
Texture the new concrete surface similar to that of the surrounding pavement. . Curing and Opening to Traffic .
This work consists of diamond grinding and texturing Portland cement concrete pavement longitudinally to substantially eliminate joint and crack faulting and to restore proper riding characteristics to the pavement surface. . Equipment .
Provide grinding equipment that is a power driven selfpropelled machine that is specifically designed to smooth and texture Portland cement concrete pavement with diamond blades or diamond impregnated cylinder rings .
Ensure the equipment is capable of correcting the pavement profile and providing proper cross slope on the concrete pavement .
m a set of pivoting tandem bogey wheels at the front of the machine and rear wheels that travel and track in the fresh cut pavement .
Provide all necessary supplies to fully operate and graph the results of testing the ground pavement for smoothness .
The plans will designate the areas of pavement surfaces to be ground .
Ensure the operation results in pavement that conforms to the typical crosssection and the requirements specified for the final surface finish however it is the intention of this specification that the faulting at joints and cracks be eliminated and the overall riding characteristics be restored within the limits specified .
To accomplish the smoothness required grinding may not be required on percent of the pavement surface .
During initial grinding operations use the profiler to test the pavement surface as soon as the concrete has been ground full lane width .
Produce a pavement surface that is true to grade with the ground area consisting of a longitudinal corduroytype texture .
Measure the finished pavement surface for riding quality .
The Engineer will witness the testing of the pavement surfaces wheel paths .
The wheel paths are located parallel to the centerline of the pavement and approximately feet .
Maintain the alignment of the profiler with reference to the pavement edge at all times .
Measure the entire length of pavement event marking the profile runs such that the data can later be identified when the profile sensors is within .
m of any bridge deck pressure relief joint approach slab or pavement not included in the grinding area identified in the plans or established by the Engineer .
Ensure the transverse slope of the pavement is uniform to a degree that no depressions or misalignments of slope greater inch in feet mm in .
The Department will measure diamond grinding by the number of square yards square meters of pavement ground and accepted .
Payment is full compensation for furnishing all labor materials tools equipment and incidentals and for doing all work involved in grinding the existing surface removing residue cleaning the pavement and testing with a profiler .
Furnish equipment to create slots that has a power driven gang type assembly consisting of diamond blade saws capable of sawing a minimum of six sawcuts at one time to the required dimensions without damage to the surrounding pavement .
Construct inch mm wide slots into the pavement to the required depth to place the center of the bar at middepth in the concrete slab .
Ensure the slots are parallel to the centerline of the pavement .
Ensure any blasting operation does not damage the surrounding pavement .
Ensure the filler board extends from the bottom of the slot to the surface of the pavement .
Ensure dowel bars vary no more than inch mm from parallel to the pavement surface and the centerline of the pavement .
Repair any damage to the pavement due to the Contractors operation at no expense to the Department .
The Department will not pay for any additional work to repair damage to the pavement caused by the Contractor .
The Contractor may use reclaimed asphalt concrete pavement according to .. OMM will establish the required binder content within a range of .
If using Item Asphalt Concrete Base as a subbase for a rigid pavement or base do not exceed a variation of inch mm .
In the design of the asphalt concrete base the requirements of Item apply except as follows The Contractor may use reclaimed asphalt concrete pavement according to .. Should problems with proper coating or other material issues related to the use of reclaimed asphalt concrete pavement or reclaimed asphalt shingles be evident OMM may restrict the allowable percentage of reclaimed asphalt concrete pavement to the reduced limits shown in tables .
Cover the aggregate base with the next layer of pavement before the end of the construction season .
Provide dowels at transverse contraction joints in mainline pavement ramps accelerationdeceleration lanes or collectordistributor lanes .
Dowels for contraction joints in concrete shoulders on mainline pavement ramps accelerationdeceleration lanes or collectordistributor lanes are not required unless the contraction joint is located within feet m of a pressure relief joint .
to square feet per gallon m²L of treated pavement surface .
Ensure that pavement surface variations do not exceed inch in feet mm in m. Impressing station numbers into the plastic concrete as specified in .
This work consists of rubblizing and rolling reinforced concrete pavement before placing an asphalt concrete pavement. . Materials .
Use a selfcontained and selfpropelled unit of either the resonant frequency type or the multiple head breaker type for rubblizing the concrete pavement .
Make a full depth saw cut or cut load transfer devices at joints on ramps or mainline where the rubblizing abuts concrete pavement or approach slabs that are to remain in place permanently or temporarily for maintenance of traffic .
Before placing the initial asphalt concrete course compact the rubblized pavement with two passes of the vibratory roller .
Leave steel reinforcement in place in the rubblized pavement .
Do not allow traffic on the rubblized pavement before the asphalt concrete base and intermediate courses are in place .
Do not allow more than hours to elapse between rubblizing the pavement and placing the initial asphalt concrete course .
However in the event of rain the Engineer may waive this time limitation to allow sufficient time for the rubblized pavement to dry to the Engineers satisfaction .
If the Engineer waives the time limitation cease rubblizing the pavement until the Engineer allows paving to resume . .
The Engineer will use the width of the concrete pavement prior to rubblizing and will measure the length along the centerline of each roadway or ramp .
This work consists of cracking and seating nonreinforced concrete pavement or concrete base before placing an asphalt concrete pavement. . Equipment .
The Engineer will measure the area of nonreinforced concrete pavement or concrete base satisfactorily cracked and seated in square yards square meters .
The Engineer will use the width of the concrete pavement prior to cracking and will measure the length along the centerline of each roadway or ramp . .
This specification is applicable to all types of asphalt concrete pavements irrespective of gradation of aggregate kind and amount of asphalt binder or pavement use .
The asphalt concrete pavement thickness shown on the plans or stated in the Proposal is for exclusive use in calculating the weight required to be placed per unit of surface area . .
Bulking may be shown through testing such as ASTM D or through field failure such as but not limited to flushing on newer pavement or apparent overasphalting in production .
Potential pavement performance problems due to poor control of steel slag aggregate include bulking poor gradation and specific gravity control resulting in highly variable void properties excess soft pieces resulting in pock marks flushing etc .
Provide reclaimed asphalt concrete pavement RAP andor reclaimed asphalt shingles RAS according to the following requirements when choosing to use them in a mix .
In addition to the above surface temperature requirements do not place surface courses if the air temperature is less than F C. For any surface course with a polymer modified asphalt binder ensure that the paving surface is at least F C and the air temperature is at least F C. Do not schedule the placement of any surface course with a polymer modified asphalt binder after November regardless of pavement or air temperature . .
Where approved subgrade or pavement courses previously constructed under the Contract become loosened rutted or otherwise defective correct the deficiency according to the contract item or items involved before the spreading of a subsequent pavement course .
If placing asphalt concrete against a vertical pavement face curb gutter manhole or other structure clean the surface of foreign material and apply a thick uniform coating of .
Spread the mixture at a rate calculated using the specified thickness and the compacted width of the pavement course being placed and the weighttovolume conversion factors established in ..
Maintain the actual rate of spreading the mixture equal to the required calculated rate within the tolerance specified in .. For pavement courses specified for leveling the actual rate of spreading the mixture may vary from the required calculated rate as approved by the Engineer to accomplish the intended purpose .
Remove and replace or otherwise correct in a manner satisfactory to the Engineer any portion of the pavement course found to be defective in surface texture or composition before or after compaction .
Maintain sufficient control of the spreading equipment with regard to line and grade references so that the pavement course when compacted as specified is in reasonable conformance with the Contract Documents .
Where the edge of the new pavement is significantly rounded trim it to a vertical face before placing the adjacent pavement .
On projects where traffic is allowed to cross the edge of the new pavement lane complete the longitudinal joint of the adjacent lane or shoulder within hours .
Prior to placing adjacent pavement trim any locations along the longitudinal joint that deviate horizontally from the point of reference .
Maintain a consistent overlap of to inches to mm on adjacent pavement when closing longitudinal joints .
If a longitudinal profile is specified by elevations on the plans do not allow the completed pavement surface to deviate more than inch mm at any point from parallel with the specified profile .
The requirements of this paragraph do not apply to small incidental areas of pavement less than feet m in length .
Provide a Field Quality Control Supervisor FQCS holding Supplement Field Quality Control Supervisor approval and who is a company employee who is routinely and usually at the paving site during placement of any nontemporary asphalt concrete pavement .
job start responses to poor test results or field mix problems aggregate stock testing reclaimed asphalt concrete pavement checks moistures and any other testing necessary to control materials not already defined in these Specifications .
Ensure that the spray bar will maintain a constant height above the pavement under variable load conditions .
Do not apply the asphalt material if the surface temperature is below the minimum placement temperature for the pavement course to be placed as specified in .. .
If paving asphalt concrete directly onto Portland cement concrete or brick pavement tack the pavement with SBR asphalt emulsion conforming to ..
Only apply the asphalt material to areas that will be covered by a pavement course during the same day .
Take care to clean the edges of road to be primed to ensure uniform application of the asphalt material directly onto the existing base or pavement surface .
This work consists of saw cutting and sealing the finished surface of the asphalt concrete pavement and shoulders directly over and in line with transverse joints in the underlying Portland cement concrete pavement. . Materials .
Locate the sawed joints directly over each transverse pavement joint in the concrete pavement including joints at fulldepth pavement repairs .
Extend the transverse saw cut joints the full width of the asphalt over the concrete pavement and paved shoulders .
This work consists of constructing a cold laid polymer modified emulsified asphalt pavement course to fill ruts or provide a leveling andor surface course for existing pavements .
Apply the mixture only when it is not raining pavement has no standing water and the existing pavement surface and atmospheric temperature is a minimum of F C and rising and there is no forecast of an atmospheric temperature below F C within hours from the time the mixture is applied .
Between September and May do not apply the mixture if the existing pavement surface temperature is less than F C. . Mixing Equipment .
Remove raised pavement markers according to .
Remove all existing pavement markings except .
Apply a tack coat to the existing pavement surface conforming to Item CSSh or .
When specified place leveling courses to cover the entire pavement area as specified .
Place the leveling course in a manner to maintain or improve the ride quality of the existing pavement .
Take care to restore the designed profile of the pavement crosssection .
Take care to restore the designed profile of the pavement crosssection .
Place the rut fill course in a manner to maintain or improve the ride quality of the existing pavement .
For leveling and surface courses provide a smooth feathered neat seam of to inches to mm where two passes meet at the pavement centerline and at edge of shoulder .
In variable width pavement sections minimize overlap and feather overlapping pass on to the completed surface .
Ensure that the microsurfacing cures at a rate that will permit traffic on the pavement within hour after application without damaging the pavement surface .
However should the Contractor experience a curing condition that does not allow the opening to traffic within one hour work out an arrangement agreeable to the Engineer before releasing traffic on the pavement .
If a section of pavement is not going to be exposed to traffic within hours compact it with a pneumatic tire roller after curing .
Date air temperature pavement temperature and humidity. . Binder temperature percent residue and pounds per gallon grams per liter .
The courses applied are in compliance with the application requirements of this specification and C. The pavement cracks are sealed prior to placement of the microsurface and D. The Quality Control requirements are met and E. The pavement is uniform in composition and texture free from excessive scratch marks tears rippling and other surface irregularities segregation raveling rutting holes debris etc .
The Department will review the pavement before the end of the two year performance review period to determine if remedial action is required .
Replace pavement markings or raised pavement markers RPM removed obliterated or damaged while performing a Remedial Action with equivalent approved pavement markings or RPMs products at no cost to the Department .
The Contractor is not responsible for pavement damage beyond the Contractors control i.e .
The Department will base the width of the pavement course on the width shown on the plans specified in this specification or directed by the Engineer .
The Department will measure the number of raised pavement markers removed .
The Department will pay for removal of existing pavement markings according to .
The Department will pay for removal of existing raised pavement markers according to Item Raised Pavement Markers Removed .
Place the chip seal when the pavement temperature is between F C and F C. Do not schedule the performance of this work for the time period before May or after September .
Clean the pavement according to ..
If necessary clean areas of the pavement with a hand broom .
Remove all existing pavement markings except .
Remove the raised pavement markers according to .. Do not place material until the Engineer approves the existing surface. . Binder Application .
If the target rate needs adjustment due to the gradation of the aggregate or due to existing surface conditions of the pavement immediately notify the Engineer and document the new rate by stationing. . Construction Operation .
Within hours of placement but after the binder sets sweep the pavement as needed to remove all loose aggregate .
If the pavement can not be swept within the hour period due to problems associated with the stone moisture binder breaking humidity or other unknown the Engineer may suspend the operation until the problem is resolved or more suitable conditions are obtained to maintain the hour time frame for sweeping .
m beyond the edge of the chip seal to help prevent migration of loose aggregate back onto the pavement .
Do not reuse aggregate from a chip seal that is swept from the pavement or that is already loose off the pavement edge .
Perform a final sweeping immediately before application of permanent pavement markings or a fog seal if a fog seal is required .
On twolane roads or pavements where traffic is maintained on a chip seal constructed that workday provide a traffic control pilot vehicle operated at no more than miles per hour kmh in the immediate work area .
Date air temperature pavement temperature and humidity. . Binder temperature. . Beginning and ending stations. . Target binder and aggregate application rates. . Yield checks on binder three per day minimum. . Yield checks on aggregate three per day minimum. . Gradation moisture content and station One sample from spreader box at production start one random sample during the day and any other samples when directed by the Engineer . .
The Department will review the pavement before the end of the two year performance review period to determine if remedial action is required .
Replace pavement markings or raised pavement markers RPM removed obliterated or damaged while performing a Remedial Action with pavement markings or RPMs equal approved products at no cost to the Department .
The Contractor is not responsible for pavement damage beyond the Contractors control i.e .
Defect Severity Threshold Levels Surface Patterns Severe light and heavy lines over the pavement surface of segment length affected continuous or localized Bleeding Flushing Moderate excess binder on surface loss of stonetire contact not subject to wearing off quickly of segment length affected continuously or total of localized problems Loss of Aggregate Moderate patches of aggregate loss of segment length affected continuously or total of localized problems .
The Department will measure the number of raised pavement markers removed if a Double Chip Seal is specified . .
The Department will pay for removal of existing pavement markings according to Items and as specified .
The Department will pay for removal of existing raised pavement markers according to Item Raised Pavement Markers Removed .
This work consists of preparing and sealing pavement cracks with a hot applied crack sealant. . Materials .
Use a propane lance unit capable of producing a blast of hot air that operates at F C and a gas velocity of feet per second ms. Use mechanical and power driven routing and sawing equipment capable of following close to the path of cracks and of widening the cracks to the required dimension without causing excessive spalling or damage to the adjacent pavement .
For Types I and IV crack sealants fill the entire crack reservoir with the sealant from the bottom up to approximately inch mm above the pavement surface .
The Engineer will not accept the work if the band of sealant on the pavement surface is greater than inches mm wide .
The Engineer will not accept the work if the thickness on the pavement is greater than inches mm . .
Do not place the asphalt concrete when the surface of the existing pavement is less than F C or the air temperature is less than F C. .
Remove raised pavement markers according to ..
The Department will measure the number of raised pavement markers removed . .
The Department will pay for removal of existing raised pavement markers according to Item Raised Pavement Markers Removed .
This specification includes general requirements applicable to all types of asphalt concrete pavements where the Contractor is responsible for performing the mix design and quality control .
If the proposed JMF contains any gravel coarse aggregate or contains more than percent natural sand or contains more than percent reclaimed asphalt concrete pavement containing gravel coarse aggregate or is designed according to Item conduct the following tests Moisture damage potential test Supplement Washed gradation AASHTO T as modified by Supplement Adherent fines test for each component ASTM D Modify the mix with one of the following antistrip additives if the results of the moisture damage potential test show the Tensile Strength Ratio TSR of the asphalt concrete mix to be less than .
Correct obvious pavement problems according to ..
If the Department has any suspicion that other mixture composition or pavement problems exist the Monitoring Team will conduct an initial investigation through review of data andor sampling of the asphalt pavement .
This work consists of gyratory mix design material and quality control requirements for constructing a Superpave asphalt concrete pavement surface or intermediate course .
The asphalt concrete pavement course consists of aggregate and asphalt binder mixed in a central plant and spread and compacted on a prepared surface .
The Contractor may use reclaimed asphalt concrete pavement according to .. Test design volumetric properties at Ndes .
Reclaimed asphalt concrete pavement passing the inch mm sieve may be used as filler only .
Do not account for reclaimed asphalt concrete pavement binder content .
Do not use reclaimed asphalt concrete pavement except as described in D above .
During the construction of a test strip perform one set of quality control tests as described above and obtain and test random cores of the compacted pavement .
Compact shoulders using the same equipment and procedures as used on the mainline pavement .
Payment for compaction of the completed mainline pavement and ramps is by Lot based upon the degree to which density is attained .
Payment for shoulders depends on the degree to which the density is obtained on the adjacent mainline pavement lane or ramp .
However when a cold longitudinal joint is made between a mainline pavement lane and an adjoining shoulder payment for the shoulder will be based on the degree to which the density is obtained on the shoulder .
A Lot consists of an area of pavement placed during a production day including the shoulders .
Within hours after the pavement is placed obtain ten cores for each Lot at random locations the Engineer determines .
Both mainline pavement and ramps will be included in Lot determinations .
Determine by random number the longitudinal location of the joint core and which pavement edge to be cored when the mat placed has both confined and unconfined edges .
Properly compact the asphalt concrete used for filling the hole and leave it flush with the pavement .
Construct joints according to .. Make a hot longitudinal joint between the mainline pavement lane and the adjoining shoulder and all ramps and the adjoining shoulders .
If a hot longitudinal joint is specified between the mainline pavement lanes the Contractor may construct a cold longitudinal joint between the mainline pavement lanes and the adjoining shoulders .
Cold longitudinal joints in mainline pavement will be tested according to ..
This work consists of constructing a pavement composed of reinforced portland cement concrete on a prepared surface. . Materials .
When the concrete pavement bid item includes with QCQA provide complete quality control of the concrete manufacturing placing and curing operations and quality control testing of the work conforming to Item .
When the concrete pavement bid item includes with QCQA the Engineer will perform Quality Assurance conforming to Item . . Equipment .
Construct pavement using either fixed forms or slip form paving equipment that conforms to the following A .
Provide machines capable of operating on two side forms on adjacent lanes of pavement and one side form or on two adjacent lanes as necessary .
When placing concrete adjacent to an existing pavement lane take measures to protect the adjacent pavement from damage .
Use straight edge side forms made of steel and of a depth equal to the specified pavement thickness .
If the radius of the circular pavement edge is feet m or less use flexible or curved forms of a design acceptable to the Engineer .
Do not use builtup forms except to construct pavement of a specified thickness whose total area for the project is less than square yards m. Provide forms with adequate joint locks to tightly join ends of abutting form sections together .
Place concrete using an industrystandard slip form paver designed to spread consolidate screed and finish the freshly placed concrete in one complete pass of the machine and with a minimum of hand finishing providing a dense and homogeneous pavement .
Consolidate the full width and depth of concrete pavement placed by a single pass of approved internal vibrators .
Electronic vibration monitoring devices are not required for paving machines used to construct shoulders gores or for any construction project with a total of less than square yards m of pavement .
Accurately control the finish grade of the pavement from a preset grade line parallel to the finish grade .
In areas where adjoining concrete pavement is to be constructed ensure that the surface at the edge of the pavement on either side of the longitudinal joint does not vary more than inch mm below the typical section .
Ensure that the outside edges of the pavement does not vary more than inch mm below the typical section .
Ensure that all pavement edges are nearly vertical with no projections or keyways exceeding inch mm .
After the subgrade or subbase is placed and compacted to the required density use an automatic subgrading machine to cut the areas for pavement and the areas that will support the paving machine to the plan elevation .
Do not operate mechanical equipment other than saws on newly placed concrete pavement prior to opening to traffic according to ..
When the width of pavement being placed in one operation is feet .
m or more and the total area of any given width of pavement on the project exceeds square yards m use a separate standard manufacture selfpropelled concrete placerspreader that receives concrete into a hopper adjacent to the area to be paved delivers the concrete in front of the slipform paver and uniformly spreads the concrete at the proper thickness for the full width being paved .
Place pavement mesh of the size and at the locations within the concrete slab shown on the standard construction drawings .
When placing reinforced concrete pavement in two layers strike off the entire width of the bottom layer to a length and depth that allows laying the mat of reinforcement on the concrete and in its final position without further manipulation .
When reinforced concrete pavement is placed in one layer and in advance of placing concrete position and securely anchor the reinforcement to the underlying base or pavement .
Unless otherwise directed construct all transverse joints normal to the centerline of the pavement lane and of the type dimensions and at locations specified .
and to the Engineers satisfaction the Contractor may operate the sawing equipment necessary to saw joints on the newly constructed pavement .
Twenty four hours before placing concrete pavement create a HIPERPAV project date file according to Supplement .
Accurately mark both edges of the pavement with the correct locations of all joints to be saw cut .
For pavement less than or equal to inches mm saw the joint to a minimum depth of one fourth the specified pavement thickness .
For pavements greater than inches mm thick saw the joint to a minimum depth of onethird the specified pavement thickness .
Unless otherwise directed construct all transverse joints normal to the centerline of the pavement lane and of the type dimensions and at locations specified .
Immediately before paving remove all shipping and spacer wires from the dowel basket assemblies check that the assemblies are held firmly in place and check that the dowels are parallel to the grade and parallel to centerline of pavement .
For each load transfer assembly provide a continuous assembly between longitudinal joints or between the longitudinal joint and pavement edge .
When concrete pavement is placed on an existing concrete pavement or on a stabilized base secure dowel basket assemblies from lateral and vertical displacement during concrete placement using powerdriven fasteners and appropriate clips or pins driven in predrilled holes of a diameter slightly less than the pin diameter .
The Contractor may propose to use a slip form paver with mechanical dowel bar inserter DBI to place dowels in transverse contraction joints the full thickness of pavement and spaced according to the standard construction drawings .
𝑅𝑖𝑘𝑒𝑘𝑒 𝐷𝑘𝑤𝑒𝑘 𝑀𝑖𝑟𝑍𝑘𝑖𝑒𝑘𝑘𝑒𝑘𝑟 𝑅𝐷𝑀 𝐻𝑘𝑟𝑖𝑧𝑘𝑘𝑟𝑍𝑘 𝑅𝑘𝑒𝑤 𝑉𝑒𝑟𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑍𝑘 𝑅𝑖𝑘𝑟 Joint Score JS Evaluated for a single transverse joint between adjacent longitudinal joints andor pavement edges i.e .
mm SDM Joint Score Trigger JST A scaling of the Joint Score risk value to account for the actual number of dowels required in a single joint for pavement width other than ft . m calculated as 𝐽𝑘𝑖𝑘𝑟 𝑅𝑐𝑘𝑟𝑒 𝑅𝑟𝑖𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑟 𝐽𝑅𝑅 𝑘𝑒 𝐷𝑘𝑤𝑒𝑘 𝐴𝑍𝑟𝑟 𝑖𝑘 𝑅𝑖𝑘𝑒𝑘𝑒 𝐽𝑘𝑖𝑘𝑟 Include the Joint Score and Joint Score Trigger for every joint scanned in the report to the Engineer .
If the pavement is constructed in two or more separately placed lanes construct the transverse expansion joints in a continuous line for the full width of the pavement and shoulders .
After coating the dowel install a sleeve of metal or other approved material approximately inches mm long with crimped end overlapping seams fitting closely around the dowel and a depression or interior projection to stop the dowel a sufficient distance from the crimped end to allow inch mm for longitudinal dowel movement with pavement expansion on one free end of each dowel .
For pavement less than or equal to inches mm thick saw contraction joints with a standard water cooled diamond bladed concrete saw to a minimum depth of onefourth of the specified pavement thickness .
For pavement greater than inches mm thick saw contraction joints to a minimum depth of onethird the specified pavement thickness .
If the pavement is constructed in two or more separately placed lanes install the joints continuous for the full width of the pavement .
Saw the pavement with sawing equipment approved by the Engineer as soon as the saw can be operated without damaging the concrete .
Use an adequate bulkhead with openings provided for dowel bars spaced as specified and shaped to fit the typical section of the pavement to form a straight joint .
If the pavement surface is dragged with a diagonal pipe float machine occasionally check the surface while the concrete is plastic .
Before the concrete initially sets round the edges of the pavement along each side of each slab and on each side of transverse expansion joints to the radius specified using an approved edging tool .
Immediately following the broom drag texture tine the pavement in the longitudinal direction using an approved device that produces uniform tine spacing inches mm apart inch deep mm and inch wide mm .
Do not tine within inches mm of pavement edges or longitudinal joints .
Only use equipment that will tine the full width of the pavement in one operation and uses string line controls for line and grade to assure straight tining texture .
Before the concrete finally sets impress complete station numbers into the pavement every feet m e.g. . Mark station equations in the pavement as shown on the plans .
Place the station numbers parallel with and facing the right edge of the pavement and centered inches .
On divided highways provide station numbers on both pavements .
m in from the outside edge of the shoulder and facing the pavement. . Curing .
On pavement with integral curb or small and irregular areas that are inaccessible to the mechanical spray machine apply the curing material by a handheld sprayer .
As soon as the forms have been removed immediately correct all honeycomb areas and coat the edges of the pavement with the curing material .
Remove forms in a manner that doesnt damage the pavement . .
After final concrete curing and cleaning the pavement surface test the pavement surface for smoothness using a foot m rolling straightedge .
Provide a two or fourwheeled device with an indicator wheel at the center that detects high and low areas in the pavement surface .
Provide equipment that actuates a pointer scale issues an audio alert or marks the pavement with paint or dye when encountering any high or low areas in excess of a preset tolerance .
Tow or walk the rolling straightedge over the completed pavement .
Locate wheel paths parallel to the pavement centerline and approximately feet m measured transversely from the center of the lane .
Maintain alignment of the rolling straightedge with reference to the pavement edge at all times .
Ensure pavement surface variations do not exceed inch in a foot mm in a m length of pavement .
For ramp pavements and for those pavements with curvature greater than degrees or with grades exceeding percent ensure the surface variations do not exceed inch in feet mm in m. Repair or replace sections of pavement containing depressions that can not be corrected by grinding as directed by the Engineer . .
When pavement tining locations are found out of conformance with .
correct the tining using power driven selfpropelled machines specifically designed to groove concrete pavement with diamond impregnated blades or diamond impregnated cylinder rings .
Furnish blades or cylinder rings mounted on an arbor head so that the resulting grooves comply with .. Furnish grooving equipment with a depth control device that will detect variations in the pavement surface and enable adjustment of the cutting head to maintain the specified groove depth .
If a pavement area was diamond ground to bring the pavements surface smoothness within the tolerances of .
that pavement area does not require tining restoration conforming to ..
As soon as feasible after completing sawing but before the pavement is open to construction equipment and traffic seal expansion joints with material conforming to .. Just before sealing thoroughly clean each joint of all foreign material using approved equipment .
When days have elapsed the Contractor may use the completed pavement for traffic including construction traffic .
MPa has been attained the Contractor may open the pavement to traffic when days have elapsed .
If necessary to open a portion of the pavement in less than days with the proviso that the pavement will be cured for a minimum of days use a high early strength concrete composed of additional .
Remove and replace or repair diagonal cracks longitudinal cracks transverse cracks spalled pavement surfaces and any pavement panels with cement balls or mud balls as approved by and at no cost to the Department .
Repair cracks by replacing the pavement the full width between longitudinal joints perpendicular to the centerline and at least feet .
Install smooth dowel bars at the interface between the original pavement and the replaced pavement section .
The Engineer may approve repair of isolated spalled pavement with Item Bonded Patching of Portland Cement Concrete Pavement .
Repair all cement balls or mud balls by coring out the area full depth with a diamond core bit and replacing the removed concrete with the same concrete as in the pavement .
Remove and replace any pavement panel with or more cement balls or mudballs .
Core pavement at the direction of the Engineer and at locations the Engineer determines according to Supplement .
For the purpose of coring the Department will consider the entire pavement area of a specified thickness a lot .
A sublot consists of square yards m of a pavement lot or major fraction thereof .
Take one random core for each sublot but not less than cores for any pavement lot cored .
If the foot m cores is more than inch mm deficient cut additional cores at foot m longitudinal intervals until a core is less than inch mm deficient until the pavement ends or until overlapping an adjacent pavement sublots core in the same lane . .
If a pavement sublot has cores more than inch mm deficient in thickness and the sublots constructed width is greater than feet .
Obtain transverse cores at a location the distance from the deficient core to the furthest edge of pavement .
The Engineer will calculate average thickness of concrete pavement placed as follows When zones of deficient thickness greater than inch mm to inch mm are allowed to remain in place the Engineer will calculate two average thicknesses .
The pavement represented by each of the two averages PAT or DZA will be calculated and paid separately .
The Engineer will determine and apply deductions to each separately placed width of pavement .
For any pavement areas removed and replaced recore those areas following this section of the specifications .
Include those core values into the calculations for average pavement thickness .
m in width or any pavement area less than square yards square meters .
Fill all core holes with concrete of the same proportions and materials used in the pavement .
Obtain an additional core at the same location as the thickness core from each pavement sublot to determine compressive strength. . For concrete pavement bid items with QCQA the AASHTO accredited laboratory will test the QC cores for compressive strength according to ASTM C . Test the QC cores from to days of age .
Determine the pay factors for individual sublots according to Table .. For concrete pavements bid items without QCQA the Department will perform the strength testing .
Payment will be made at the unit bid price upon completion of any section of pavement .
Final pay adjustments to the bid price will be made upon completion of the pavement operations and all thickness strength and smoothness data is tabulated and pay adjustments applied according to .. A through .. D. A. Pavement Thickness .
inch mm Remove and replace The DCA will determine whether pavement areas from .
When a pavement exhibits multiple deficiencies for thickness and strength the reduced unit price will be calculated for each deficiency and the lowest reduced unit price will be used .
The width equals the pavement width shown on the typical crosssection of the plans plus additional widening as the Engineer directs in writing .
Payment is full compensation for furnishing and placing all materials including reinforcing steel dowels and joint materials for furnishing the foot m rolling straightedge and for coring and testing the pavement .
For pavement found deficient in thickness or compressive strength the Department will pay a reduced price according to ..
The Department will not pay extra for pavement with an average thickness in excess of that shown on the plans .
This work consists of constructing a nonreinforced portland cement concrete pavement on a prepared surface. . Construction .
Provide dowels at transverse contraction joints in mainline pavement ramps accelerationdeceleration lanes or collectordistributor lanes .
Dowels for contraction joints in concrete shoulders on mainline pavement ramps accelerationdeceleration lanes or collectordistributor lanes are not required unless the contraction joint is located within feet m of a pressure relief joint .
If Item pavement is specified for shoulders and is tied longitudinally to Item or pavement match the joints in the shoulder pavement to the spacing and alignment of the adjacent pavement .
If making pavement repairs before Department acceptance under .
The width equals the pavement width shown on the typical crosssections of the plans plus additional widening as the Engineer directs in writing .
Payment is full compensation for furnishing and placing all materials for surface testing and for coring the pavement .
For pavement found deficient in thickness or compressive strength the Department will pay a reduced price according to ..
The Department will not make additional payment over the contract unit price for any pavement with an average thickness in excess of that shown on the plans .
The name and accreditation of the AASHTO accredited laboratory to be used for testing fresh and hardened concrete properties for structures or pavements .
For the purpose of thickness and strength determination a lot consists of the entire pavement area of the same pavement thickness and the same class of concrete .
Provide the placement sequence and placement widths for the pavement work and determine the sublot division conforming to Supplement .
During production of the concrete pavement perform the following quality checks .
Testing for opening the pavement to traffic early according to ..
Define who will be measuring the pavement thickness according to Supplement .
Define the frequency of reporting pavement thickness results to the Engineer .
Define the method and frequency of reporting pavement thickness results to the Engineer E. Concrete Strength .
Define the procedure and frequency of conditioning the subbase or subgrade before pavement placement . .
Describe the methods and monitoring frequency that will be utilized to assure tie bars are placed and conform with .. A in the finished pavement . .
Describe finishing and pavement grooving methods. . Pavement Smoothness .
Define methods to check pavement smoothness conforming to .
Report the pavement thickness measurements conforming to the form in Supplement . . Report the compressive strength test results from the QC cores sampled according to .. B with the following information a. Pavement lot b .
Conduct tests on the plastic concrete for pavement at the point of placement or at an Engineerdesignated location .
CONCRETE SLUMP Type of Work Nominal Slump inch mm Maximum Slump inch mm Concrete pavement to to Structural Concrete to to Superstructure concrete to to Nonreinforced concrete to to This nominal slump may be increased to inches mm provided the increase in slump is achieved by adding a chemical admixture conforming to the requirements of .
The groove machines shall have depth control devices that detect variations in the pavement surface and adjust the cutting head height to maintain the specified depth of the groove .
Remove existing pavement markings using a method as specified in .. G .. a .
Remove existing pavement markings using a method as specified in .. G .. a .
If asphalt pavement is to be placed directly over the water proofing membrane first apply tack coat as specified in without damaging the membrane . .
To prevent contamination of the pavement or soil park all equipment on ground covers free of cuts tears and holes .
m centers in two directions or wire fabric according to the standard construction drawing for pavement reinforcing .
When gutter constructed under this item is to be tied to an existing concrete base pavement or other rigid structure match the type and location of the joints in the gutter with those in the adjoining pavement .
Place the granular material for the full width of the trench around the underdrain and extend it to the bottom of the pavement or base as shown on the plans .
If underdrains are placed outside of the pavement or base area extend the granular material to within inches mm of the finished grade .
Place the pavement over the underdrain trench within days after placing the trench backfill .
Install the prefabricated edge underdrains against the outside wall of a inch mm trench and backfill the trench adjacent to the pavement with granular material .
Have the underdrains and outlets on fractured slab projects such as crack and seat rubblized or break and seat projects in place and functional before fracturing the existing pavement .
Construct the aggregate drains after the completion of granular pavement courses .
Excavate the trench to furnish a clean exposure of the granular pavement courses .
Adjust the location of the anchors to avoid pavement joints .
If placing sandstone curb after placing pavement fill remaining joints with dry sand to within inches mm of the surface of the pavement and fill to the pavement surface with asphalt concrete .
Where curb and combination curb and gutter is not constructed integral with or tied to the base or pavement construct inch mm wide contraction joints at feet m intervals using steel separator plates a grooving tool or a saw according to Item .
Where expansion joints occur in the abutting pavement separate the section being placed with inch mm thick .
Where the curb is integral with or tied to the base or pavement construct the same type of joints as used in the pavement .
Space joints identically with the joints in the base or pavement .
Place concrete for curb that is integral with the concrete base or pavement while the base or pavement concrete is plastic .
M tie bars vertically in the pavement at foot .
m intervals and in a line inches mm inside of and parallel to the pavement edge .
Install these tie bars to within inches mm of the subgrade or subbase and inches mm above the concrete base or pavement surface .
Water cure this horizontal construction joint between the concrete base or pavement and the curb or membrane cure the concrete base or pavement and remove the membrane before placing the curb .
Immediately before placing the concrete curb brush mortar consisting of one part cement to two parts sand with enough water to form a workable mortar into the surface area of the hardened concrete pavement or base where the curb is to be placed .
Where medians and traffic islands are not anchored to the pavement construct contraction joints at foot m intervals using steel separator plates a grooving tool or saw according to Item .
Where the medians or traffic islands are anchored to the pavement construct the same type of joints in the median or traffic island as used in the pavement .
Space the joints identically with the joints in the pavement .
Type B Conduit Storm or sanitary sewers under pavement Nonreinforced concrete pipe Class .
C. Type C Conduit Storm or sanitary sewers not under pavement Nonreinforced concrete circular pipe .
For drainage structures material used to fill the trench from the top of Bedding Material to subgrade in pavement or topsoil in vegetated areas. . Submittals A .
for Final Backfill for use as Structural Backfill for conduit Types D and E and drainage structures not located in pavement .
When conduit is installed under pavement perform the following immediately after the completion of backfill placement and compaction remove and dispose of all surplus material according to .
clear the site and replace all pavement necessary to restore traffic .
A performance inspection is not required for projects that meet all of the following All conduit is Type C Conduit plan quantities are less than feet .m All conduit has less than feet .m of maximum fill height In each phase of construction of a conduit perform the inspection no sooner than days and no later than days after the completion of the finished grade when not below pavement and after the completion of the rough subgrade when any portion of the conduit is below pavement .
When the highway under construction is being used by through traffic including periods of suspension of the Work maintain it so that it is smooth free from potholes ruts ridges bumps and other pavement deficiencies .
Maintain pipe trenches or other openings left in hard surface pavements with material of comparable quality .
D. Ensure positive drainage into structures that have inlet windows without grates during pavement overlay operations when traffic will be maintained on a pavement course lower than the inlet window .
Place steel or iron plating of at least ¼ inch mm thickness that completely covers the drilled holes prior to construction of the finished pavement course. . Traffic Control General .
Ensure that the pavement markings for traffic maintenance conform to Item .
Where the highway under construction is being used by through traffic including periods of suspension of the work furnish and maintain pavement markings lights construction signs barricades guardrail sign supports and such other traffic control devices .
Whenever it is necessary to divert the flow of traffic from its normal channel into another channel clearly mark the channel for such diverted traffic with cones drums barricades vertical panels pavement markings or arrow boards .
Furnish install maintain and when necessary remove work zone retroreflective pavement markings on existing reconstructed resurfaced or temporary roads within the work limits according to the following requirements .
The Department will compensate under the applicable contract pay item for work zone pavement marking for the ordered replacement of worn markings after calendar days under traffic .
Type I or Type II preformed material for work zone pavement markings .
For Class I or Class II work zone pavement markings use the specified application rate from Table . . TABLE .
Remove work zone pavement markings of .
Ensure that work zone markings are complete and in place on all pavement including ramps before exposing the pavement to traffic .
Repair damage to the pavement that results in the removal of more than inch of pavement thickness .
Use sand shot or water blasting to remove markings on all asphalt or concrete pavement surfaces .
Use only sand shot or water blasting for removal of all pavement markings in preparation for placing Item Chip Seal or Item Microsurfacing .
A grinder may only be used to remove markings on temporary pavement or pavement that will be covered or removed prior to project completion e.g .
Remove the prismatic retroreflector within any raised pavement marker that is in conflict with the work zone pavement markings .
When the work zone pavement markings are removed and the raised pavement marker is no longer in conflict thoroughly clean the recessed reflector attachment area of the casting and install a new prismatic retroreflector of the same kind and color .
When existing permanent nopassingzone markings are removed or obliterated as the result of a construction operation pavement grinding asphalt concrete pavement overlays etc .
and the section of pavement continues to be used by the traveling public place Class I Center Line Markings or final center line markings as specified by the plan within Calendar Days unless thermoplastic spray thermoplastic or epoxy final markings are to be applied on the surface course .
If after the original markings are removed or obliterated the Contractor returns to the subject no passing zone and places a planspecified pavement course within the Calendar Day limit or performs work in preparation for a subsequent pavement course the Contractor shall have temporarily satisfied the conditions of the previous paragraph .
Sections of pavement where passing is permitted in both directions must be marked with Class I Center Line Markings or final center line markings as specified by the plan within Calendar Days unless thermoplastic spray thermoplastic or epoxy final markings are to be applied on the surface course .
Any time existing permanent lane lines gore markings or edge lines have been removed or obliterated as the result of a construction operation pavement grinding asphalt pavement overlays pavement widening etc .
and the section of pavement continues to be used by the traveling public place Class I Markings or final markings as specified by the plan within Calendar Days unless thermoplastic spray thermoplastic or epoxy final markings are to be applied on the surface course .
If after the original markings are removed or obliterated the Contractor returns to the subject section of pavement and places a planspecified pavement course within the Calendar Day limit or performs specified work that requires a lane closure except routine maintenance required by .
If a section of pavement is in a continuous part of the project then a new day limit for renewed work on a section applies to all sections in that part .
Remove work zone retroreflective pavement markings when necessary .
Accomplish removal of work zone pavement marking by using removal methods specified in .. G .. a for removal of existing markings. . Work Zone Raised Pavement Markers .
Furnish install maintain and subsequently remove work zone raised pavement markers WZRPMs .
Work zone raised pavement markers may serve as a substitute for or supplement to work zone pavement markings .
They are provided in both yellow and white versions to match the appropriate pavement marking color .
When viewed from the front parallel to the pavement as from approaching traffic Type A markers have a width of approximately inches mm and a visible area of not less than .
The patterns of WZRPMs required for the various types of pavement markings are shown in Table .. TABLE .
Attach work zone raised pavement markers to clean dry and sound pavement .
The minimum pavement temperature for installation is F C. When markers are being attached to new concrete pavement with curing compound remaining remove the curing compound membrane by sandblasting or other mechanical cleaning method .
Work zone raised pavement markers are not suitable for use from October to April .
If the Contractor elects to start or continue work zone pavement markers during this period and they fail or are subsequently removed or destroyed by snow and ice control activities immediately at his expense provide a substitute traffic guidance system which is effective during day and night and which is acceptable to the Engineer .
m or percent of the nominal spacing in order to avoid poor pavement conditions but the average spacing remains unchanged .
Poor pavement conditions include separated joints cracks deteriorated pavement usually uneven pavement or where pavement marking material will interfere with the bond .
Edge Lines Install the WZRPM inches mm outside the work zone pavement marking if any or the theoretical edge of the lane .
This offset may vary inches mm as necessary to avoid poor pavement conditions. . Lane lines and dashed center lines Install the WZRPM in the center of the gap between pavement marking dashes if any .
If a pavement joint exists locate the marker approximately inches mm clear from the joint and to the left of it for lane lines .
Double center line Install each WZRPM of the pair in line with the appropriate pavement marking stripe if any .
Otherwise center the pair on the theoretical edge of lane. . Channelizing Line Install the WZRPM in line with the pavement marking stripe or immediately adjacent to the line except when used at exit gore outlines where the WZRPM is installed within the painted gore vee and approximately inches mm from the pavement marking stripe .
A marker will be considered to have failed when the marker is broken the marker is worn to the extent that daytime visibility is significantly diminished or of an unacceptable color type B only the reflector is broken or detached the marker is detached from the adhesive the adhesive is detached from the pavement or the marker or reflector is covered by tar or paint .
Accomplish removal of work zone raised pavement markers in such a manner that no adhesive remains on the pavement .
Do not cause permanent pavement surfaces to be scarred broken or significantly roughened. . Pavement Marking Operations .
Where materials are placed in small quantities or under adverse conditions the Engineer may waive specification requirements for placing and finishing if in the judgment of the Engineer it is determined that the Contractor can obtain satisfactory results in providing a smooth and durable pavement surface .
This material is intended to be used to maintain pavement free from defects as described in .. B. .
Identify all pavement deficiencies within the work area .
Line quantities will be the length of the completed stripe including gaps intersections and other sections of pavement not normally marked .
The Department will measure line quantities as the length of the completed stripe including gaps intersections and other sections of pavement not normally marked .
Unless separately itemized the lump sum price bid for Maintaining Traffic shall include the cost of removal or covering of conflicting pavement markings layout application and removal of pavement markings when required maintaining the existing highway in a safe condition for public use removing abrasive and salt residue remaining from snow and ice control performed by the Department or local governments providing flaggers and their equipment and furnishing maintaining in an acceptable condition and subsequently removing the following work zone traffic control items as required by the Contract Documents .
This work consists of providing maintaining and subsequently removing roads and appurtenances and pavements for maintaining traffic . .
Ensure that the pavement surface is constructed to the width shown in the plans of the materials and in the manner specified .
Provide subgrade conforming to Item .. Soft subgrade will be determined and replaced according to Item .. Where Class A or Class B pavement is shown on the plans provide either rigid pavement or flexible pavement conforming to the following minimum requirements MINIMUM COURSE THICKNESS REQUIRED Pavement Type Course MakeUp Class A Class B Rigid in mm in mm Flexible Type in mm in mm Type in mm in mm in mm in mm in mm in mm Meet surface course requirements .
For the indicated pavement type and courses conform to the requirements of the specified items except as modified below .
For rigid pavements conform to Item .
For any part of the pavement that is to be incorporated into the permanent pavement the above exclusions do not apply and conformance to Items and is required .
Use a PG asphalt binder for temporary asphalt pavement .
If any part of the temporary pavement will be incorporated into the project permanently then use the contractspecified PG asphalt binder grade for the pavement course .
If the course is to be removed the Contractor may use reclaimed asphalt concrete or Portland cement concrete pavement .
The Department will measure the quantity of Pavement by the number of square yards square meters of pavement surface placed maintained and removed as directed measured complete in place .
If the surface is an asphalt mix or seal cut the surface along the edge of the pavement with a blade or disc to give a straight vertical edge .
Do not dump or store aggregate on the pavement .
Remove spilled aggregate from the pavement as spreading progresses .
Remove and dispose of all grinding materials deposited on the roadway pavement in a manner approved by the Engineer and before opening the roadway to traffic . .
This work consists of preparing the pavement and furnishing and placing plowable raised pavement marker castings RPMs and prismatic retroreflectors and removing existing RPMs for disposal. . Materials .
On pavement surfaces with cracking spalling or failure of underlying base material .
C. Over pavement markings except with the Engineers approval .
D. Closer than inches mm to a pavement construction transverse or longitudinal joint or within an intersection .
RPMs along double yellow centerline are to be placed in line or on line but no closer than inches mm to a pavement construction transverse or longitudinal joint .
RPMs installed along a channelizing line are to be placed no more than inch mm from the edge of the painted line and no closer than inches mm to a pavement construction transverse or longitudinal joint .
Place the RPMs installed along a lane line or dashed yellow centerline between and in line with the dashes no closer than inches mm to a pavement construction transverse or longitudinal joint .
When a casting is inserted in the cut without casting adhesive to test proper cut at least of the leveling lugstabs must contact the pavement surface and all four keelends of castings must be below the pavement surface .
to mm clearance between pavement cut and casting for casting adhesive to bond properly .
Only the leveling lugstabs should be in contact with the pavement surface after insertion of casting in pavement so that a minimum of inch .
mm of casting adhesive is the bonding adhesive between the casting and pavement .
The pavement cut must be completely dry and free of dust dirt or any other material that will interfere with the adhesive bond to the casting and the pavement .
Install the RPM casting within hours after cutting the slots into the pavement .
On new pavement surfaces the Contractor may begin RPM placement as soon as the pavement markings for that section are completed and dry .
Ensure that the RPM casting is free of dirt dust oil grease rust moisture or any foreign matter that impairs adhesion to the pavement .
Place RPMs when the pavement surface temperature and the ambient air temperature are at least F C and the pavement is dry .
Heat both parts of the RPM casting adhesive to F C during installation when either the pavement surface or ambient air temperature is between and F and C. Ambient Air Temperature Minimum Period Protected from Traffic F C Minutes Do not allow traffic on the RPMs until the adhesive has cured .
Two component approved casting adhesive is used to fill the pavement cut to within approximately inch mm of the top of the pavement cut .
A minimum of of the leveling lugstabs must be in contact with the pavement surface and the casting adhesive should ooze out from under the casting from all sides filling all voids around the casting and be level with the pavement surface .
Attach the reflector to the casting before installation or after the adhesive in the pavement slots has cured .
Apply the reflector when the pavement surface temperature and the ambient air temperature are at least F C and the casting surface is dry .
As designated remove existing raised pavement markers .
Compact the asphalt concrete flush with the pavement .
Removed raised pavement markers become the property of the Contractor . .
The Department will measure RPM Reflectors by the number of each complete in place for use on existing RPM castings in the pavement and accepted .
This work consists of furnishing and placing portland cement concrete barrier on the accepted and prepared subgrade subbase course or existing pavement .
A surveyed position typically set inside pavement that consists of a steel rod housed inside a monument assembly box with a cast frame and cover according to SCD RM .. D. Reference Monuments .
A surveyed position outside of pavement that consists of a steel rod and aluminum cap encased in concrete according to SCD RM .
A surveyed position outside of pavement that consists of a steel rod and aluminum cap encased in concrete according to SCD RM .
After setting the pull box to proper grade backfill the excavated spaces around the pull box with suitable material placed and thoroughly tamped in thin layers and restore the pavement base and paving to match the surround .
Keep the trench within inches mm of the designated line where the trench is adjacent to and parallel with a curb or pavement .
Cut the pavement along existing joints or grooves where possible .
Mark the pavement with cut lines and secure the Engineers approval of the location of the cut before cutting the pavement. . Jacking and Boring .
The payment for trench in paved areas includes the aforementioned and in addition sawing and removal of pavement along with the repaving over the trench .
Trench in paved areas shall be separated for payment into Type A for pavements or sidewalks less than inches mm thick and Type B for pavements inches mm or greater .
If installing a run of rail or barrier that is at varying distances from the edge of pavement place a reflector where the run first approaches closest to the pavement .
On concrete barriers retaining walls and bridge parapets place the top of the reflector so its height is inches mm above the near edge of pavement except that the top of the reflector is at least inches mm below the top of the concrete barrier .
Install guardrail blockout reflectors on the top or side of the blockout nearest the edge of pavement .
Saw slots in the pavement for installation of vehicle detector loop wire in the configuration dimensions and combinations required .
Cut an extension from the loop to the pavement edge to allow wire routing to an adjacent pull box .
Cured sealant shall be level with or higher than the pavement surface .
Run the wire continuously around the loop perimeter and through a slot leading to the pavement edge and by underground conduit to a roadside pull box or pole with feet .
Check the detector units to determine which pavement loop is associated with which detector unit .
The Department will measure Detector Loop by the number of complete detector loops installed in the pavement and will include pavement cutting loop detector wire with tubing in place application of sealant conduit trenching backfilling and surface restoration from the edge of pavement to the pull box .
In paved areas neatly line cut the pavement at the surface a distance of at least inches mm beyond the trench side and remove paving material .
Locate the stop beyond the pavement and provide it with a service box centered vertically over the stop operating nut such that the box provides maximum protection for the stop .
Where a service branch is disturbed for lowering raising or relocation between the water main at the corporation stop and the service stop replace it with new materials within these limits unless the connections can be made outside the limits of the proposed pavement paved shoulder or curb .
This specification gives general requirements for various kinds of retroreflective pavement markings .
Place all pavement markings according to the OMUTCD. . Materials .
Ensure that pavement markings are free of uneven edges overspray or other readily visible defects that detract from the appearance or function of the pavement markings .
Correct pavement markings that are improperly applied located or reflectorized .
Obtain the Engineers approval for methods and equipment used for pavement preparation marking and marking removal .
Schedule and perform other construction work such as shoulder paving seeding and mulching in a manner to avoid damage to applied pavement markings .
Do not apply pavement marking materials to the reflector of a plowable raised pavement marker .
Interrupt the application of the pavement marking line at each raised pavement marker where marking material would otherwise be applied to the markers prismatic reflector .
Remove pavement marking material applied to a prismatic reflector surface or replace the reflector that same workday .
Equip long line pavement marking equipment for traffic paint polyester epoxy and work zone marking Item with a computerized Data Logging System DLS including a cab mounted display which shows the actual material application rate and film thickness .
kmh Measure and record weight andor volume amount of material used by color Measure and record weight of glass beads Measure and record pavement surface temperature Measure and record air temperature Measure and record dew point Measure and record humidity Calculate and record average material application rate and film thickness over the section painted .
Equip the pavement marking equipment with an air jet to remove all debris from the pavement in advance of the applicator gun .
On projects where resurfacing or other operations will result in obliteration of the existing pavement markings establish reference points to ensure proper placement of restored markings .
Ensure that pavement marking lines are straight or smoothly curved true to the alignment of the pavement and do not deviate laterally from the proper location at a rate of more than inches in feet mm in m. The Engineer will not allow any deviation greater than inches mm .
Locate the center of the stripe inches mm from the edge of the pavement .
Ensure that the right edge line is applied to the left of the right edge of pavement .
Ensure that the left edge line is applied to the right of the left edge of pavement .
Place lane lines using the width specified as white stripes between contiguous lanes of pavement carrying traffic in the same direction .
Place center lines as single or double yellow stripes between contiguous lanes of pavement carrying traffic in opposite directions .
Place words on pavement using white markings .
If twoway radio equipment is required furnish and maintain radio equipment necessary for the voice communication between the striper and the inspectors vehicle at all times during the pavement marking operation .
If specified as a pay item remove pavement markings as described in .. G. Take care during marking removal not to scar discolor or otherwise damage the pavement surface .
Replace pavement markings and glass beads in all sections determined to be unsatisfactory by retracing over the unsatisfactory markings at the full thickness specified in Items and . .
The Department will measure pavement markings complete in place in the units designated .
The Department will measure line quantities as the length of completed marking including the gaps intersections and other sections of pavement not normally marked .
The Department will measure the removal of pavement markings using the same method of measurement as completed markings in the units designated . .
The Department will not pay for costs associated with correcting improperly located lines replacing reflectors coated with pavement marking material or replacing unsatisfactory pavement markings .
Apply pavement markings only when the surface is clean and dry in accordance with the paint manufacturers written application instructions .
If application is required when air and pavement temperatures are between F C and F C obtain approval from the Engineer and apply only prequalified Type A cold weather traffic paint materials .
Perform traffic control operations for all pavement markings according to .
This work consists of furnishing and applying polyester pavement markings according to Item .
Apply polyester only when the pavement surface is clean and dry and the pavement and air temperature are above F C. If project safety requirements require marking application below F C obtain approval from the Engineer and apply cold weather traffic paint Type A according to Item instead of the polyester .
Apply polyester catalyst plus resin uniformly to the pavement at the following rates Mil Thickness Line Width inch Gallon per Mile of Line Solid Line Broken Line Dotted Line Areas Symbols Words .
Apply glass beads to the uncured polyester in sufficient quantity so that the beads completely fill the polyester film from the filmpavement interface to the top surface of the film to the extent that there are loose beads on the surface of the uncured line .
Do not apply polyester pavement markings to new asphalt concrete until at least weeks after the pavement is placed .
Assure curing compound is removed from portland cement concrete pavements .
This work consists of furnishing and applying screed extruded thermoplastic pavement markings according to Item .
Furnish materials conforming to Thermoplastic pavement marking .
Equip all thermoplastic pavement marking trucks for center line lane line and edge line markings with a computerized Data Logging System DLS including a cab mounted display which shows the actual bead application rate .
Measure and record pavement surface temperature .
Ensure that the applicator portion of the equipment has a shoe that rides on the pavement and extrudes the thermoplastic .
If applying thermoplastic to pavements that are less than six months old ensure that both the pavement surface and the ambient air temperature at the time of application are not less than F C and rising .
However if applying thermoplastic to pavements that are older than six months ensure that both the pavement surface and the ambient air temperature at the time of application are not less than F C and rising .
Use primer except on new asphalt pavement .
only place auxiliary markings on new pavement .
This work consists of furnishing and applying preformed pavement marking material according to Item .
Only apply on clean dry pavement surfaces .
If there is oil salt or dust power wash the pavement and allow the pavement to dry .
Apply preformed markings to the pavement by means of a precoated adhesive on the back or by an adhesive or activator furnished with the markings and used according to the manufacturers recommendations .
Apply the preformed markings while the pavement surface temperature is at the manufacturers application recommendations .
Before any application test and record the pavement surface temperature air temperature and dew point .
Proper application of inlaid markings requires that the asphalt concrete pavement surface have a temperature below the maximum temperature recommended for the preformed material or its adhesive backing .
place preformed auxiliary markings only on new pavement . .
This work consists of furnishing and applying epoxy pavement markings according to Item .
Furnish materials conforming to Epoxy pavement markings .
Use equipment to apply epoxy pavement markings that has the following capabilities and features .
Ensure that these devices are clearly visible. . All the necessary spray equipment mixers compressors and other appurtenances to allow for the placement of reflectorized pavement marking systems in a simultaneous sequence of operations. . A minimum inch mm long static mixer unit or an equivalent system that produces properly mixed material. . A completely enclosed flush and purge system to clean the lines and the guns without expelling any of the solution into the environment .
Before applying epoxy clean and prepare the pavement surface in the following sequence .
Remove all debris oil and any other contaminants that may hinder the adhesion of the epoxy to the pavement. . Use a powerbroom to clean the pavement . .
Perform operations in such a manner that the finished pavement surface is not damaged or unnecessarily scarred or left in a pattern that will mislead or misdirect the motorist and that minimizes airborne dust .
Wait hours after the placement of polymer modified asphaltconcrete pavement before preparing it for epoxy pavement markings .
Lightly abrade any new asphalt concrete pavement containing SBS SBR latex or SMA latex polymer modifiers without scarring the area between the broken lines to the manufacturers recommendations to remove polymer surface film to assure proper bonding .
On new portland cement concrete pavements do not begin cleaning operations until a minimum of days after the placement of concrete unless otherwise directed by the Engineer .
Remove all curing compound and laitance on the concrete surface and in any textured pavement valleys .
Round the profiles of the peaks of textured pavement and remove sharp edges and irregularities .
Blast track cleaning. . Highpressure water blasting greater than psi kPa with or without abrasives and with sufficient time to allow the pavement to dry before applying epoxy markings. . Other methods approved by the Engineer .
When placing epoxy markings in the same place as existing pavement markings remove at least percent of the existing pavement markings .
Use a removal method that results in little or no color and texture changes in the surrounding pavement .
Prepare an area that is the width of the new pavement marking or existing line plus inch mm on each side and the length of broken lines plus inches mm on each end . .
Apply epoxy only when the surface is clean and dry and when the pavement and air temperature are above ºF ºC .
Before any application test and record the pavement surface temperature air temperature .
Apply enough glass beads to the uncured epoxy so that the beads completely fill the epoxy film from the film pavement interface to the top surface of the film to the extent that there are loose beads on the surface of the uncured line .
is included in the unit bid cost for the various pavement markings .
This work consists of furnishing and applying heatfused preformed thermoplastic for use as auxiliary pavement markings according to Item . . and the additional requirements specified below. . Materials .
Furnish materials conforming to Heat fused preformed thermoplastic pavement marking material . . Equipment .
Use manufacturer recommended equipment to apply the heatfused preformed thermoplastic pavement marking material according to the appropriate type as follows A .
Type A or Type A Material. . Propane torch to heat the pavement and material according to .. B. . Infrared thermometer to assure that both the pavement and the material are properly heated and do not exceed the manufacturers specified application temperature .
Type B or Type B Material. . Propane torch for ensuring no moisture is present on the pavement and heating the material according to .. C. . A thermometer is not required . .
Apply the heatfused preformed thermoplastic pavement marking material to clean dry pavement surfaces according to the appropriate type unless otherwise directed by the manufacturers recommendation .
Apply primer sealer on portland cement concrete pavements for proper adhesion only if the manufacturer requires its use .
Uniformly preheat the pavement to F C with a propane torch .
Heat the pavement only to ensure no moisture is present .
Material must be able to be applied with no preheating of the pavement to a specified temperature and without the use of a thermometer .
This work consists of furnishing and applying spray thermoplastic pavement markings according to Item .
Equip all spray thermoplastic pavement marking trucks for center line lane line and edge line markings with a computerized Data Logging System DLS including a cab mounted display which shows the actual bead application rate .
Measure and record pavement surface temperature .
Before applying spray thermoplastic the pavement surfaces must be clean dust free and completely dry .
Apply spray thermoplastic to new pavement over existing thermoplastic or over one application of paint .
If applying spray thermoplastic to pavements that are less than six months old ensure that both the pavement surface and the ambient air temperature at the time of application are not less than F C and rising .
However if applying spray thermoplastic to pavements that are older than six months ensure that both the pavement surface and the ambient air temperature at the time of application are not less than F C and rising .
Control the intensity of cleanup to effect a natural transition in cleanup treatment from the edge of the pavement outward to the limits of the RightofWay to avoid sharp demarcation between the artificial and the natural . .
When an aggregate source is specially designated with a SR or SRH according to Guidelines for Maintaining Adequate Pavement Friction in Surface Pavements the aggregate source will be restricted for use in surface pavement according to the methods in the guidelines .
Provide coarse aggregate for asphalt concrete base used in combination with rigid pavement consisting of CCS gravel or crushed ACBFS .
Provide coarse aggregate for asphalt concrete base used in flexible pavements consisting of CCS gravel see note in table below or crushed ACBFS .
may be used for coarse and fine aggregate in asphalt concrete base used in flexible pavements .
Concrete should be proportioned and mixed in accordance with ASTM C . C. Skid resistance The skid resistance of treated concrete pavement will not be reduced by more than percent as compared to the same untreated pavement .
The roadway will be new asphalt pavement .
Permanent pavement marking materials that meet the requirements of this specification and that have passed the service test required by Supplement are included on the Approved List maintained by the Office of Materials Management OMM .
OMM may retest pavement marking materials prequalified by a service test to determine formulation compliance to prequalified material and compliance with physical properties specified herein .
Furnish white and yellow readymixed traffic paint suitable for marking various types of pavement .
Type A on pavement exposed to traffic .
Ensure that the polyester pavement marking material supplied is a two part polyester system capable of being applied at ambient temperature down to F C. Ensure that the material is capable of retaining reflective glass beads .
Field Dry Time No Track minutes Furnish pavement marking material that will be in no tracking condition in minutes .
The no tracking condition will be determined by applying the markings and beads at the specification requirements to dry pavements at a low temperature of F C and high temperature of F C. Run tests at the manufacturers highest and lowest recommended application humidity .
A line showing no visual deposition of the material to the pavement surface when viewed at a distance of ft m will be considered as showing no tracking and conforming to this requirement for time to no track. . Prime Pigment Content percent by weight of paint White ASTM D . Yellow ASTM D or Department approved lab method . . Pigment Content percent by weight of paint ASTM D White Yellow .
Furnish thermoplastic pavement marking material formulated expressly for use as retroreflective pavement markings on asphalt concrete or Portland cement concrete pavement .
Ensure that the markings maintain their original shape and pavement position .
Furnish the preformed material suitable for retroreflective pavement markings on asphalt concrete or portland cement concrete pavement .
Furnish material that resists deterioration by contact with highway deicing chemicals or because of the oil content of asphalt concrete pavement or from oil droppings and other effects of traffic .
Furnish work zone pavement marking material conforming to ASTM D Type I removable or Type II nonremovable with the following modifications A .
Ensure that the pavement marking material when mixed in the proper ratio and applied at the properly prescribed wet film thickness at F . C and with the proper saturation of glass beads exhibit a no tracking time of no greater than to minutes when tested according to ASTM D . E. Field Time to NoTrack .
Furnish pavement marking material that will be in no tracking condition between to minutes .
The no tracking condition will be determined by applying the markings and beads at the specification requirements to dry pavements at a low temperature of F C and high temperature of F C. Run tests at the manufacturers highest and lowest recommended application humidity .
A line showing no visual deposition of the material to the pavement surface when viewed at a distance of ft m will be considered as showing no tracking and conforming to this requirement for time to no track .
Furnish epoxy pavement marking material capable of fully curing at a constant surface temperature of F C or above .
Furnish epoxy pavement marking materials when tested according to ASTM D that have a Shore D Hardness of between and .
Furnish heatfused preformed plastic pavement marking materials conforming to the following Type A Preheated tape and Type B Postheated tape Type A and B mil thickness .
Furnish spray thermoplastic pavement marking material specially formulated to be used as retroreflective pavement markings on asphalt concrete or Portland cement concrete pavement .
Use heavyduty type valve boxes for locations within existing or proposed pavement driveway or other traveled areas .
