It is further understood and agreed that the requirements of Figure at the end of Section shall be applicable to all Contracts on which the typical sections of the plans show construction of any element of the pavement structure or shoulders .
base course The layer or layers of specified or selected material of designed thickness placed on a subgrade to support a pavement .
cross slope The rate of transverse slope in a roadbed element or pavement structure .
intermediate course A combination of graded aggregate and bituminous material which constitutes the lower layer or layers of a flexible pavement but not part of the base course .
legend The words letters and arrows and other symbols or markings shown on the plans and designated as legend required to be placed on the surface of a pavement in the form of paint and glass beads thermoplastic and glass beads or other similar specified materials to serve as pavement markings .
pavement The portion of the roadbed constructed upon the base course and specifically constructed as the contact element for vehicular traffic .
pavement structure The combination of a pavement and a base course placed on a subgrade to support the traffic load and distribute it to the roadbed .
roadbed The graded portion of a highway within top and side slopes prepared as a foundation for a pavement structure and shoulders .
shoulders The portion of the roadway contiguous with the traveled way for the lateral support of the other elements of the pavement structures and for emergency use of stopped vehicles .
subgrade The top surface of a design soil upon which the pavement structure and shoulders are constructed .
Mowing shall be performed at the direction and satisfaction of the Engineer and shall include those areas from the edge of the pavement to a minimum of five feet beyond the shoulder line .
It may become necessary for the Contractor to sweep the roadway surface to completely remove debris from pavement surfaces and other areas designated on the plans or directed by the Engineer .
Proposed changes in the basic design requirements of a bridge or of a pavement system will not normally be given consideration as a Value Engineering Incentive Proposal .
The Contractor shall regulate loads such that damage will not occur to structures or any completed subgrade or pavement structure but in no case shall loads exceed the legal weight limit .
Loads will not be permitted on a concrete pavement base or structure before the expiration of the Section Section curing period .
When the Contractor has completed a unit of the work such as an interchange a structure a portion of the road or pavement or one project of a multiproject Contract the Contractor may request the Engineer to make a final inspection of that unit .
The eligible permanent items shall be limited to traffic signal systems changeable message signs roadway signs and sign supports lighting items guard rail items delineators impact attenuators median barriers bridge railing or pavement markings .
Time will not be charged during any required waiting period for placement of permanent pavement markings as set forth in Subsection .
The contract time which is determined by the Contractor on A B projects shall include time for the required waiting periods for placement of permanent pavement markings and all necessary burnin Section Section periods for electrical items .
With the exception of A B contracts as noted in Subsection daily charges as shown above will not be made during any required waiting period for placement of permanent pavement markings as set forth in Subsection .
This work consists of the removal and satisfactory disposal of all buildings fences structures old pavements abandoned pipe lines and other obstructions that are not designated to remain or to be removed and disposed of under other provisions of the contract or under separate contracts or agreements as referenced in Subsection ..
When required on the plans or in the proposal concrete pavement sidewalks curbs gutters etc .
The excavation and subsequent basement soil formation shall be completed as soon as practicable in order to obtain maximum consolidation prior to final shaping of the subgrade and subsequent construction of the pavement structure .
Bed preparation shall be required within plant pits which shall consist of stripping the proposed bed area of existing grass or plant material unless designated to remain removal and disposal of existing soil in order that finished grade of bed not including surface mulch is no higher than surrounding gradespavement edges unless noted otherwise on the drawings spreading a inch layer of Tree Bark Mulch Type III throughout the area and tilling in the Tree Bark Mulch Type III to a depth of six inches uniformly throughout the area and excavating plant holes .
Payment will be made under A Riprap for Erosion Control per ton B Remove and Reset Riprap per cubic yard Division Division DIVISION BASES The sections in the series include the specification requirements for bases shoulders and other work closely related to the construction of the pavement foundation and shoulders .
When granular material is required to be placed adjacent to pavement in place blending shall be performed to the satisfaction of the Engineer prior to placement of the material on shoulders .
aggregate and the course is to serve as a base for bituminous pavement at least one complete coverage shall be made with a steel wheel roller .
When pavement is not required the required density for the top course will be as shown in the table below .
aggregate and the course is to serve as a base for bituminous pavement at least one complete coverage shall be made with a steel wheel roller .
This work shall also include preservation from injury or damage to and repair and reconstruction of if necessary underlying courses and other elements of the pavement structure .
Shoulder construction shall begin at the earliest practicable time and proceed in the proper sequence with contiguous base or pavement construction .
The required density for the shoulder portion of any layer or course where the adjacent internal portion is of unlike material shall be as follows Section Section Granular Material Lot Individual Class Average Test . . or . . or . . or . . or . . except a When the finished shoulder is required to be paved the required density for such shoulder course shall be that required for the same material for bases and b Where an existing pavement is to be overlaid or widened and overlaid without shoulder widening and the existing shoulder is to be raised to match the new pavement satisfactory density of each layer of new shoulder material shall be that which can be obtained from six coverages of a pneumatic roller with an operating weight of approximately six tons while the shoulder material is at the proper moisture content .
In cases of base or pavement in which cement is used as a material of construction shoulder construction shall follow immediately upon expiration of the curing period unless it has been otherwise provided that the shoulder course be constructed in advance of the contiguous course .
Figure Section graphically defines the limits of the roadway the design soil and the components of the pavement structure .
Ingrade preparation will be required on all projects that require replacement of any component of a pavement structure or chemical treatment of the design soil .
Ingrade preparation will not be required on pavements or chemically treated courses that are to remain in place undisturbed .
When the first ingrade preparation course is a component of the pavement structure other than design soil the course shall be prepared by blading shaping to the specified section and compacting to the specified density for the particular layer being prepared .
It is essential in pavement structure construction that the degree of accuracy must be increased for each succeeding course in order that the final surface requirements can be met and the thickness of each course will be within design tolerances .
Where a base course is not to be treated and the next course is to be bituminous pavement In Place b .
Where a base course is stone or is to be cement treated and the next course is a drainage layer In Place Section Section c. Where a base course is to be limefly ash treated and the next course is a drainage layer In Place d. Where a base course is stone or is to be cement treated and the next course is to be bituminous pavement In Place e. Where a base course is to be limefly ash treated and the next course is to be bituminous pavement In Place Note From the design grade established for bulked material .
Where a course is to be stone or is to be treated or untreated and the next course is a drainage layer or bituminous pavement In Place b .
Where a course is stone or is to be treated followed by a drainage layer and concrete pavement Under the Form Line or Track Line Elsewhere Notes The Contractor may construct the course at the form line to a tentative grade having a tolerance of not more than minus inch in which case the Contractor shall at no additional cost to the State bring the surface of the base at the form line to the specified grade and density with materials and methods approved by the Engineer and consistent with the requirements for foundation formation for forms or tracks required under the contract .
Provided the Contractor places at no additional cost to the State at the time of placing concrete base course or pavement the additional concrete necessary to compensate for the deficiency from a true design base grade .
c. Measurement and payment for base or pavement material required in the work performed will be made in accordance with the requirements and provisions for Section Section use of such material .
This work consists of the construction of one or more lifts of asphalt pavement in accordance with these specifications and the specific requirements for the mixture to be produced and in reasonably close conformity with the lines grades thicknesses and typical sections shown on the plans or established by the Engineer .
Polymers for use in polymer modified asphalt pavements shall meet the requirements of Subsection .. WMA Products and Processes .
Tensile Strength Ratio TSR MT Wet Strength Dry Strength percent minimum Interior Face Coating percent minimum Boiling Water Test MT Particle Coating percent minimum Reclaimed asphalt pavement RAP materials may be used in the production of asphalt in the percentages of the total mix by weight set out in the following table Asphalt Mixture Maximum Percentage of RAP by total weight of mix .mm .mm .mm Surface Lift .mm Underlying Lift mm mm At a minimum RAP shall be processed andor screened such that the RAP material size does not exceed the nominal maximum sieve size for the mixture specified .
Crushed reclaimed concrete pavement may be used as an aggregate component of all asphalt pavements .
When crushed reclaimed concrete pavement is used as an aggregate component controls shall be implemented to prevent segregation .
Crushed reclaimed concrete pavement aggregate shall be separated into coarse and fine aggregate stockpiles using the inch or inch sieve as a breakpoint unless otherwise approved by the Engineer in writing .
For mm .mm .mm .mm mixtures conduct density tests as necessary to control and maintain required compaction according to Mississippi Test Method MT Method C nuclear gauge or AASHTO T . Note The nuclear gauge may be correlated at the Contractors option with the average of a minimum of five pavement sample densities .
The Engineer will determine the quantity of material to be replaced based on a review of the individual testing data that make up the running average in question and an inspection of the completed pavement .
The Engineer will base final acceptance of the asphalt mixture production on the results of the Contractors testing for total voids and VMA NDesign gradation and asphalt content as verified by the Engineer in the manner hereinbefore described and the uniformity and condition of the completed pavement .
Areas of pavement that exhibit nonuniformity or failures materials or construction related such as but not limited to segregation bleeding shoving rutting over ⅛ raveling slippage or cracking will not be accepted .
For all other leveling no density shall be required but the pavement shall be rolled to refusal densification. . For all single lift overlays with or without a leveling lift andor milling the required lot density shall be .
percent of maximum density. . For all pavements on new construction except shoulders that are untreated the required lot density for all lifts shall be .
For all pavements on shoulders that are untreated the required lot density for all lifts shall be .
No resampling will be performed when pavement samples are used for determining density .
The density for trench widening on a lot to lot basis shall be determined from density tests performed by the Department using pavement samples cores .
No resampling will be performed when pavement samples are used for determining density .
Grinding of asphalt surfaces shall consist of diamond grinding the existing asphalt pavement surface to remove surface distortions to achieve the specified surface smoothness requirements .
The grinding equipment shall be a power driven self propelled machine that is specifically designed to smooth and texture pavement surfaces with diamond blades .
It shall have a set of pivoting tandem bogey wheels at the front of the machine and the rear wheels shall be arranged to travel in the track of the fresh cut pavement .
The operation shall result in pavement that conforms to the typical crosssection and the requirements specified in Subsection It is the intent of this specification that the surface smoothness characteristics be within the limits specified .
Solid residue shall be removed from pavement surfaces before it is blown by traffic action or wind .
The grinding process shall produce a pavement surface that is smooth and uniform in appearance with a longitudinal line type texture .
The finished pavement surface will be measured for riding quality .
The roadway pavement on bridge Section Section replacement projects having feet or less of pavement on each side of the structure will be excluded from a smoothness test .
Pavement on horizontal curves having a radius of less than feet at the centerline and pavement within the super elevation transition of such curves are excluded from smoothness testing .
Smoothness testing shall terminate feet from each transverse joint that separates the pavement from a bridge deck bridge approach slab or existing pavement not constructed under the contract .
No smoothness testing shall be performed when there is moisture of any kind on the pavement surface .
Any additional testing shall meet the requirements of Subsection The surface lift will be accepted on a continuous interval basis for pavement smoothness .
At the time of placement the air and pavement surface temperature limitations shall be equal to or exceed that specified in the following table .
The air and pavement temperature at the time of placement shall equal or exceed ºF regardless of compacted lift thickness .
The lot density for all dense graded pavement lifts except as provided below for preleveling wedging less than fifty percent of width greater than minimum lift thickness ramp pads irregular shoulder areas median crossovers turnouts or other areas where the established rolling pattern can not be performed shall not be less than the specified percent .
Strikeoff extensions should be avoided wherever possible but may be used for items such as drivewaymailbox turnouts or intersections in which frequent variations in pavement width are encountered .
The foundation upon which asphalt pavement is to be placed shall be prepared in accordance with the applicable Section of the Standard Specification .
Section Section Bituminous mixture shall not be placed against the edge of pavements curbs gutters manholes and other structures until these edges located adjacent to the asphalt layer to be placed are sprayed with a thin uniform tack coating .
Existing asphalt pavements that require preliminary leveling or patching in advance of placing the bituminous mixture shall be sprayed with a tack coat material and then brought as nearly as practicable to uniform grade and cross section .
Excluding the areas mentioned below the material transferred from the hauling unit when placing the top lift or the top two lifts of a multilift asphalt pavement with density requirements shall be remixed prior to being placed in the paver hopper or insert by using an approved Materials Transfer Device .
Areas excluded from this requirement include leveling courses temporary work of short duration detours bridge replacement projects having less than feet of pavement on each side of the structure acceleration and deceleration lanes less than feet in length tapered sections transition sections for width shoulders less than feet in width crossovers ramps side street returns and other areas designated by the Engineer .
Grade control for asphalt pavements shall be established by stringline at least feet ahead of spreading unless placement is adjacent to curb and gutter concrete pavement or other allowed grade control .
Joints between previously placed pavement and pavement being placed shall be so formed as to ensure thorough and continuous bond .
No additional compensation will be allowed for furnishing samples and repairing the areas with new pavement .
The Contractor shall attach a device to the screed of the paver that confines the material at the end gate and extrudes the asphalt material in such a way that results in a compacted wedge shape pavement edge of approximately degrees but not steeper than degrees .
Reclaimed asphalt pavement RAP or crushed reclaimed concrete may not be used as an aggregate component in the production of OGFC .
The Engineer will determine the quantity of material to be replaced based on a review of the individual testing data that make up the running average in question and an inspection of the completed pavement .
The Engineer will base final acceptance of the asphalt mixture production on the results of the Contractors testing for total voids gradation and asphalt content as verified by the Engineer in the manner described and the uniformity and condition of the completed pavement .
Areas of pavement that exhibit nonuniformity or failures materials or construction related such as but not limited to segregation bleeding shoving rutting over raveling slippage or cracking will not be accepted .
The OGFC will not be considered a surface lift in the completed pavement structure .
There shall be no smoothness requirement for OGFC pavements .
At the time of placement the air and pavement surface temperature limitations shall be equal to or exceed F and rising .
The foundation upon which OGFC pavement is to be placed shall be prepared in accordance with the applicable Section of the Standard Specifications .
Bituminous mixture shall not be placed against the edge of pavements curbs gutters manholes and other structures until the edges located adjacent to the asphalt layer to be placed are sprayed with a thin uniform tack coating .
Existing pavements that require preliminary leveling or patching in advance of placing the OGFC mixture shall be sprayed with a tack coat material and then brought as nearly as practicable to uniform grade and cross section .
Areas excluded from this requirement include temporary work of short duration detours bridge replacement projects having less than feet of pavement on each side of the structure acceleration and deceleration lanes less than feet in length tapered sections transition sections for width shoulders less than feet in width crossovers ramps side street returns and other areas designated by the Engineer .
Joints between previously placed pavement and pavement being placed shall be so formed as to ensure thorough and continuous bond .
This work consists of constructing one or more lifts of asphalt pavement meeting the requirements of Section on a prepared surface in accordance with the requirements of this section and in reasonably close conformity with the lines grades thicknesses and typical cross sections shown on the plans or established by the Engineer .
In the placement of full depth asphalt pavement where the chemically treated base is constructed graded andor trimmed full lane width to a surface tolerance of inches from design grade stringline grade controls may be eliminated for the placement of the asphalt drainage course and all asphalt lifts .
Acceptance and payment of asphalt will be determined on a lot to lot basis by cores taken from the completed pavement as outlined in Subsection Approved contacting type profile averaging devices are those devices capable of working in conjunction with a taut string or wire set to grade or skitype device with extreme contact points with the surface at least feet apart .
During the finishing and compacting of pavement lifts it shall be the responsibility of the Contractor to check the surface and joints for progress toward conformance to surface requirements set forth herein .
Section Section When a portland cement concrete pavement is to be placed on an asphalt lift the finished top of the asphalt lift shall meet the requirements of Sections l and l. Sectionss or portions thereof representing areas excluded from a smoothness test with the High Speed Inertial Profiling System IPS shall also be excluded from consideration for a contract price adjustment for rideability .
Smoothness tolerances shall be applied to asphalt pavements based on the following pavement categories .
Category A applies to the following pavement constructions New construction Construction with three or more lifts Mill and two or more lifts Category B applies to the following pavement constructions Mill and one lift Two lift overlays without milling Category C applies to the following pavement constructions Single lift overlay without milling All pound routes regardless of the pavement construction Additional projects may qualify for Category C construction at the Departments discretion .
Asphalt overlay lifts shall be constructed as nearly in accordance with the thickness shown on the plans as the underlying pavement and foundation will permit .
When the paver is operating off an established grade line no thickness determination will be required for the various lifts of pavement .
When grade stakes are eliminated by Notice to Bidders or as outlined in Subsection .. d and where resulting in the placement of two or more lifts acceptance and payment will be determined on a lot to lot basis by cores taken from the completed pavement .
Section Section When the average thickness of all the cores from the lots representing a days production excluding any discarded by the Engineer for justifiable reason is within threeeighths of an inch of the total pavement thickness shown on the plans excluding lifts placed using an established grade line corrective action will not be required and a price adjustment will not be made for nonconformity to specified thickness .
When the average thickness of all the cores from the lots representing a days production is deficient in thickness by more than three eights of an inch of the total pavement thickness shown on the plans excluding lifts placed using an established grade line the deficiency shall be corrected by overlaying the entire length of the days production .
Transverse joints shall be perpendicular to the centerline of the pavement .
Transverse joints shall be perpendicular to the centerline of the pavement .
All mixtures used in the correction of unacceptable pavement shall be approved by the Engineer prior to use .
In addition to the requirements of Subsections .. through .. the following requirements will be applicable when an existing pavement is to be overlaid or widened and overlaid .
Unless otherwise provided in the traffic control plan andor the contract the following appropriate items of work shall be begun and continually prosecuted in the order listed a In sections designated by the Engineer trim the shoulders along the pavement edges to provide drainage from the pavement .
b Perform prerolling to locate areas of pavement with excessive movement per Section .
The surface of the mixture shall be finished as a continuation of the adjacent pavement slope .
Existing pavement that has failed or unsatisfactorily stabilized shall be removed as directed .
Removal of pavement will be measured and paid for under the appropriate pay items as provided in the contract .
All localized irregularities of the existing pavement such as ruts crossslope deficiencies etc .
The pavement shall be protected and properly maintained until it has been compacted and cooled sufficiently for use by traffic .
Asphalt pavement of the type specified will be measured by the ton .
Class B structural concrete base substituted for asphalt under portland cement concrete bridge end pavement as per Subsection .. will be paid for as asphalt calculated as follows Square yards of portland cement concrete bridge end pavement concrete base thickness in inches .
Subject to the adjustments set out in Subsections .. asphalt pavement measured as prescribed above will be paid for at the contract unit price per ton for each lift of pavement specified in the bid schedule and shall be full compensation for completing the work .
When grade stakes are eliminated as provided in Subsection .. and the average thickness of all cores from lots representing a days production is more than three eights of an inch thicker than the total specified thickness of the pavement excluding lifts placed using an established grade line a lump sum reduction in payment for the surface lift of lots representing a days production will be made as follows Individual Days L.S .
Reduction Monetary Value of the Days Surface Lift Production x D ST Where D The days average deviation from total pavement thickness shown on the plans excluding lifts placed using an established grade line .
This work consists of constructing one or more courses of cold bituminous pavement in accordance with these specifications and in reasonably close conformity with the lines grades thicknesses and typical cross sections shown on the plans or established by the Engineer .
The bituminous pavement shall be composed of aggregates and bituminous material and if specified a top dressing of sand gravel stone or slag screenings .
Cold bituminous pavement courses shall be placed only when the air temperature is F or above .
Cold bituminous pavement of the type specified will be measured by the square yard or ton .
Cold bituminous pavement will be paid for by the square yard or ton .
This work consists of constructing one or more lifts of SMA pavement on a prepared surface in accordance with the requirements of Sections and for Asphalt Pavements with the exceptions set forth herein .
Polymers for use in polymer modified asphalt pavements shall meet the requirements of Subsection Stabilizing Fiber .
Tensile Strength Ratio TSR MT Wet Strength Dry Strength percent minimum Interior Face Coating percent minimum Boiling Water Test MT Particle Coating percent minimum Reclaimed asphalt pavement RAP or crushed reclaimed concrete may be used in the production of SMA in the percentages of the total mix by weight set out in the following table .
No resampling will be performed when pavement samples are used for determining density .
At the time of placement the air and pavement surface temperature limitations shall be equal to or exceed F. Tack Coat .
The lot density for all SMA pavement lifts except as provided below for preleveling wedging less than fifty percent of width greater than minimum lift thickness ramp pads irregular shoulder areas median crossovers turnouts or other areas where the established rolling pattern can not be performed shall not be less than .
Areas excluded from this requirement include temporary work of short duration detours bridge replacement projects having less than feet of pavement on each side of the structure acceleration and deceleration lanes less than feet in length tapered sections transition sections for width shoulders less than feet in width crossovers ramps side street returns and other areas designated by the Engineer .
for asphalt pavements .
for asphalt pavements .
This work consists of removal of pavement materials on the roadway and shoulders by cold milling to the designated depth and loading hauling and disposal of the milled materials by the Contractor in accordance with the plans and specifications or as directed by the Engineer .
This work also consists of the removal of portions of existing pavement using a cold fine milling process to a nominal depth using grade control as specified on the plans or as directed by the Engineer .
The equipment shall accurately and automatically establishing profile grades along each edge of the machine by referencing from the existing pavement with means of an approved profile averaging device with extreme contact points with surface at least feet apart or from an independent grade line and shall have an automatic system for controlling cross slope .
When fine milling is required the milling machine shall in addition to the above be designed specifically for grinding surfaces to close tolerances and shall be operated at a rate recommended by the manufacturer so as to avoid tearing and gouging of the pavement surface .
The pavement and shoulder materials shall be removed to the depth width grade and cross section shown on the plans or as directed by the Engineer .
The surface of the pavement and shoulders after milling shall be reasonably smooth and true to the established line grade and cross section .
A longitudinal pavement edge that traffic is expected to move across should have an elevation difference of not more than ¼ inches .
Uneven pavement signs as shown in the plans or contract documents will be required if the pavement edge is more than½ inches and less than or equal to ¼ inches .
If the pavement edge is less than or equal to ½ inches no uneven pavement signs will be required .
Transverse pavement joints shall be sufficiently tapered to allow for the safe movement of traffic .
The surface tolerance of the fine milling shall be checked to assure a uniform pavement texture that is true to line grade and cross section .
Fine milled pavement surfaces are subject to visual and straightedge inspections by the Engineer at any time during the milling operation .
Cold milling of pavement and shoulders all depths will be measured by the square yard cubic yard LVM or ton as indicated in the contract .
Fine milling of pavement and shoulders will be measured by the square yard cubic yard LVM or ton as indicated in the contract .
Cold milling of pavement and shoulders all depths measured as prescribed above will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard cubic yard LVM or ton as indicated which price shall be full compensation for completing the work .
Fine milling of pavement and shoulders measured as prescribed above will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard cubic yard LVM or ton as indicated which price shall be full compensation for completing the work .
The Contractor shall provide equipment for heating and applying bituminous material and for laying the pavement fabric .
The surface to be treated and at least one additional foot on each side shall be cleaned by sweeping blowing or other methods until all dust dirt mud vegetation and foreign materials are removed entirely from the pavement before the asphalt sealant is applied .
Varying surface conditions such as the degree of porosity of the existing pavement will cause varying application rates .
In circumstances where this method is impractical asphalt pavement or sand spread over the joint will aid in prevention of pickup .
Emulsified asphalt and cutback asphalt shall be applied only when both the air and pavement temperatures are above F. Asphalt cement shall be applied only when both the air and surface temperatures are above F. Cutback asphalt shall not be placed during the period between October and March .
On projects where completion of seal coats after November or before March is determined to be in the public interest the Engineer may permit variations from the above under the condition that all the following requirements are met a The air and pavement temperature is F or higher .
The application rate of the bituminous material shall result in complete and uniform coverage of the pavement receiving the bituminous surface treatment .
The optimum application rate of bituminous material for chip seals is dependent on the chosen seal aggregate gradation as well as the condition of the pavement in which the chip seal is to be applied .
At the beginning of the application including joints with preceding applications intersections and junctions with all pavements etc .
During application of bituminous material the Contractor shall provide adequate protection to prevent marring or discoloration of pavements structures curbs trees etc .
This work consists of the construction of one lift of ultrathin asphalt pavement UTAP in accordance with these specifications and the specific requirements for the mixture to be produced and placed in reasonable close conformity with the lines grades thicknesses and typical sections shown on the plans or established by the Engineer .
The gradation requirements for Ultrathin asphalt pavements are provided in the following table Sieve Size Percent Passing inch inch No .
Reclaimed asphalt pavement may be used in ultrathin asphalt pavement and shall be no greater than percent of the total mix weight .
Reclaimed asphalt pavement shall be separated into coarse and fine aggregate stockpiles using a ½ sieve as the break point .
Ultrathin asphalt pavement shall be designed at Ndesign of revolutions of the gyratory compactor .
Effective Binder Content for ultrathin asphalt pavement shall be between .
The minimum lift thickness for ultrathin asphalt pavement shall be inch and the maximum lift thickness shall not exceed one inch .
The Engineer will base final acceptance of the asphalt mixture production on the results of the Contractors testing for total voids and Vbe NDesign gradation and asphalt content as verified by the Engineer in the manner hereinbefore described and the uniformity and condition of the completed pavement .
Areas of pavement that exhibit nonuniformity or failures materials or construction related such as but not limited to segregation bleeding shoving rutting over inch raveling slippage or cracking will not be accepted .
The finished pavement surface will be measured for riding quality .
At the time of placement the air and pavement surface temperature limitations shall be equal to or exceed F for UHMA and F for UWMA regardless of the compacted lift thickness .
The foundation upon which UTAP pavement is to be placed shall be prepared in accordance with Subsection .. Preparation of Mixture .
Ultrathin asphalt pavement will be measured by the ton .
Ultrathin asphalt pavement measured as prescribed above will be paid for at the contract unit price per ton which price shall be full compensation for completing the work .
This work shall consist of grinding existing pavement surfaces to substantially eliminate bumpsknots in the existing pavement which results will improve riding characteristics of the finished pavement surface .
The Contractor may elect to pre grind bumps in the existing pavement surface to improve riding characteristics prior to placement of the new asphalt pavement .
Prior to any paving operations the Contractor shall run a profile of the existing pavement as required in Subsection This profile shall be used to determine if and where any areas are located with a short interval MRI value of inches per mile or more .
Solid residue shall be removed from pavement surfaces before it is blown by traffic action or wind .
When a pay item is included in the contract Pre Grinding of existing pavement will be measured by the square foot of area approved by the Engineer .
This work consists of routing sawing andor cleaning sealing joints and cracks in existing pavement as designated by pay items in the contract proposal and as detailed on the plans and described herein .
Bituminous concrete pavement joints shall be constructed over and in line with the existing underlying transverse portland cement concrete joints in accordance with plans specifications and as directed by the Engineer .
This work may also consist of cleaning and filling joints in existing concrete pavement as designated by pay items in the contract proposal and as detailed and described herein or on the plans .
This specification addresses existing PCC pavements with and without an existing asphalt overlays whether to be overlaid under this contract or not .
Unless otherwise designated on the plans or in the contract documents the joint sealing material may be cold or hot poured material meeting the requirements of Subsection The joint sealing material for sealing transverse joints in asphalt pavement shall be a hot poured elastic type conforming to the requirements of Subsection The bituminous joint filling material for cleaning and filling joints shall be hot poured material meeting the requirements of Subsection or the type designated on the plans .
Cleaning equipment shall consist of mechanical or hand operated devices capable of removing all existing joint materials soil asphalt debris to the depth specified herein without causing damage to the existing joint faces or the surface of the PCC pavement .
The adjacent surfaces of the pavement shall be cleaned to the extent necessary to prevent foreign matter from entering the joint before pouring .
The adjacent surfaces of the pavement shall be cleaned to the extent necessary to prevent foreign matter from entering the joint before pouring .
Costs of any interim cuts shall be included in the pay item for sawing and sealing transverse joints in asphalt pavement .
The detail for sawing and sealing transverse joints in asphalt pavement shall be as shown below .
The sawcut joints shall be directly over the existing portland cement concrete pavement joints and shall be accurately located by a method employing pins and stringline .
The transverse sawcut joints shall normally extend the full width of the pavement unless otherwise shown on the plans or directed by the Engineer .
All sawing slurry from the wet sawing process shall be immediately flushed from the pavement surface .
Dry dust and material from the dry sawing process shall be blown or brushed off the pavement surface .
The pouring shall be performed in such a manner that the material will not be spilled on the exposed surfaces of the asphalt pavement .
Any excess material on the surface of the asphalt pavement shall be removed immediately and the pavement surface cleaned .
All existing joint materials soil asphalt debris and any loose spalled or delaminated materials shall be removed to the depth specified herein without causing damage to the existing joint faces or the surface of the PCC pavement .
After compaction excess material asphalt or aggregate shall be removed and the pavement surface cleaned as necessary so as to leave the asphalt or aggregate filler flush with the existing PCC pavement .
For PCC pavements without existing asphalt overlays in place and which are not to be overlayed with asphalt under the contract joints shall be cleaned and filled as described above and as shown on the applicable detail .
Cleaning and filling joints in PCC pavement will be measured by the linear foot or mile of joint .
Removal of existing asphalt over the joint joint filler aggregate bituminous material and the replacement of asphalt over the joint if applicable will not be paid for separately but will be included in the unit price per linear foot for cleaning and filling joints in PCC pavement .
Sawed and sealed joints in new asphalt pavement will be measured by the linear foot of joint complete in place and accepted by the Engineer .
Sawing and joint sealant material will not be paid for as separate pay items but will be included in the unit price per linear foot for sawing and sealing transverse joints in asphalt pavement .
Sawing and sealing transverse joints in new asphalt pavement accepted and measured as prescribed will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot which price shall be full compensation for locating and transferring the location of existing joints to establish new joint locations for all required sawing for furnishing all materials including joint sealant materials for all cleaning pouring trimming cleanup and disposal of all excess and waste for protective screening for all pertinent operations necessary and incidental to the construction as indicated herein and for all equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
Cleaning and filling joints in PCC pavement measured as prescribed above will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot or mile which price shall be full compensation for furnishing all materials including filler aggregate and bituminous material for all work required to expose the PCC joint for cleaning filling and compacting the joint for placing any required asphalt over the joint prior to the placement of the subsequent overall asphalt course if applicable and the cleanup and disposal of all excess and waste for all pertinent operations necessary and incidental to the construction as herein indicated and for all equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
This work consists of pavement composed of concrete with or without reinforcement as specified constructed in accordance with these specifications and in reasonably close conformity with the lines grades thicknesses and cross sections shown on the plans or established by the Engineer .
This equipment shall be a metal tine finishing device having flat steel wire tines capable of being operated to produce uniform parallel grooves in newly placed pavement .
Forms shall have a depth equal to the specified edge thickness of the pavement and a base width of at least percent of the depth of the forms .
The foundation upon which the concrete pavement is to be placed shall be prepared within the tolerances set out in Subsection .
for at least two feet beyond the proposed pavement edge .
Low areas within the tolerances set out in Subsection .. shall be filled with concrete integral with the pavement .
The finished grade of the base shall be maintained in a smooth and compacted condition until the pavement is placed .
For paneled pavement placing shall be continuous between transverse joints without the use of intermediate bulkheads .
For continuously reinforced pavement placing shall be continuous between construction joints without use of intermediate bulkheads .
When concrete is to be placed adjoining a previously constructed lane of pavement and mechanical equipment will be operated upon the existing lane of pavement that lane shall have attained the age of days exclusive of days on which the air temperature does not reach F or shall have attained a flexural strength of pounds per square inch .
Protective materials shall include standard metal forms or wood planks having a nominal thickness of at least two inches and a nominal width of not less than the thickness of the pavement and covering material such as burlap or cotton mats curing paper or plastic sheeting material .
When rain appears imminent all paving operations shall stop and all available personnel shall begin placing forms against the sides of the pavement and covering the surface of the unhardened concrete with the protective covering .
The equipment shall vibrate the concrete for the full width and depth of the strip of pavement being placed .
Where sections of pavement are to be subsequently abutted with other lanes of pavement involving longitudinal or nearly longitudinal joints the concrete adjacent to these joints shall be placed and finished as required by standard paving methods or by use of false forms adjacent to the slip forms .
If the Contractor is able to construct the pavement without measurable edge slump or misalignment the Engineer may waive the use of the false form .
When the pavement is placed in two layers the entire width of the bottom layer shall be struck off to the length and depth that will permit the sheet of bar mat to be laid full length on the concrete in its final position without further manipulation .
When the pavement is placed in one layer the reinforcement may be placed in the plastic concrete after spreading by approved mechanical or vibratory means or it may be positioned in advance of concrete placement on supports that will withstand without displacement all depositing spreading and vibrating operations .
Steel for continuously reinforced pavement shall be placed by the first of the following methods or conditionally by the second method a Steel shall be placed sufficiently in advance of the paving operation .
When adjacent lanes of pavement are constructed separately longitudinal construction joints shall be constructed in accordance with the details shown on the plans .
Preformed joint filler shall be furnished in lengths equal to the pavement width or equal to the width of one lane .
Transverse contraction joints shall consist of planes of weakness created by forming or sawing grooves in the surface of the pavement as shown on the plans and shall include load transfer assemblies when specified .
For the slipform method of concrete placement dowel bars may be placed in the full thickness of pavement immediately following the paver with a vibratory inserter in lieu of using dowel assemblies .
A second screed shall be provided for striking off the bottom layer of concrete if reinforcement is used and the pavement is placed in two layers .
The concrete adjacent to joints shall be compacted or firmly placed without voids or segregation against the joint material and also under and around all load transfer devices joint assembly units and other features designed to extend into the pavement .
If uniform and satisfactory density of the concrete is not obtained by the vibratory method at joints along forms at structures and throughout the pavement the Contractor shall furnish equipment and methods which will produce pavement conforming to the specifications .
The longitudinal float operated from foot bridges spanning but not touching the concrete shall be worked with a sawing motion while held in a floating position parallel to the road centerline and passing gradually from one side of the pavement to the other .
Movement ahead along the centerline of the pavement shall be in successive advances of not more than onehalf the length of the float .
The float shall pass over each area of pavement at least two times but excessive operation over a given area will not be permitted .
If necessary following one of the preceding methods of floating longhandled floats having blades at least five feet long and six inches wide may be used to smooth and fill in opentextured areas in the pavement .
Longhandled floats shall not be used to float the entire surface of the pavement in lieu of or to supplement one of the preceding methods Section Section of floating .
When strikeoff and consolidation are done by the hand method and the crown of the pavement will not permit the use of the longitudinal float the surface shall be floated transversely by means of the longhandled float .
Care shall be taken not to work the crown out of the pavement during the operation .
After floating excess water and laitance shall be removed from the surface of the pavement by a straightedge feet or more in length .
This finish shall consist of a uniform surface of gritty texture produced by dragging a seamless strip of damp burlap or cotton fabric longitudinally along the full width of pavement .
For pavement feet or more in width the drag shall be mounted on a bridge which travels on the forms or track line .
The dimensions of the drag shall be such that a strip of burlap or fabric at least three feet wide is in contact with the full width of pavement surface while the drag is used .
The broom shall be drawn from the center to the edge of the pavement with adjacent strokes slightly overlapping .
When straightedging is complete and the water sheen has Section Section practically disappeared and just before the concrete becomes nonplastic the surface shall be belted with a twoply canvas belt eight inches wide and at least three feet longer than the pavement width .
After completion of the drag finish the pavement shall be given an additional texture by transverse tining .
The final surface texture shall be produced with a metal tine finishing device meeting the requirements of Subsection The texturing device shall be so constructed and operated as to produce uniform parallel grooves perpendicular to the centerline of the pavement inch on centers and having a depth of inch plus or minus inch .
The metal tine device shall be operated by approved mechanical means when texturing main roadway pavement lanes .
After the final finish but before the concrete has taken its initial set the pavement along each side of each slab and on each side of transverse expansion joints formed joints transverse construction joints and emergency construction joints shall be worked with an approved tool and rounded to the radius required by the plans .
The roadway pavement on bridge replacement projects having feet or less of pavement on each side of the structure will be excluded from a smoothness test .
Pavement on horizontal curves having a radius of less than feet at the centerline and pavement within the super elevation transition of such curves are excluded from smoothness testing .
Smoothness testing shall terminate feet from each transverse joint that separates the pavement from a bridge deck bridge approach slab or existing pavement not constructed under the contract .
During initial paving operations either when starting up or after a long shut down period the pavement surface will be tested with profilograph as soon as the concrete has cured sufficiently to allow testing .
No smoothness testing shall be performed when there is moisture of any kind on the pavement surface .
The surface will be accepted on a continuous basis for pavement smoothness .
Smoothness tolerances shall be applied to concrete pavements based on the following pavement categories Section Section Category A applies to the following pavement constructions .
New construction projects Category B applies to the following pavement constructions .
Corrections shall be made using an approved profiling device or by removing and replacing the pavement as directed by the Engineer .
Each area or section of pavement removed shall be at least feet in length and at least the full width of the lane involved .
When it is necessary to remove and replace a section of pavement any remaining portion of the slab adjacent to the joints that is less than feet in length shall also be removed and replaced .
Where surface corrections are made the Contractor shall reestablish the surface texture to a uniform texture equal in roughness to the surrounding uncorrected pavement .
Corrective work shall be completed prior to determining pavement thickness .
The entire surface of the pavement shall be sprayed uniformly with white pigmented curing compound immediately after the finishing of the surface and before the set of the concrete has taken place .
The curing compound shall not be applied during rainfall or when there is a water sheen on the pavement .
The top surface and sides of the pavement shall be entirely covered with polyethylene sheeting .
The Contractor shall protect the pavement from both public traffic and traffic caused by employees and agents .
This shall include watchmen to direct traffic and the erection and maintenance of warning signs lights pavement bridges or crossovers etc .
All damage to the pavement occurring prior to final acceptance shall be repaired or the pavement replaced .
Forms shall be removed carefully so as to avoid damage to the pavement .
Joints to be sealed shall be filled with joint sealing material meeting the requirements of Subsections or as shown on plans and Subsection before the pavement is opened to traffic and as soon after completion of the curing period as is feasible .
After a joint has been sealed all surplus sealant on the pavement shall be promptly removed .
The Engineer will decide when the pavement may be opened to traffic .
The pavement shall not be opened to traffic until test specimens have attained a compressive strength of pounds per square inch .
If such tests are not performed the pavement shall remain closed to traffic for days or days if Type IP cement or Type I or II cement with fly ash is used from the date of placement .
Prior to opening to traffic the pavement shall be cleaned .
The thickness of the pavement will be determined from cores taken in accordance with Subsection and tested in accordance with Subsection .. Holes remaining in the pavement after coring shall be completely filled by the Contractor at no additional cost to the State with concrete of the same quality as used to construct the pavement .
It is anticipated that when concrete pavement is placed over an asphalt treated base the concrete may penetrate the asphalt treated base .
Volumes of concrete that penetrate the asphalt treated base will not be included in the volume of concrete pavement to be paid for .
When cores are taken to determine the thickness of concrete pavement it is anticipated a layer of asphalt treated base will adhere to the bottom of the core .
Prior to determining the thickness of the concrete pavement all particles of asphalt treated base will be removed from the bottom of the core .
Measurement of core thicknesses will be made from top of concrete pavement to the top of the asphalt treated base .
For the purpose of establishing adjusted unit prices for pavement units to be considered separately are defined as linear feet of pavement in each traffic lane .
Each traffic lane will be divided into units of feet of pavement excluding exceptions and omissions beginning at the end of the pavement nearest the Beginning of Project .
At points the Engineer may select at random in each unit one core will be taken for each square yards of pavement or fraction thereof in the unit .
In calculating the average thickness of the pavement measurements which are in excess of the specified thickness by more than .
inch the actual thickness of the pavement in this area will be determined by taking exploratory cores at not less than foot intervals parallel to the centerline in each direction from the affected location until in each direction a core is found which is not deficient by more than .
inch will be evaluated by the Engineer and if in the judgment of the Engineer the deficient areas warrant removal they shall be removed and replaced with pavement of the thickness shown on the plans without cost to the Department .
If the Engineer determines that the deficient areas do not warrant removal the pavement may be left in place with no payment to the Contractor or may be removed and replaced at the Contractors option .
For contracts that involve the placement of less than square yards of pavement cores will not be taken unless the State Materials Engineer elects to do so .
For such contracts the Project Engineers measurements will be used to determine the pavement thickness as follows The Engineer will accurately measure by taut stringline or instrument from referenced grades and record the grade on which the pavement is to be placed .
After the pavement is in place the Engineer will accurately measure and record the grade of the top of the pavement above each point where the initial measurements were made .
Concrete pavement with fulldepth cracks or misplaced joints shall be removed and replaced at no additional expense to the Department .
Load transfer devices shall be established in these replaced panels in a manner sufficient to meet the designed load transfer requirements of the original pavement .
Concrete pavement will be measured by the square yard complete in place and accepted .
Where integral or raised edge curb is constructed the width of the pavement will include the width of the curb .
When rehabilitating existing pavement dowels will be measured per each and wooden joint filler board shall be measured by the linear foot .
For concrete and bridge end pavements the quantity will be computed by measuring by the limits of transverse grooving shown in the plan .
When not shown the quantity will be computed by measuring the bound area between the edge of pavement and the length of the pavement .
Concrete pavement will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard adjusted when applicable in accordance with Subsections .. and Expansion joints will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot .
Section Section When rehabilitating existing pavement dowel bars and expansion board will be paid for at the contract unit price per each and linear foot which shall be full compensation for furnishing all labor equipment tools and materials to complete the work .
No separate payment will be made for cutting off dowel bars left in the existing pavement .
Where the average thickness of pavement determined in accordance with Subsection or with Subsection is deficient in thickness by more than .
l. percent Section Section When the thickness of an area of pavement is deficient by more than .
inch and in the judgment of the Engineer the deficient area should be removed the area shall be removed and replaced at no additional costs the State with pavement of the specified thicknesses .
The adjusted unit price will be computed using the contract unit price of the concrete pavement .
For concrete pavement other than mainline pavement the surface will be tested using a Section Section foot straightedge at locations selected by the Engineer .
This work consists of bridge end pavement of concrete with reinforcement as shown on the plans constructed in one course on a prepared base in accordance with these specifications and in reasonably close conformity with the lines grades thickness and cross section shown on the plans or as directed .
The requirements specified for concrete pavement in Section shall apply in all respects to bridge end pavement except where otherwise indicated in the specific requirements below or on the plans .
When the plans specify a certain thickness of asphalt under the bridge end pavement the Contractor may substitute Class B Structural Concrete base in lieu of the asphalt .
The concrete base will be allowed to cure hours prior to placement of the bridge end pavement .
In the event the concrete pavement adjacent to the bridge end pavement has been previously poured the end of the pavement shall be used as a gauge in lieu of the temporary bulkhead .
The final finish of the bridge end pavement shall be that designated on the plans .
Concrete bridge end pavement shall be constructed monolithically unless construction joints are specifically indicated on the plans .
Concrete bridge end pavement complete in place and accepted will be measured as specified in Subsection .. .Basis of Payment .
Concrete bridge end pavement will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard in accordance with the methods as provided in Subsection .
This work consists of replacing continuously reinforced concrete pavement CRCP jointed reinforced concrete pavement JRCP or plain jointed concrete pavement JCP and the removal and replacement of base materials at locations designated on the plans or as determined by the Engineer all in accordance with the plans and specifications .
Equipment shall meet the requirements set out in Section for hand placement and finishing concrete pavement .
Existing pavement shall be removed in accordance with details shown on the plans and as specifically set out herein .
The removal of existing Section Section reinforced concrete pavement shall be accomplished by sawing the full thickness of the pavement along the edge of the repaired areas as shown on the plans andor as directed by the Engineer .
The pavement within the lap area shall not be disturbed damaged or removed until the continuity of the concrete and steel has been severed between the failed area and the lap area .
This shall be accomplished by sawing the full thickness of the pavement along the edge of the lap area .
A chipping type removal is required to prevent spalling the bottom of the pavement to remain .
The removal of existing plain concrete pavement shall be accomplished by sawing the full thickness of the pavement along the edge of the repaired areas as shown on the plans andor as directed by the Engineer .
Base material referred to herein and on the plans shall be all types of material below the pavement that requires removal and backfill .
Repair of the base and pavement shall conform to the requirements set forth herein and details shown on the plans .
The exposed faces of the concrete pavement the soil cement base andor polyethylene covering the base repair shall be sprayed with water just prior to pouring the new slab .
Structural concrete for pavement repair shall be made of cement or cement with additives andor admixtures .
Section Section The surface of the pavement shall be finished as designated elsewhere in the contract and in accordance with the applicable portions of Section .
All replacement concrete shall be checked longitudinal with a foot straightedge in accordance with Subsection .. for concrete pavement other than main line pavement .
Limitations on placing continuously reinforced concrete pavement are set forth in the following schedule CONCRETE PAVING SCHEDULE DURING DAYTIME HOURS Predicted High Temperature Hours of Daytime Placement Below ºF Daylight hours º ºF Noon to Sundown º ºF PM to Sundown ºF Above PM to Sundown Note The National Weather Services predicted high temperature for the day shall govern .
Side forms shall be removed and the shoulder repaired with asphalt pavement and the area cleared of equipment and waste materials prior to opening to traffic .
The sampling and testing frequency for concrete test cylinders shall be at least two cylinders per day per section of lane for which an individual lane closure is effected and concrete pavement is replaced .
A maturity meter probe shall be inserted into the last concrete placed that represents the pavement area to be tested .
The pavement may be opened to traffic when maturity meter reading indicates that the required in place strength is obtained .
Replacement of the concrete pavement will be measured for payment by the square yard complete in place .
Section Section No separate measurement will be made for reinforcing steel wire mesh longitudinal joints polyethylene sheeting and asphalt pavement for repair of shoulders and maintenance of traffic items required .
The accepted quantities of saw cuts concrete for base repairs smooth dowel bars tie bars and concrete pavement will be paid for at the contract unit prices which shall be full compensation for completing the work furnishing all labor equipment tools materials and bituminous plant mix required for shoulder repair .
Removal and disposal of pavement and base materials shall be made under appropriate items under Section .
After a joint has been sealed all surplus sealant on the pavement shall be promptly removed .
This work consists of surface preparation including cleaning and placement of polymer concrete in spalled areas of concrete pavement or other areas directed by the Engineer in accordance with these specifications and in reasonably close conformity with the lines and grades of the existing pavement .
The polymer concrete shall be one of the approved materials listed in the MDOTs Approved Products List under the List of Approved Rapid Setting Commercial Grouts and Patching Compounds for use in the repair of punchouts spall repairs in concrete pavements .
Graded aggregate and resin used in polymer concrete pavement repair of spalled areas will be measured by the cubic foot of aggregate and by Section Section the gallon for resin .
This work consists of prerolling existing pavement to determine construction procedures required under other provisions of the contract .
The loaded roller shall not encroach upon bridge end pavement or in the absence of bridge end pavement within feet or greater distance when directed of bridge abutments except under specific authority granted to cross a bridge .
Prerolling may begin as early as A.M. and continue as long as the surface temperature of the pavement remains below F. The above work shall be included and correlated with the general sequence of operations set out in Subsection .Method of Measurement .
The area of prerolling will be computed by using the horizontal length along the centerline of the roadway and the width unless otherwise specified of the concrete pavement in or under the traffic lane being prerolled .
This work consists of locating unstable concrete pavement drilling of holes and the pumping of a slurry type grout mixture to stabilize and underseal the pavement .
When an asphalt overlay is required it shall be the Contractors responsibility to schedule operations in such a manner that the first course of overlay will be placed at the earliest practicable time and no later than fourteen days after the pavement has been stabilized .
When designated on the plans this work shall also consist of drilling holes in the shoulder adjacent to cracks at the edge of the pavement and the pumping of a slurry type grout Section Section mixture to fill the cracks to the surface of the cement treated shoulder .
Pressure grouting shall not be performed when the subgrade contains an abnormal amount of moisture as evidenced by standing water on the pavement or in joints or cracks .
The equipment shall be that customarily used in pressure grouting of earthen embankments or mudjacking of concrete pavement .
The equipment shall be in satisfactory operating condition and operated in such a manner as to prevent unnecessary damage to the pavement .
e A positive action pump capable of forcing grout into voids and cavities beneath the pavement .
Section Section h Equipment to measure pavement lift shall consist of no less than four gauges mounted on a measuring device or devices that is capable of detecting movement on each side of a joint or crack and the adjoining shoulder simultaneously .
When testing is required it is intended to locate all pavements having a deflection exceeding .
Testing may begin as early as A.M. and continue as long as the surface temperature of the pavement remains below F. Preliminary Testing by the Department .
When the pavement has been tested and marked by the Department preliminary testing will not be required by the Contractor .
Testing shall be performed as follows One set of gauges will be positioned on each side of a joint or crack near the pavement edge .
The test truck will then be moved into position and stopped with the center of the nearest test axle about one foot from the joint or crack and the outside test wheel about one foot from the pavement edge .
When testing shoulders gauge positioning and testing shall be the same as indicated above for roadway pavement .
Any undersealed pavement with movement of .
Any pavement which continues to show movement in excess of that specified after two properly performed groutings may be accepted or the slab may be removed and replaced as directed by the Engineer .
When pressure grouting cracks located in the shoulders at the edge of the pavement the holes in the shoulders shall be located as shown on the plans or as directed by the Engineer .
Pumping will continue until a clear flow of grout protrudes from an adjacent hole joint or crack or until the pavement begins to lift .
Additional evidence that grouting should cease is a rapid rise of the pavement or a rise of the adjacent shoulder .
A minimum lifting of the pavement will generally be required to move grout into the cavities and voids however the lifting shall not exceed .
Movement of the pavement and adjacent shoulder will be monitored by the Contractor with equipment as required by Subsection .. h. Care shall be taken not to crack the pavement by differential lifting .
Moderate to major pavement cracks or pavement broken during the pumping operation due to the Contractors negligence will be repaired or removed and replaced at the Contractors expense .
Deposits of mud andor grout on the pavement or shoulders shall be removed and the surface cleaned before traffic is permitted on the section .
Traffic shall not use the undersealed pavement for at least three hours after grouting .
When pavement is not to be overlaid all grout shall be removed from the holes to the bottom surface of the concrete pavement and filled with a stiff sandcement mixture or an approved quick setting patching material .
The test shall not be conducted until the undersealed pavement has been open to traffic for at least twelve hours .
These tests shall be conducted in accordance with Subsection Based upon these test results the pavement will be accepted or designated for further undersealing or replaced as directed by the Engineer .
The cement incorporated into the grout mixture will be paid for at the contract unit price per pound which price shall be full compensation for furnishing materials to be incorporated into the specified type of grout mixture for all hauling mixing pumping and cleanup required to stabilize the pavement .
All filling material shall be thoroughly compacted and if under the pavement structure the material shall be compacted to the density specified in the contract .
When poly vinyl chloride corrugated sewer pipe is used joints shall be made in accordance with the pipe manufacturers recommendations and ASTM F . The backfill of the trench along the pavement edge across the shoulder and outside the shoulder shall be as shown in the details of the drawings .
Wire mesh covers pipe and pipe fittings couplings untreated permeable material geotextile fabric granular material bituminous pavement mixture trenching disposal of trenched materials and other miscellaneous appurtenances used for edge drain installation will not be measured separately for payment .
Edge drain and edge drain outletsvents measured as prescribed above will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot which price shall be full compensation for furnishing all labor materials tools equipment and incidentals and for doing all the work involved in constructing edge drains and edge drain outletsvents complete in place including wire mesh covers pipe and pipe fittings couplings untreated permeable material geotextile fabric granular material bituminous pavement mixture trenching disposal of trenched materials and other miscellaneous appurtenances as shown on the plans and as specified herein .
Holes larger than nominal post size drilled through paved surfaces or cement treated courses shall be properly backfilled with hot or cold bituminous pavement d Outoftolerance posts shall be pulled and properly replaced or reset and all disrupted portions of the roadbed structure restored as directed and Section Section e Mutilated posts shall be pulled and properly replaced and all disrupted portions of the roadbed structure restored in kind or as directed .
Joints shall match as nearly as possible adjacent joints in curb or pavements .
Concrete for curbs integral with concrete Section Section pavement shall meet the requirements of Section .
Concrete used for curb integral with concrete pavement shall be proportioned mixed and placed in accordance with the provisions of Section .
Expansion joints shall be formed of premolded joint filler of the specified thickness and shall be placed in line with expansion joints in the adjoining pavement or structure and at other locations designated on the plans .
When curbing is to be constructed on concrete or bituminous pavement that is not newly Section Section placed the bed shall be thoroughly swept and cleaned by compressed air .
The materials used in the manufacture of concrete shall conform to the requirements for the type of concrete pavement used in the roadway as set out in Section or shall conform to the requirements for Class B concrete as set out in Section as shown on the plans and in the proposal or as otherwise indicated in the contract .
Driveway areas shall be defined as follows a Where the driveway joins pavement and integral curb construction the driveway area shall include the entire paved area behind the normal back of curb line .
Asphalt pavement shall be in accordance with the applicable materials and construction requirements of Sections and .
The approved material shall be uniformly spread over the entire area immediately prior to placing the pavement .
In the event the locations are not shown on the plans joints shall be placed between all edges of the median or island pavement and the surrounding curb or pavement .
Where applicable joints shall be placed to match expansion and contraction joints in adjacent curb or pavement .
After the pavement is finished it shall be protected and cured in accordance with the requirements of Subsection .. or by other approved method .
Asphalt pavement used in construction of median and island pavement shall be manufactured and placed in accordance with the requirements of Sections and except that approved modified methods of placement shaping and compacting will be permitted .
The pavement shall consist of the layers and types shown on the plans .
The surface of the finished pavement shall conform closely to the typical section indicated on the plans and shall not have irregularities that would prohibit complete surface drainage including drainage over Section Section adjacent curb .
When specified pavement markings on median and island pavement shall be made as detailed or as directed by the Engineer and shall conform to the provisions and requirements of the applicable sections for the markings specified .
Median and island pavement of the type specified will be measured in square yards .
Median and island pavement of the type specified will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard which shall be full compensation for completing the work .
The final riding surface of the detour road shall be asphalt pavement .
Limits of the lump sum detour shall be all work right of the right edge of pavement or left of the left edge of pavement as applicable necessary to construct the detour .
The Contractor will be responsible for the design of the detour bridges and the pavement structure design .
The pavement structure shall be designed based on the selected type of embankment .
It shall also include embankment design and test data base and pavement design and test data proposed asphalt Job Mix Formula JMF the method of developing the JMF all JMF testing a list of materials and their test properties a quality control plan and construction plan that includes lift thicknesses .
A longitudinal pavement edge that traffic is expected to move across should have an elevation difference of not more than ¼ inches .
If the pavement edge is more than ½ inches and less than or equal to ¼ inches uneven pavement signs will be required as shown in the plans or contract documents .
If the pavement edge is less than or equal to ½ inches no uneven pavement signs will be required .
Transverse pavement joints shall be sufficiently tapered to allow for the safe movement of traffic .
When a paving operation produces a longitudinal pavement edge that traffic is expected to move across the adjacent lane shall be constructed to eliminate any uneven pavement edge within hours unless prohibited by weather conditions or an emergency arises .
All failed areas that have been removed and all trenches shall be filled and compacted to the elevation of the existing pavement before work is discontinued for the day .
The Contractor shall be required to place granular material on the shoulders at any time a differential of two and onequarter ¼ inches or more exists between the present pavement edge and the shoulder grade .
In locations where a ¼inch differential exists between the pavement edge and the shoulder material and along a section which lies outside a work zone delineated with traffic control devices such as drums this condition shall be corrected by the placement of the shoulder material to correct the differential .
Temporary edge lines placed on the final pavement course of projects requiring paved shoulders with surface treatment may be placed on the adjacent shoulder as close to the Section Section permanent location as possible until the surface treatment is placed .
Permanent pavement markings are to be applied no sooner than days nor later than days after placement of the final lift of pavement .
When shoulder paving or placement of granular material adjacent to the pavement edge is required and upon approval of the Engineer the permanent edge stripe may be delayed until a section not to exceed five miles of the shoulder work is complete .
Permanent pavement markings on surface treatment shall be delayed until the maximum amount of seal aggregate has embedded and all loose material is broomed from the surface .
All temporary stripe shall be maintained in good order until placement of the permanent pavement markings or placement of the next pavement course or until removed .
Repair of structural failures in the pavement foundation or a structure beneath the surface not resulting from the Contractors failure to comply with the requirements or limitations of the contract or from the Contractors operations will be the responsibility of the Department .
This work consists of furnishing placing maintaining or replacing as necessary removing when no longer applicable and installation at other locations all traffic control devices including pavement marking materials paint tape markers etc .
Preformed pavement marking materials must be listed on the Departments APL and meet the requirements of Subsection .. .. Reflective Raised Pavement Markers .
Raised pavement markers must be on the Departments APL and shall meet the applicable requirements of Subsection .. .. Construction Signs .
Temporary stripes are pavement markings temporary in nature that are used to direct traffic from its customary path to be removed from the pavement course under use for further temporary traffic control to be covered by the next pavement course andor to be replaced by permanent stripes .
When preformed tape is used on the final pavement course for temporary traffic markings it shall be removed at no additional cost to the State .
Temporary paint stripe placed on the final pavement course may be left in place and covered with permanent stripe of the same color provided the temporary stripe has been satisfactorily placed in the proper location .
Painted traffic stripe removed from the final asphalt pavement surface shall be sealed with an approved sealant .
All temporary pavement markings placed and measured for payment under this section Section Section shall include any required removal .
Existing pavement markings conflicting with temporary markings shall be removed .
When measuring removal of pavement markings for payment the skips will not be included in the measurement .
Reflective pavement markers for construction zones shall be secured to the pavement by an approved adhesive .
Clean pavement need not be blastcleaned unless the surface contains an abnormal amount of asphalt or the surface is contaminated with dirt grease oil or any Section Section other material that would adversely affect the bond of the adhesive .
When a pressuresensitive pad is used a primer shall be applied directly to the road surface with a brush or sprayer but is not to be applied when the ambient temperature is lower than F. No marker shall be installed when the relative humidity of the air is greater than percent or when the pavement is not surface dry .
No markers shall be installed over longitudinal or transverse joints of the pavement surface .
Cleaning may be done by hand brooms rotary brooms air blast scrapers or whatever combination of equipment is necessary to clean the pavement thoroughly without damage to the surface .
The paint shall be applied when the ambient temperature is no less than oF the pavement surface is properly prepared and the temperature of the pavement surface is no less than oF .
This work consists of furnishing materials and placing thermoplastic pavement markings of the type specified in reasonably close conformity with these specifications and the details shown on the plans or established .
All pavement marking material excluding edge lines over rumble strips shall be applied using the extrusionribbon method .
Application of thermoplastic material shall be made only in periods of dry weather and when the temperature of the pavement surface is at least F. The pavement shall be surface dry to the satisfaction of the Engineer before application will be permitted .
Immediately before application the areas to receive markings shall be cleaned thoroughly in accordance with Subsection On areas of pavement cured with compound the membrane shall be removed completely by shot blasting sand blasting or other approved method .
When thermoplastic material is to be applied to concrete pavements or bridge surfaces a bindersealer of the type and amount recommended by the manufacturer of the thermoplastic material shall be applied prior to placement of the thermoplastic material .
On other pavement surfaces a bindersealer shall be applied under those conditions recommended by the manufacturer of the thermoplastic material .
The thickness of the thermoplastic material when measured above the surface plane of the pavement shall be within tolerance of the specified thickness .
Any material so damaged marred or picked up by traffic shall be repaired and the thermoplastic material tracked onto the pavement shall be removed .
This work consists of furnishing and placing pavement markers of the types colors shapes and dimensions specified and in reasonably close conformity with the location lines and details shown on the plans or as directed by the Engineer .
Type B through G High Performance reflective markers shall be listed on the Departments APL for high performance raised pavement markers .
The bituminous adhesive for pavement markers shall meet the requirements of Subsection .Construction Requirements .
The markers shall be installed when the relative humidity of the air is or less the pavement surface is dry and the temperature of the pavement surface is no less than F. Other pavement marking materials such as thermoplastic cold plastic and paint shall be placed prior to installation of markers .
The adhesive shall be heated to between F and F and applied directly to the pavement surface from the melterapplicator by either pumping or pouring .
Excessive adhesive squeeze out shall be removed from the pavement and adhesive on the exposed surfaces of the markers shall be immediately removed .
Soft rags moistened with mineral spirits conforming to Federal Specification TTT or kerosene may be used if necessary to remove adhesive from exposed faces of pavement markers .
No markers shall be installed over longitudinal or transverse joints of the pavement surface .
Raised pavement markers of the type specified will be measured per each as determined from actual count in place .
Raised pavement markers of the type specified will be paid for at the respective contract unit price per each which shall be full compensation for completing the work .
This work consists of furnishing materials and installing cold plastic pavement markings of the type specified in reasonably close conformity with the plans and these specifications .
When high performance profile cold plastic pavement markings are used the manufacturer shall provide application equipment manual or automatic as necessary for the job requirements .
The freeair temperature shall be at least F. The pavement surface shall be dry and clean .
All dirt loose particles of pavement and other foreign material shall be removed prior to application of the pavement marking material .
Where possible the markings shall be placed adjacent to rather than on longitudinal construction joints in the pavement .
Cold plastic pavement markings will be measured for payment in accordance with Subsection .. .Basis of Payment .
Cold plastic pavement markings will be paid for at the contract unit price per mile linear foot or square foot as applicable which shall be full compensation for completing the work .
The cross section will show the horizontal dimensions and elevations of ditches edge of travel lanes shoulder lines pavement crown lines barriers and retaining walls etc .
The finished top surface of each foundation shall be inches from the pavement edge elevation at the foundation location .
Where foundations are constructed in areas where the pavement edge elevation and shoulder edge elevation differ more than twelve inches taller poles should be evaluated to minimize exposed foundation .
Inductive Loop Detection System shall consist of the following principal components two or more turns of insulated loop wire wound in shallow slot sawed in the pavement leadin cable from the curbside pull box to the intersection controller cabinet and an electronics unit housed in a nearby controller cabinet .
The material shall when cured retain flexible characteristics and accommodate movement associated with portland cement and bituminous concrete pavements .
A chalk line or equivalent method shall be used to outline the perimeter of the loop on the pavement and routes for leadin cables .
The saw cut in the pavement shall not deviate by more than one inch from the chalked line .
All wireless batterypowered Magnetometer Vehicle Detection Systems MDS shall consist of one or more batterypowered wireless Vehicle Sensor Nodes VSN installed inpavement with reusable enclosure .
The testing shall prove that all inpavement sensors are configured appropriately .
Boring operations shall be kept a minimum of two feet Section Section from the edge of shoulder and care shall be taken not to disturb existing pavement or edge drains .
The use of water which could undermine pavements shall not be permitted .
The base and pavement grade stakes shall be set on intervals in accordance with the applicable requirements of Sections and .
D Design line work edge of pavement shoulder etc .
Unless otherwise provided all materials furnished that are to remain in place after final acceptance shall be new and unused before incorporation into the work except that crushed reclaimed concrete pavement meeting the requirements of Section as amended may be used to produce aggregate for all asphalt pavements .
When allowed by the specifications Recycled Asphalt Pavement RAP may be used in the manufacture of asphalt pavements .
Frame The part of the work or materials for which the same quality characteristics are specified such as a base course an aggregate stockpile a hot bituminous pavement course etc .
Asphalt cement shall be homogeneous free of water and shall not foam when heated to a temperature of C. Except for use in asphalt pavements asphalt cement of the grade specified shall conform to the requirements of Subsection .
Fine aggregate used in major construction such as concrete pavements and bridges shall be natural sand unless otherwise designated on the plans or in any special provisions .
When the slipform method for placement of concrete pavement is used the fine aggregate gradation requirements will be modified if necessary .
is allowed only in concrete pavements Section Hydraulic Cement Concrete Pavements This tolerance is not applicable for Class F and Class FX Concrete .
Crushed concrete is defined as recycled concrete pavement structural concrete or other concrete sources that can be crushed to meet the gradation requirements for Size No .
Crushed reclaimed concrete pavement shall also be allowed as a coarse aggregate provided it meets the quality requirements below and the final product produced therefrom meets all other specification requirements .
sieve shall consist of hard durable particles of naturally disintegrated rock or material obtained by crushing stone slag gravel reclaimed concrete pavement or combinations thereof .
Fine aggregate produce from crushing reclaimed concrete pavement shall be manufactured from material meeting the quality requirements for coarse aggregate .
Joint fillers and seals for concrete bridges concrete pavements or base course and culvert pipe shall conform to the following applicable subsections .
In addition bituminous material shall be applied in such a manner that a smooth pavement will result in the invert bottom of pipe when installed for of the circumference of circular pipe and of the circumference of pipe arches .
The pavement except where the upper edges intersect the corrugations shall have a minimum thickness of inch above the crest of the corrugations .
Upon curing these materials shall produce an adherent reflective pavement marking capable of resisting deformation by traffic .
The high build traffic paint shall be quick dry waterborne traffic paint to be applied on asphalt or concrete pavements .
Welded deformed steel bar mats for concrete pavement reinforcement shall meet or exceed Grade billet steel according to AASHTO M and shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M . .. Steel Welded and NonWelded Wire Reinforcement Plain and Deformed for Concrete .
Approved NonFast Set Epoxy anchor systems may be used for the repair of concrete pavements that do not involve permanent sustained tension applications or overhead applications .
Approved epoxy anchors for concrete pavement repair shall be one listed on the Departments APL .
Raised pavement markers including high performance raised pavement markers shall be listed on the Departments APL .
Pavement and jiggle markers shall conform to one or more of the following types Section Section Type A NonReflective White Jiggle Markers Class AcrylonitrileButadieneStyrene Polymer Markers Class Ceramic Markers Type AY NonReflective Yellow Jiggle Markers Class AcrylonitrileButadieneStyrene Polymer Markers Class Ceramic Markers Type B Way Clear Reflective Markers Type C RedClear Reflective Markers Type D Way Yellow Reflective Markers Type E OneWay Clear Reflective Markers Type F OneWay Yellow Reflective Markers Type G YellowClear Reflective Markers Type H Chip Seal Clear Reflective Markers Type I Chip Seal Yellow Reflective Markers High performance raised pavement markers shall be available in Types B through G .
The Contractor shall furnish the Engineer three copies of the manufacturers certified test reports covering all pavement markers shipped to the project .
The pavement markers will be tentatively accepted on the basis of the manufacturers certified test reports .
Final acceptance shall be based on check samples as set out in Subsection Marker Type B through G. The Contractor shall furnish the Engineer three copies of the manufacturers certification covering all pavement markers shipped to the project .
The certification shall state that the raised pavement markers meet the applicable requirements of ASTM D . The pavement markers will be tentatively accepted on the basis of the manufacturers certification .
Reflective pavement markers shall be listed on the Departments APL and shall meet the applicable requirements of ASTM D . Section Section .. Adhesive for Pavement Markers .
The adhesive shall be an asphaltic or thermoplastic material suitable for bonding pavement markers to hydraulic cement concrete pavement hot bituminous pavement and chipsealed surfaces when the road surface and marker temperatures are in the range of F to F. The composition of the adhesive must be such that its properties will not deteriorate when heated to and applied at temperatures up to F using either air or oiljacketed melters .
The hot applied flexible pavement marker adhesive shall be a hot melt thermoplastic material capable of bonding the marker without excessive marker movement at hot summer temperatures and remain flexible at winter temperatures .
The prefabricated markings described shall consist of white or yellow pigmented plastic films with reflective glass spheres uniformly distributed throughout their entire crosssectional area and be capable of being affixed to bituminous or hydraulic cement concrete pavements by either a pressure sensitive precoated adhesive or a liquid contact cement .
Cold plastic pavement markings shall be listed on the Departments APL .
The retroreflective pliant polymer pavement marking film shall consist of a mixture of high quality polymeric materials pigments .
The film shall be composed of the following materials Material Minimum Percent by Weight Resins Plasticizers Pigments Graded Glass Beads This film shall be capable of being fabricated into pavement markings of specified thickness and dimensions and of being adhered to asphaltic andor hydraulic cement concrete by means of a pressure sensitive precoated adhesive or a liquid contact cement applied at the time of installation .
The retroreflective pliant polymer pavement marking film shall be capable of conforming to pavement contours breaks faults etc .
through the action of traffic at normal pavement temperatures .
The film when applied according to the recommendations of the manufacturer shall provide a neat durable marking that will not flow or distort due to temperature if the pavement surface remains stable .
In addition to the specific material requirements set forth herein pavement marking materials must have been approved for listing in the Departments APL prior to their use .
The pigments shall be selected and blended to provide pavement markings that conform to standard highway colors .
The markings shall be precoated with a pressure sensitive adhesive capable of adhering to asphalt and hydraulic cement concrete pavement in accordance with the manufacturers instructions without the use of heat solvents or other additional adhesives .
Retroreflective preformed pavement markings Section Section shall be of the types described below and as specified on the plans or in the contract documents .
The adhesive shall be of a type that is completely removed with the pavement marking or colorless so as not to leave a color mark on the pavement .
The pavement markings shall consist of retroreflective materials on a conformable metallic backing precoated with a colorless pressure sensitive adhesive that does not leave a color mark on the pavement or of a type that is substantially removed with the pavement marking .
The Contractor shall furnish the Engineer three Section Section copies of certifications from the manufacturer for each lot of pavement markings stating that the material meets the requirements of the contract .
The preformed high performance pavement markings shall consist of white or yellow films with ceramic beads incorporated to provide immediate and continuing retroreflection .
Preformed high performance cold plastic pavement markings shall be listed on the Departments APL for Preformed High Performance Profile Cold Plastic Pavement Marking Tape .
The preformed pavement markings shall be capable of being adhered to the pavement by a precoated pressure sensitive adhesive .
A primer may be used to precondition the pavement surface .
The preformed pavement markings shall conform to pavement contours by the action of traffic .
The preformed pavement markings shall be highly durable retroreflective pliant polymer materials designed for longitudinal markings subjected to high traffic volumes .
The retroreflective pliant polymer pavement marking film shall consist of a mixture of high quality polymeric materials pigments and glass beads distributed throughout its base crosssectional area with a reflective layer of ceramic beads bonded to a durable polyurethane top surface .
The preformed pavement markings shall consist of white and yellow films with pigments selected and blended to conform to standard highway colors .
The pavement marking material shall be capable of use for patching worn areas of the same type in accordance with manufacturers instructions .
The film when applied according to the recommendations of the manufacturer shall provide a neat durable marking that will not flow or distort due to temperature if the pavement surface remains stable .
All manufacturers standard warranties and guarantees on high performance cold plastic pavement marking material which are provided as customary trade practice shall be delivered to the Engineer at the final inspection .
Section Section In the case of concrete placed directly on or in the ground such as for footings or bottom slabs protection and curing during cold weather may be provided as set for concrete pavement under Subsection The Contractor shall assume all risk and added cost connected with the placing and protecting of concrete during cold weather .
The grinding equipment shall be a power driven self propelled machine that is specifically designed to smooth and texture hydraulic cement concrete pavement with diamond blades .
It shall have a set of pivoting tandem bogey wheels at the front of the machine and the rear wheels shall be arranged to travel in the track of the fresh cut pavement .
In operation the profilograph shall be moved longitudinally along the pavement at a speed no greater than MPH so as to reduce bounce as much as possible .
This profile shall be the mean elevation referenced to the twelve points of contact with the pavement established by the support wheels .
The mortar mix shall be finished to the line of the existing joint and to the grade of the adjacent pavement or bridge deck .
Prior to placing slope pavement the areas beneath the pavement shall receive soil sterilization treatment as set out in Subsection .. Cleaning Up .
If authorized revisions are made in the finish grade or the configuration of the slope pavement computations will be made considering the changed dimensions .
