Rough stakes may be used to denote top and bottom of slopes edge of pavement gutter lines etc .
All rock stone parts of stone brick or cement concrete pavement parts of cemented stone walls or masonry Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
The Cold Planer shall be designed and built for planing flexible pavements and possess the ability to plane cement concrete patches when encountered in bituminous pavement .
The minimum width of pavement planed in each pass shall be meters except in areas to be trimmed and edged .
B Masonry removed from the walls covers and other portions of existing drainage structures also plain and reinforced concrete pavements and masonry removed from bridge substructures .
the trench through the pavement shall be cut to a neat line using an approved pavement breaker or power saw. . Channel Excavation .
Where channel excavation is made adjacent to a bridge or other structure the limits of pavement for channel excavation begin at the outer limits of payment for excavation for bridge or other structure .
Crushed Stone for Bridge Foundation M .. Reclaimed Pavement Borrow Material For Base Course meeting Subsection M .. may be substituted for Ordinary Borrow under the pavement areas .
Embankment meters or more in height from the elevation of the subgrade to the original ground elevation shall be constructed to the elevation of the proposed subgrade and then allowed to settle for days or such other period as the Engineer shall direct in writing before the pavement structure is constructed thereon .
The Contractor shall take precautions necessary to prevent damage to existing structures and conduits both above and below ground and to lawns walks and pavements .
Test Pits Through Pavements When test pits are required where the Contractor must break through pavements heshe shall make as small a test Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
Test pits made through pavements shall be cut on a neat line by a jack hammer saw or other mechanical means .
The cost of cutting the pavement on a neat line by jack hammer saw or other mechanical means and patching the pavements as required shall be included in the unit bid price for test pits made through pavements .
The cost for any material to restore the site to its original condition and cutting through pavements will be included in the Item .
The castings of structures located within the pavement area shall not be completely set to the established grade until the bottom course of pavement has been laid .
New gate and service boxes and existing gate and service boxes that are designated to be removed and reset or adjusted to line or grade which are located in roadway pavement areas shall have concrete collars constructed around them .
The work shall consist of manufacturing a stabilized base course through the recycling of the existing pavement structure and a specified depth of acceptable subbase material .
This combination of pavement and subbase material is to be uniformly crushed pulverized and blended then spread graded and compacted to the lines and grades shown on the plans or established by the Engineer .
Reclaiming operations shall not be permitted when the existing pavement or subbase contains frost when the subbase is excessively wet as determined by the Engineer nor when the air or surface temperature is below C. Reclaiming operations shall not commence before April and shall terminate on or before October unless otherwise approved in writing by the Engineer .
kilometers full width or as directed by the Engineer in order that the placing of pavement structure up to the binder course will be completed before beginning the next sequence of roadway reclamation work. . Equipment .
Prior to the start of reclamation the existing pavement shall be swept with a power sweeper to remove all trash sand dirt organic matter and other undesirable material to the satisfaction of the Engineer .
Also the existing pavement shall be sawcut full depth within the areas where the adjacent surface is to be protected curb side streets etc .
The Contractor shall reclaim only that area of pavement that can be processed and compacted by the end of the same working day at which time it must be opened to traffic with the Engineers approval .
The required density shall be maintained until the bituminous concrete pavement has been placed .
The total thickness of the pavement structure unless otherwise indicated and uppermost portion of the subbase layer shall be recycled to the design depth specified on the typical sections .
Reclaimed pavement borrow material for Base Course consists of crushed asphalt pavement crushed cement concrete and gravel borrow uniformly premixed and placed on the subgrade or subbase in close conformity with the lines and grades shown on the plans or established by the Engineer .
The reclaimed pavement borrow material shall be spread and compacted in layers not exceeding millimeters in depth compacted measurement except the last layer of reclaimed pavement borrow material conforming to M .. will be millimeters in depth compacted measurement .
Expansion joints shall be formed about all structures and features projecting through or into the pavement and between the pavement slab and adjacent curbing .
The pavement shall be protected and cured as required in Subsection .
The Contractor shall have no claim for extra payment if thickness of pavement exceeds that shown on the plans or as directed . .
The surfacing materials for paving the top portion of shoulders shall conform to the requirements of the particular sections of these specifications relating to the kind of pavement or surfacing required .
Portions of the shoulders of sufficient width to hold the pavement in its proper place shall be built in conjunction with the pavement and shall be rolled to a width of at least millimeters with each rolling of the roadway base course or surface course .
Whenever the plan shows that sodding loaming paving or other similar work affecting shoulder construction adjacent to the roadway pavement is required the Contractor will be required to construct temporary shoulders of suitable Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
material to support the roadway pavement adequately during rolling operations .
After the pavement is constructed the temporary shoulders shall be carefully removed and satisfactorily disposed of by the Contractor prior to construction of the permanent shoulders .
Where necessary temporary shoulders shall be constructed in conjunction with the construction of paved shoulders in the same manner as prescribed above for roadway pavement .
Paving of shoulders shall be done in the manner specified in the particular section of these specifications relating to the kind of pavement or surfacing to be used in this work .
Surfacing materials for paving shoulders will be measured as specified in the particular section for the kind of pavement required .
Compensation for the removal and disposal of temporary shoulder material will be included in the contract unit price under the item for the kind of material used in the roadway pavement or permanent shoulder .
When shoulders are paved with surfacing materials such materials will be paid for at the contract unit prices for the kinds of materials used in the pavement as specified in the particular section relating to the kind of pavement or surface ordered .
This type of pavement shall be composed of mineral aggregate mineral filler and bituminous material .
The pavement shall be constructed in courses as shown on the plans and as directed on the prepared or existing base in accordance with these specifications and in close conformity with the lines grades compacted thickness and typical cross section shown on the plans . .
Where plant inspection is maintained the material will be considered acceptable for use when the specified tests from samples obtained at the production plant indicate conformance to M The densities of the completed pavement shall not be less than of the density obtained from Laboratory compaction of a mixture composed of the same materials in like proportions .
Where required these control stakes shall be maintained by the Contractor and used throughout the operations from the grading of the subbase material up to and including the final layers of the pavement .
On each contract specifying metric tons of pavement or more the Contractor shall submit for approval a schedule of proposed paving and compaction equipment .
When it is required that the existing hardened surface shall be utilized as a base for the new pavement a tack coat of bituminous material of the kind and grade shown on the plans shall be uniformly applied by mechanical means to the present surface at the rate of application of either .
liters per square meter or that and by the method indicated on the plans or as directed by the Engineer immediately prior to laying the bottom course of the new pavement .
If during construction it is found that the spreading and finishing equipment in use leaves tracks or indented areas or produces other permanent blemishes in the pavement which are not satisfactorily corrected by the scheduled operations the use of such equipment shall be discontinued and other satisfactory spreading and finishing equipment shall be provided by the Contractor .
The construction of bituminous concrete pavement shall terminate November and shall not be resumed prior to April except as determined and directed in writing by the Engineer depending upon the necessity and emergency of attendant conditions weather conditions and location of the project .
No mixture shall be placed unless the breakdown and intermediate rolling can be completed by the time the material has cooled to C and provided that the density of the completed pavement attains at least of the laboratory compacted density .
The contact surfaces of bridge curbings manholes catch basins or other appurtenant structures in pavement shall be painted thoroughly with a thin uniform coating of bitumen Specification RS just before any mixture is placed against them .
During the rolling of layered pavement in order to prevent creeping and aggregate crushing care shall be taken not to exceed two passes with the vibrator in action .
For deep lift pavements these passes shall normally not exceed two in each direction except that the number of vibratory passes in either direction may be varied in order to obtain the required density .
Longitudinal rolling shall start at the side and proceed toward the center of the pavement except on superelevated curves where the rolling shall begin on the low side and progress to the high side overlapping on successive trips by at least millimeters .
To prevent rolloff of the pavement edges and longitudinal joints on deep lift paving the outer millimeters of the deep lift mixture shall be left unrolled until the temperature of the mix ranges between C and C whereupon it shall be compacted by the steel roller .
The densities of the completed pavement shall not be less than of the density obtained from Laboratory compaction of a mixture composed of the same materials in like proportions .
In making joints along any adjoining edge such as curb gutter or an adjoining pavement and after the mixture is placed by the mechanical spreader just enough of the hot material shall be placed by hand method to fill any space left open .
The top course of pavement on bridges shall consist of Modified Top Course and be placed only after the curbing and edging are in place in the work .
The straightedge shall be held in successive positions parallel to the road centerline and in contact with the road surface and the entire area checked from one side to the other of the pavement .
The entire cost for furnishing adequate and approved straightedges with the use of same and the repair or removal and replacement of pavement as may be required by the Engineer shall be borne by the Contractor as part of the payment made to himher for the relevant contract items . .
No vehicular traffic or loads shall be permitted on the newly completed pavement until adequate stability has been attained and the material has cooled sufficiently to prevent distortion or loss of fines .
If rubberized asphalt is applied directly to an old existing Portland Cement Concrete pavement bandaid strips shall be placed prior to the rubberized asphalt treatment on all transverse and longitudinal joints .
At all starts intersections junctions at transverse joints with previous spreads or other pavements provision shall be made to ensure that the distributor nozzles are operated at full force when the application begins .
During application adequate provision shall be made to prevent marring and discoloration of adjacent pavements structures vehicles foliage or personal property . .
When the maximum of aggregate has been embedded into the rubberized asphalt and the pavement has cooled all loose material shall be swept or otherwise removed at such time and in such a manner as will not displace any embedded aggregate or damage the rubberized asphalt. . Curing .
This type of pavement shall be composed of mineral aggregate mineral filler and bituminous material .
This work shall consist of a pavement composed of air entrained Portland cement concrete plain or reinforced as specified constructed on an approved foundation in accordance with these specifications and in close conformity with the lines grades thicknesses and typical cross sections shown on the Plans or established by the Engineer .
The cement concrete pavement may be constructed by the SlipForm Method or the FixedForm Method .
It shall also be placed to a width meter greater millimeters on each side than the required pavement slab width .
The grade on which the pavement is to be constructed shall then be brought to the proper profile by means of a track mounted subgrade machine operation on the prepared track line or by other mechanical means approved by the Engineer .
If the subbase is displaced by the movement of the paver to the extent that the finished pavement will be affected the two areas that will support the slipform paver tracks shall be stabilized as provided herein .
The areas to be stabilized will be immediately outside the edge lines of the pavement slab on both sides and are each to be not less than millimeters in width measured from the exterior edges of the proposed pavement slab .
Low areas shall be filled and compacted to a condition similar to that of surrounding grade except that areas which are not more than millimeters below subbase elevation may be filled with concrete integral with the pavement .
The finished grade shall be maintained in a smooth and compacted condition until the pavement is placed .
Satisfactory wooden forms as approved by the Engineer may be used for curves of meter radius or less or where the design of pavement is such that the metal forms can not be used .
Where concrete is to be placed adjoining a previously constructed lane of pavement and mechanical equipment will be operated upon the existing lane of pavement that lane may be opened to traffic when curing operations have been completed provided that beam tests show that the concrete has attained a modulus of rupture of at least .
However the pavement may be used at the end of days if only rubbertired finishing equipment is permitted to operate upon it and the concrete has attained a modulus of rupture of at least .
When high early strength concrete is used mechanical equipment may be operated upon the pavement after a shorter period of curing or as beam tests show that the concrete has attained a modulus of rupture of at least .
Pavers will not be permitted to operate on the finished pavement unless permission is given by the Engineer .
Gaps in the pavement for crossovers will not be permitted .
The strikeoff shall be so adjusted for elevation that when the concrete is consolidated as herein designated sufficient material remains above grade as is required for the final finished surface of the pavement .
When reinforced concrete pavement is placed in two layers the entire width of the bottom layer shall be struck off to such length and depth that the sheet of fabric or bar mat may be laid full length on the concrete in its final position without further manipulation .
The slipform paver shall be an approved machine designed to spread consolidate screed and float finish the freshly placed concrete in one complete pass of the machine in such manner that a minimum of hand finish will be necessary to provide a dense and homogenous pavement in conformance with the plans and specifications .
The machine shall vibrate the concrete for the full width and depth of the strip of pavement being placed .
The concrete shall be of uniform consistency such that there will be no appreciable slumping at the edge of the pavement after the slipforms have passed .
The following tolerances on edge slump shall apply edge slump exclusive of edge rounding shall not exceed millimeter within millimeters of the edge at the extreme outside limits of the concrete pavement at the longitudinal joint along the pavement crown and along the longitudinal joint between the travel lanes and speed change lanes .
For reinforced pavement and where necessary more than one machine andor complimentary equipment will be allowed subject to the Engineers approval .
Surface vibrating apparatus shall be used only on the top course or layer of the pavement and must be completely out of use when moving over transverse joints or when spreading the bottom course of concrete in twocourse construction .
It shall not be operated where the surface of the concrete as spread is below the elevation of the finished surface of the pavement . .
Laps between adjacent mats or sheets and positions of same with respect to longitudinal joints transverse joints and edges of pavement shall be as shown on the plans .
The transverse finishing machine for the pavement shall be mechanical selfpropelled and of an approved type .
If uniform and satisfactory density of the concrete is not obtained by the vibratory method at joints along forms at structures and throughout the pavement the Contractor shall furnish equipment and methods which will produce pavement conforming to the Specifications .
Mechanical Method The float in contact with the pavement shall be at least .
The float shall pass over each area of pavement no more than twice except with the special permission of the Engineer .
It shall be operated from bridges spanning the pavement .
It shall be operated with a sawing motion parallel to the center line while passing gradually from one side of the pavement to the other .
The surface of the concrete shall be struckoff immediately after it is placed and leveled by means of an adjustable steel template millimeters wide and millimeters longer than the width of the pavement .
A second adjustable steel template millimeters wide and millimeters longer than the width of the pavement shall be used directly behind this template .
Both templates shall be constructed to produce pavement of the desired cross section and shall have sufficient strength to retain their shape under all working conditions .
The concrete adjacent to joints shall be compacted or firmly placed without voids or segregation against the joint material under and around all load transfer devices joint assembly units and other features designed to extend into the pavement .
The lateral edge adjacent to pavement already in place shall be rounded with an edging tool having a vertical leg millimeters wide and slightly longer than that used on the first slab .
The straightedge shall be placed on the form or edge of completed pavement nearest the operator .
The handle shall be lowered to knee height and pushed transversely over the pavement surface .
When it reaches the opposite form or center of full width paving the handle shall be raised to shoulder height and the straightedge drawn back across the pavement in the same path .
Following the scraping straightedges the final surface texture shall be developed by use of a wet burlap strip dragged longitudinally over the pavement .
The burlap shall be a minimum of millimeters longer than the pavement width being dragged .
At least millimeters of the burlap drag shall be in contact with the surface when dragging the pavement .
When not in use the drag shall be removed from the pavement surface .
All joints shall be sealed before the pavement is opened to any kind of traffic .
When supported above the fine grade before placing concrete the tiebars shall be at the middepth of the pavement .
If placed under the distributed reinforcement the tiebars shall be not less than millimeters nor more than millimeters below the finished pavement surface .
Longitudinal construction joints shall extend for the full depth of the pavement be perpendicular to the pavement surface and keyed and tied as shown on the plans .
All honeycombed areas on the vertical faces of longitudinal joints shall be cleaned with a wire brush and thoroughly wetted and patched with mortar of the same composition as that used in the pavement .
The width of the cut shall not be less than millimeters and the depth shall not be less than onefourth of the pavement thickness plus millimeters .
The joint shall be sawed before any equipment or vehicles are allowed on the pavement .
It shall extend from the subgrade to millimeters below the pavement surface .
These joints shall consist of planes of weakness created by sawing grooves in the surface of the pavement at the locations indicated on the plans .
The timing and sawing and the order in which joints are sawed shall be subject to such control by the Engineer as in hisher judgment is necessary to protect the pavement from ravelling spalling cracking or other damage .
The pavement shall be cut for not less than millimeters in width to a depth at least onefourth of the pavement thickness .
The subbase at the locations where expansion contraction and construction joint load transfer assemblies are to be installed shall be trimmed accurately to the required cross section and depth of pavement .
The installation of dowel assemblies and the placement of the surrounding concrete shall result in dowels tightly enclosed in concrete and parallel to both the pavement surface and center line at plan locations .
The pavement slabs shall be numbered consecutively as the work progresses and the last slab placed each day shall be stamped with the date .
The marking shall be on the right hand corner at the beginning of each slab and so placed that it can be read traveling in the direction the pavement was laid .
The straightedge shall be placed at several points across the pavement parallel to the centerline and shall be advanced in .
Where the departure from correct cross section exceeds millimeters the pavement shall be removed and replaced by and at the expense of the Contractor .
When it is necessary to remove and replace a section of pavement any remaining portion of the slab adjacent to the joints that is less than meters in length shall also be removed and replaced. . Curing .
Whenever fixedforms are not used exceptional care shall be taken in the use of paper or burlap to prevent any damage to the unsupported edges of the pavement .
The curing media shall be applied at the appropriate time and shall be applied uniformly and completely to all surfaces and edges of the pavement .
meters of pavement is exposed at one time followed at once by application of cotton mats .
The top surface and sides of the pavement shall be entirely covered with waterproof paper .
The surface of the pavement shall be moist when the paper is placed .
Also wind protection to the spray fog shall be provided by an adequate shield when the compound is applied to the pavement .
Immediately after the forms are removed the entire area of the sides of the slab shall be coated with the curing compound at the rate specified for the pavement surface .
If rain falls on the newly coated pavement before the film has dried sufficiently to resist damage or if the film is damaged in any other way the Contractor will be required to apply a new coat of material to the affected areas equal to that specified for the original coat .
All holes or honeycomb shall be patched promptly with mortar of the same composition as that used in the pavement which has been allowed to set for about onehalf hour after mixing .
When it is necessary to remove and replace a section of pavement any remaining portion of the slab adjacent to the joints that is less than meters in length shall also be removed and replaced. . Sealing Joints .
Joints shall be sealed after curing and before any kind of traffic is permitted on the pavement .
When the atmospheric temperature at the time of sealing is below C the surface of the sealing compound in the finished joint shall be not less than millimeters below the level of the pavement surface .
Any excess material on the surface of the concrete pavement shall be removed immediately and the pavement surface cleaned .
In the event paving and construction operations must close down in the Fall because of cold weather and the contract can not be completed until the following year the Engineer shall require the Contractor to clean and seal all joints in the part of the pavement completed at the time of the shutdown in the manner prescribed in this Specification .
The Contractor shall erect and maintain suitable barricades and employ watchmen to exclude traffic from the newly constructed pavement for the period herein prescribed .
When it is necessary to provide for traffic across the pavement the Contractor shall construct at hisher entire expense immediately after the finishing of the concrete the necessary bridges over the pavement clear of the forms and at least millimeters clear of the concrete and sufficiently strong to carry the traffic .
Such protective materials shall consist of standard metal forms or wood planks having a nominal thickness of not less than millimeters and a nominal width of not less than the thickness of the pavement at its edge for the protection of the pavement edges and covering material such as burlap or cotton mats curing paper or plastic sheeting material for the protection of the surface of the pavement .
When rain appears imminent all paving operations shall stop and all available personnel shall begin placing forms against the sides of the pavement and covering the surface of the unhardened concrete with the protective covering .
The Contractor shall have on hand at the paving site sufficient burlap or paper to cover at least square meters of freshly laid pavement as a protection against sudden thunder showers or heavy downpours of rain .
Any part of the pavement damaged by traffic or other causes occurring prior to its final acceptance shall be repaired or replaced by and at the expense of the Contractor in a manner satisfactory to the Engineer .
The Contractor shall protect the pavement against both public traffic and the traffic caused by hisher own employees and agents .
The pavement shall be so protected until the beam test shows a strength of at least .
Upon completion of curing operations as specified the pavement may be opened to traffic provided that beam tests show that the concrete has attained a modulus of rupture of at least .
Where highearly strength concrete is used the pavement may be opened to traffic after a shorter period of curing or as beam tests show that the concrete has attained a modulus of rupture of at least .
Test specimens shall conform to the requirements of Subsection M They will be taken in the field from batches used in the pavement to determine the adequacy of control of the materials the proportioning and mixing of the concrete and compliance with the minimum strength requirements .
AASHTO Designations T and T . At least two beams shall be made for each square meters or fraction thereof of pavement placed .
Payment for the forms material and assistance as the Engineer may require to make cure and test the field specimens will not be paid for directly but shall be included in the contract unit price for the pavement . .
It is the intent of these Specifications that the pavement shall be constructed in accordance with the thickness shown on the plans .
Before final acceptance of the work or during the progress of the work as may be advisable or necessary the thickness or depth of concrete pavement will be determined by cores taken by the Contractor under the direction of the Engineer or hisher designee and unsatisfactory work shall be repaired replaced or will be paid for at an adjusted unit price .
Where any pavement is found deficient in thickness the following rules relative to replacement of the faulty pavement and adjustment of unit price shall govern .
The thickness of the pavement will be determined by average caliper measurement of cores tested in accordance with AASHTO Designation T . For the purpose of establishing an adjusted unit price for pavement units to be considered separately are defined as not more than meters of pavement in each traffic lane starting at the end of the pavement bearing the smaller station number .
A traffic lane is defined as being between longitudinal joints or between a longitudinal joint and a pavement edge .
When the measurement of the core from a unit is not deficient by more than millimeters from the plan thickness the pavement in the unit represented will be paid for at full unit price .
Payment for the pavement in the unit will be at an adjusted unit price as provided in Subsection ..
In calculating the average thickness of the pavement measurements in excess of the specified thickness will be considered as the specified thickness .
meters of pavement one traffic lane in width .
The pavement so represented will be deducted from the unit of pavement being measured and the remaining area cored and measured as described previously .
However the Contractor may at hisher own expense remove and replace the pavement which will then be cored and measured for payment as herein provided .
Payment for such replaced pavement will be as provided herein .
At such points as the Engineer may select in each unit one core will be taken for each square meters of pavement or fraction thereof in the unit .
Cement concrete pavement will be measured by the square meter and the quantity paid for shall be the number of square meters as determined by the actual area of the finished pavement complete in place and accepted but subject to adjusted proportional payment or nonpayment as stated in Subsection .
for all pavement areas found deficient in depth .
The width for measurement of the pavement shall be as shown on the typical cross sections including additional widening where called for or as otherwise directed in writing by the Engineer .
Standard cement concrete pavement will be paid for at the contract unit price per square meter complete in place subject to price adjustments as set forth below .
No additional payment over the contract unit price will be made for any pavement having an average thickness in excess of that shown on the plans .
Average thickness shall be calculated as stated in Subsection .. Where the average thickness of pavement is deficient in thickness by more than millimeters but less than millimeters payment will be made as follows CONCRETE PAVEMENT DEFICIENCY Deficiency in Thickness Determined by Cores Proportional Part of Contract Prices Allowed millimeters or less percent More than millimeters but less than millimeters percent millimeters or more but less than millimeters percent Where core measurements indicate that the pavement is deficient in thickness by millimeters but less than millimeters the pavement may be accepted without any payment being made to the Contractor or it may be replaced at the option of the Contractor with pavement of the specified thickness at hisher entire expense .
If the deficiency in thickness is millimeters or more the Contractor shall be required to remove such deficient areas and replace them with cement concrete pavement conforming with all requirements of these Specifications and to the thickness shown on the plans .
When high early strength concrete is specified at the direction of the Engineer in order to expedite the opening of pavement to traffic the high early strength will be obtained by means of an increase in the cement factor and a reduction of the watercement ratio .
The extra cement will be paid for at the actual unit cost per kilogram to the Contractor for the extra quantity of cement actually incorporated in the pavement plus an allowance of of the cost per kilogram which cost shall include all equipment labor storage transportation and work incidental to its inclusion in the concrete and incorporation in the finished pavement. . Payment Items. . Cement Concrete Pavement Square Meter SECTION GRANITE RUBBLE BLOCK PAVEMENT DESCRIPTION .
This item of work shall consist of furnishing and setting granite rubble block pavement on a sand cushion on a concrete base course in accordance with these specifications and in close conformity with the lines and grades shown on the plans or established by the Engineer .
After a sufficient area of block pavement has been laid the surface shall be tested with a meter straightedge laid parallel with the centerline and any variation exceeding millimeters shall be corrected and brought to proper grade .
Immediately after the mortar joints have set sufficiently the granite block pavement shall be swept clean and any marks on the top surface removed .
When curb is constructed adjacent to or on concrete pavement expansion joints shall be located opposite or at expansion joints in the pavement .
The length of curb except bituminous concrete curb and edging shall be as measured along the front arris of the curb and edging except that where the edging is set on a curve having a radius of meters or less the measurement will be made along the edging at the lowest exposed level after completion of shoulder or pavement .
Forms shall be accurately set to the required line and grade secured by a method not detrimental to the roadway pavement and maintained in a true position during concrete placement .
This work shall consist of placing a geotextile fabric under guard rail and placing millimeters of pavement millings on top of the fabric .
Pavement millings are to consist of recently milled asphalt concrete pavement .
The mulched area will generally be meter wide and start at the back of the berm sloped edging curb or edge of roadway pavement .
The quantity of pavement milling mulch shall be the number of meters based on actual measurements made along the guard rail . .
The work under this item shall be paid for at the contract unit price per meter complete in place which price includes the geotextile fabric pavement millings and all related excavation borrow and grading. . Payment Items. . Pavement Milling Mulch under Guard Rail Meter SECTION SODDING DESCRIPTION .
The trench for a single conduit line shall be excavated to a width of millimeters to a depth not less than meter below the proposed grade of the finished pavement as shown on the plans .
When jacking or drilling methods are specified for placing conduits under existing pavements pavement shall not be disturbed without the approval of the Engineer .
In the event obstructions are encountered upon approval of the Engineer small test holes may be cut in the pavement to locate the obstructions .
Jacking or drilling pits shall be kept meter clear of the edge of any type pavement wherever possible .
The unit contract price per meter shall be full compensation for furnishing all conduits condulets couplings expansion fittings elbows bends caps sleeves clamps hangers reducers tees jointing compound sealing compound cement concrete required in Subsection .F and .I planking required in Subsection .G and gravel required in Subsection .B for placing the electrical conduit in accordance with these specifications including all excavation except Class B Rock Excavation or jacking required backfilling of the trenches chipping or sawing of pavement bedding or hanging of conduit and all other work incidental to the construction of the conduit system except that when electrical conduit is included on any project as an integral part of a traffic control signal or Highway Lighting System and the conduit is not shown as a pay item it shall be considered as incidental to the construction and be included in the lump sum price for such systems .
meters above the sidewalk or if none above the pavement grade at the center of the roadway .
meters above the pavement grade at the center of the roadway .
WireLoop and MicroLoop Detectors shall be installed in the slots sawcut in the pavement and oriented to the traffic lane .
The following test procedure shall be performed in the presence of the Engineer before and after the loop sensor is sealed in the pavement as detailed below .
Temporary Pavement Markings and Raised Pavement Markers consist of furnishing applying maintaining and removing temporary white andor yellow reflectorized andor black non reflectorized pavement markings during construction and maintenance operations .
Pavement Marking Removal consists of obliterating existing pavement markings as required and as directed . .
This work consists of the masking of existing pavement markings by overlaying with black nonreflective pavement masking tape as required and as directed. . Portable Changeable Message Sign .
Paints tapes and glass beads used for temporary pavement markings shall conform to Subsections M M .. and tapes .
Final determination as to pavement marking quality shall be made by the Engineer .
The colors of the marking materials shall be the standard highway colors of white yellow or black commonly used for pavement markings and as outlined in the MUTCD .
Raised pavement markers shall conform to Subsection M . Hazard Identification Beacon Flashing Warning Beacon .
Pavement marking removal methods shall not cause damage to the pavement or cause drastic change in texture which could be construed as delineation at night and shall be approved by the Engineer .
The removal of the tape shall not damage the pavement or the permanent markings . .
The Contractor shall provide all necessary temporary pavement markings temporary raised pavement markers or both following the completion of each days operations and prior to opening the roadway to traffic .
Temporary raised pavement markers shall be supplemented with tape or painted markings to assure lane delineation .
Any damage to the pavement or surfacing caused by pavement marking removal shall be repaired by the Contractor at hisher expense by methods acceptable to the Engineer .
Painting over a pavement marking line by use of asphaltic liquids or paints will not be permitted .
Inappropriate pavement markings shall be removed before any change is made in the traffic pattern .
Material deposited on the pavement as a result of removing markings shall be removed as the work progresses .
Where blast cleaning is used for the removal of pavement markings and such removal operation is being performed within meters of a lane occupied by traffic the residue including dust shall be removed immediately after contact between the sand and the surface being treated .
Pavement markings will be masked by covering with pavement marking masking tape .
Prior to the application of the pavement masking tape the roadway shall be clean and dry .
No diversion of traffic patterns by the use of temporary pavement markings shall be made before the pavement marking masking is in place . .
Pavement Marking Removal shall be measured by the square meter of pavement marking actually removed .
Payment for Temporary Pavement Markings and Raised Pavement Markers will include full compensation for furnishing installing maintaining and removing as specified the markings and markers except that removal of painted temporary pavement markings will be paid for under Item .
All equipment used for the application of pavement markings shall be of standard commercial manufacture .
All other equipment and devices necessary for the application of the pavement markings and protection thereof and for the protection to the traveling public shall be as usually required for work of this type and shall be furnished by the Contractor .
The pavement marking equipment shall be operated at the speed and in accordance with other requirements of the manufacturer unless otherwise directed by the Engineer .
Truck mounted equipment is approved for the application of pavement markings except in such cases where in the Engineers judgment travel will be unreasonably delayed andor the quality of the work performed by the machine is unsatisfactory . .
A schedule of pavement marking operations shall be furnished by the Contractor for the approval of the Engineer prior to the application of any pavement markings .
This schedule must be in the office of the Engineer seven days prior to the proposed date of application of any pavement markings .
Material Line Thickness mm Application M .. . . . kgm drop on M .. . . . kgm drop on M .. . . kgl M .. . . kgl No thinners shall be used for the above listed pavement marking applications except in accordance with the manufacturers specifications at the direction of the Engineer .
No paint or pavement marking material shall be heated above the temperature marked on the container .
Bituminous concrete pavements shall have been in place for hours prior to the applications of pavement markings except preformed permanent plastic pavement markings which can be applied immediately .
Markings shall be protected by traffic cones of not less than millimeters in height except in the case of markings which cure to a no track condition in seconds or less in the latter case protection may be provided by a convoy of vehicles with suitable warning devices to warn overtaking or oncoming traffic that the pavement marking operation is in progress .
Forms for the roadway deck slabs shall be so construed that under full dead load the thickness of the slabs shall be the required thickness shown on the plans and the surface of the pavement will accurately conform to the profile grades cross sections and alignment shown on the plans .
d Where the surface of the concrete is to be used as the riding surface for traffic once all the irregularities have been removed a wet burlap bag consisting of a double thickness of approved burlap without seams and about meter in drag width and long enough to span the entire width of surface being finished shall be pulled along the surface in a longitudinal sweeping manner by workers operating from outside the edges of the pavement or such a burlap drag may be attached to the finishing machine .
The pavement wearing surface shall then be given a final finish by pulling a light broom about millimeters wide and having two thin rows of flat bristles gently and squarely across the surface from one edge to the other so as to remove any laitance and other surface blemishes and so as to produce uniform corrugations not more than millimeters in depth .
g While the concrete is still plastic the surface of the pavement shall be tested with a meters straightedge attached to a handle of sufficient length to permit testing of the full width of the slab .
The straightedge shall be laid parallel to the centerline of the pavement and any irregularity of millimeters or greater shall be corrected immediately .
The membrane waterproofing on bridge decks shall not be placed unless the Contractor is ready to follow within hours with the first layer of bituminous concrete pavement a longer period of time will be allowed only with the approval of the Engineer .
The work under this section does not include the various classes of excavation bituminous concrete pavement any work on piles backfill revetments temporary structure removal of present superstructure cofferdams control of water or other items noted in the contract .
Reclaimed base borrow material for subbase course shall consist of crushed asphalt pavement crushed cement concrete and gravel borrow meeting M .. free from loam clay and deleterious materials such as brick reinforcing steel glass wood paper plaster lathing and building rubble etc .
mm µm µm The approved source of reclaimed pavement borrow material shall be processed by mechanical means .
All reclaimed pavement borrow material shall come from approved stockpiles .
Rubble pavement blocks shall be granite basically light grey in color free from seams and other structural imperfections or flaws which would impair its structural integrity and of a smooth splitting appearance .
Rubble pavement blocks shall be not less than millimeters nor more than millimeters in length not less than millimeters nor more than millimeters in width and depth .
This specification covers a hot applied crack sealer suitable for use in cement concrete and asphaltic concrete pavement .
These mixtures shall be composed of mineral aggregate mineral filler if required bituminous material and reclaimed asphalt pavement RAP .
C. Reclaimed Asphalt Pavement RAP Reclaimed Asphalt Pavement RAP shall consist of the material obtained from highways or streets by crushing milling or planing existing pavements .
PGA in mixes containing reclaimed asphalt pavement RAP will be considered as part of the overall allowable mass of RAP in the mix .
For determination of pavement density the Nuclear Density Method ASTM D andor Bulk Specific Gravity Method AASHTO T shall be used .
Where AASHTO T is used samples for the full depth of the course being laid shall be taken from the mixture incorporated in the work after finishing operations have been completed and the pavement has cooled .
One or more suitable portable lightweight or wheeled work bridges shall be required and used behind the finishing operation for touchup work surface texturing and curing cover pavement .
The insert of the pipe arch shall be coated with asphalt conforming to AASHTO M Type C coating so as to form a smooth pavement to widths of of the circumference of the pipe arch .
It shall be applied in such a manner that the corrugations are completely filled and that except where the upper edges intersect the corrugations the pavement has a minimum thickness of millimeters above the crests of the corrugations .
All coupling bands shall be coated to the same requirements as the pipe arch except the pavement shall be omitted .
The seed mixture specified for slopes and shoulders consists of a tough hardy type for use on slopes graded at the rate of vertical to horizontal and steeper slopes and on shoulders adjacent to the roadway pavement or as otherwise directed .
It shall be furnished in strips not less than meter nor more than meters in width and not more than millimeters longer than the width of the pavement slab .
Temporary raised pavement markers shall be a material previously approved by the Department for the purpose intended and listed on the Qualified Product Listing maintained by the Research and Materials Section D Street South Boston Massachusetts .
