Trenches Where existing pavement carries traffic and is removed the pavement shall be replaced daily with a temporary pavement consisting of a minimum of three inches of acceptable hot or cold bituminous mixture .
No separate payment will be made for furnishing placing maintaining and removing temporary pavement and all cost of such work will be considered incidental to the contract .
Before placing any permanent pavement over backfilled trenches the edge of the adjoining existing pavement shall be cut even and vertical and coated with tack coat to form a tight joint between the new and the existing pavements .
The permanent pavement depth and type HMA or PCC will match the existing roadway structure .
When the Contract involves placing material on or use of previously constructed subgrade base course pavement or structure the Contractor shall maintain such previously constructed Work in a safe and satisfactory condition until Final Acceptance .
The ground shall be backfilled with Material that is generally the same as the surrounding Material graded to drain properly and finished such that the surface matches the surrounding surface examples loam and seed compacted gravel pavement .
Local Natural Materials When MaineDOT owns or controls a local natural materials source such as a borrow pit or a stockpile of salvaged pavement material etc .
Description This work shall consist of removing wholly or in part and satisfactory disposing of all designated buildings structures bituminous pavement Portland cement concrete pavement manholes catch basins and other obstructions which are required to be removed except for the obstructions to be removed and disposed of under other contract items .
Removing Existing Superstructure Structural Concrete Railings Curbs Sidewalks and Bridges Removing existing superstructures shall consist of removing and disposing of existing superstructure including fill pavement railing and all other material on or over the superstructure unless otherwise specified .
Existing concrete curbs granite curbs and concrete sidewalks shall be removed to the limits shown on the plans using a chipping hammer or pavement breaker of a size approved by the Resident or any other method approved by the Resident which will not damage the structural integrity of the concrete deck to remain .
Removing Existing Bituminous Pavement and Concrete Wearing Surface from Bridges and Scarifying the Top of Deck The full depth of existing bituminous pavement or concrete wearing surface shall be removed from curb to curb for the entire length of the bridge .
Areas that can not be removed by a scarifying machine such as adjacent to curbs drains and armored joints shall be removed by using a maximum pound chipping hammer or pavement breaker . .
Removing Portland Cement Concrete Pavement All Portland cement concrete pavement and Portland cement concrete base course designated for removal shall be broken into pieces suitable for use in construction or embankment or disposed of as directed by the Resident .
Removing Bituminous Concrete Pavement The equipment for removing the bituminous pavement shall be capable of scarifying and loading the bituminous pavement without including any gravel except that adhering to the pavement .
Removing Pavement Surface The equipment for removing the bituminous surface shall be a power operated milling machine or grinder capable of removing bituminous concrete pavement to the required depth transverse cross slope and profile grade by the use of an automated grade and slope control system .
The controls shall automatically increase or decrease the pavement removal depth as required and readily maintain desired cross slope to compensate for surface irregularities in the existing pavement course .
The equipment shall be capable of accurately establishing profile grades by referencing from a fixed reference such as a grade wire or from the existing pavement surface using a foot minimum contact ski floating beam or foot noncontact grade control beam .
The Contractor shall locate and remove all objects in the pavement through the work area that would be detrimental to the planing or grinding machine .
Excess material that becomes bonded to the milled surface will be removed to the Residents satisfaction before the area is accepted. . Pavement Butt Joints The equipment for removing the bituminous surface shall be a cold milling machine or a power operated planer capable of removing the existing pavement to the required depth width grade and slope .
Should resurfacing be delayed or the resulting milled surface is unsatisfactory for any reason bituminous leveling course or temporary pavement may be required .
Removing Portland cement concrete pavement removing bituminous concrete pavement pavement butt joints and removing pavement surface will be measured by the square yard with no deductions made for areas occupied by existing catch basins and manholes .
The removing of existing bituminous pavement removing existing concrete wearing surface removing of existing concrete curbs and sidewalks from bridges and scarifying of the concrete deck will each be measured for payment as one lump sum unit complete and accepted .
Removing Portland cement concrete pavement will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard which price will be full compensation for removing and disposing of pavement and pavement reinforcement .
Removing and scarifying existing concrete removing existing concrete wearing surface and removing existing bituminous pavement from bridges will be paid for at the contract lump sum price for the respective contract pay item involved .
Removing membrane waterproofing if present on the existing deck shall be incidental to the removing of bituminous pavement .
Removing bituminous concrete pavement will be paid for at the contract unit price for the number of square yards removed as required by the plans or as ordered by the Resident which price will be full compensation for removing and disposing of the bituminous pavement and re grading of the remaining material .
The accepted quantity of pavement butt joints will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard which price will be full compensation for removing and salvaging the bituminous material .
Any bituminous leveling material or temporary pavement required will not be measured for payment directly but will be incidental to the related contract Pay Items .
The accepted quantity of removing pavement surface will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard .
When the proposal does not include pay items for removal of structures and obstructions as provided in this Section such work shall be incidental to the various contract pay items and no direct payment will be made except that removal of foundations and Portland cement concrete pavement will be paid as provided in Section Excavation and Embankment .
There will be no additional pay for any temporary protection required for the construction of the project. . Salvage of Existing Hot Mix Asphalt Pavement All existing hot mix asphalt pavement designated to be removed under this contract must be salvaged for utilization .
Existing hot mix asphalt pavement material shall not be deposited in any waste area or be placed below subgrade in any embankment .
Stockpiled at commercial or approved sites for commercial or MaineDOT use. . Other approved methods proposed by the Contractor and approved by the Resident which will assure proper use of the existing hot mix asphalt pavement .
Removing Portland cement concrete pavement and Portland cement concrete base course when not included in the contract as a separate pay item will be paid for under Pay Item .
Payment will be full compensation for cutting the edge joint removing pavement curb and other unsuitable material grading and compacting the existing shoulder disposing of surplus and unsuitable material and for furnishing placing grading and compacting new aggregate to the required depth suitable for paving at the time of paving .
Additional material required as a result of crossslope variance of the pavement surface will not be paid for directly but will be considered incidental to the contract unit price per square yard of rehabilitation of existing shoulder .
Where required by the Resident the edge of the existing travel lane pavement shall be cut to provide a uniform edge .
Payment will be full compensation for cutting the edge joint removing pavement curb and other unsuitable material excavating grading and compacting the existing shoulder disposing of surplus and unsuitable material and for furnishing placing grading and compacting new aggregate to the required depth .
Payment will be full compensation for excavating removal of pavement and other unsuitable material and for the cutting of edge joints .
Base Course Crushed A B or C Subbase Course Gravel D Subbase Course Gravel Below D or E Will be designated on the plans Contractors option When designated on the plans Type E Subbase may be used inches below and lower beneath the pavement For The various classes of base and subbase at the time it is deposited on the roadbed shall conform to the gradation requirements of the contract .
The surface compaction and stability shall be satisfactorily maintained until the pavement course has been placed .
The surface of this material shall be maintained in its compacted and graded condition until the hot mix asphalt pavement has been placed .
Description This work shall consist of pulverizing a portion of the existing roadway structure into a homogenous mass placing and compacting this material to the lines grades and dimensions shown on the plans or established by the Resident. . Pulverized Material Pulverized material shall consist of the existing bituminous pavement and if specified a designated portion of the underlying gravel pulverized and blended into a homogenous mass .
It shall be free of winter sand granular fill construction debris and other materials not generally considered bituminous pavement. . Pulverizer The pulverizer shall be a selfpropelled machine specifically manufactured for cold inplace recycled type work and capable of reducing the required existing materials to a size that will pass a inch square mesh sieve .
Final rolling shall be accomplished by a minimum inch width single drum vibratory soil compactor. . Pulverizing The entire depth of existing pavement shall be pulverized together with approximately inch of the underlying gravel into a homogenous mass .
The Contractor will use recycled pavement to the extent it is available in lieu of untreated aggregate surface course .
In areas where a variable gravel course is called for or required the contractor shall pulverize grade and compact the existing pavement to allow for a consistent thickness of gravel .
Pulverized Material Pulverized material shall consist of the existing asphalt pavement and one inch or more as specified of the underlying gravel pulverized and blended into a homogenous mass .
It shall be free of winter sand granular fill construction debris or other materials not generally considered asphalt pavement .
In no area of the work site where cement or cementpavementgravel combination is being applied reworked with reclaimer rolled or graded shall respirable dust be allowed to exceed the NIOSH established respirable dust standard RDS recommended exposure limit REL of .
MIX DESIGN The Department will supply a mix design for the recycling work based on test results from pavement and soil analysis taken to the design depth .
Pulverizing The entire depth of existing pavement shall be pulverized together with approximately inch or more of the underlying gravel into a homogenous mass .
The Contractor shall protect and maintain the recycled layer until a lift of pavement is applied .
ACCEPTANCE TEST FREQUENCY Property Frequency Test Method Inplace Density per ft lane AASHTO T . Miscellaneous No new pavement shall be placed on the full depth recycled pavement until a curing period of hours has elapsed .
Pulverized Material Pulverized material shall consist of the existing asphalt pavement and one inch or more as specified of the underlying gravel pulverized and blended into a homogenous mass .
It shall be free of winter sand granular fill construction debris and other materials not generally considered asphalt pavement .
MIX DESIGN The Department will supply a mix design for the foamed asphalt based on test results from pavement and soil analysis taken to the design depth .
Pulverizing The entire depth of existing pavement shall be pulverized together with approximately inch or more of the underlying gravel into a homogenous mass .
Foamed asphalt shall be incorporated into the material to a depth determined by the pavement design .
The Contractor shall protect and maintain the recycled layer until a lift of pavement is applied .
ACCEPTANCE TEST FREQUENCY Property Frequency Test Method Inplace Density per ft lane AASHTO T . Miscellaneous No new pavement shall be placed on the full depth recycled pavement until a curing period of hours has elapsed .
Description This work shall consist of the removal of all bituminous pavement from the existing roadway hauling the bituminous pavement to an approved location and processing as per Section ..
All plant mixed recycled asphalt pavement shall be placed in one or more courses on an approved base and in accordance with these specifications and in reasonably close conformity with the lines grades and thicknesses indicated on the plans or as established by the Resident .
The recycled asphalt pavement shall be processed by the Contractor so all material will be no larger than ½ inch and stockpiled so as to minimize segregation .
The stockpile shall be free of any materials not generally considered to be asphalt pavement .
Changes to compensation will be in accordance with the Mix Design Special Provision. . Mixing The recycled asphalt pavement shall be delivered to the mixer at a temperature of not less than F. The emulsified asphalt shall meet the mixing temperature requirements listed in Section .
Recycled pavement and emulsified asphalt and cement shall be proportioned and the mixing time set to produce a mixture in which uniform distribution of the emulsified asphalt and coating of the recycled pavement is obtained .
If a drum type mixing plant is used the recycled asphalt pavement may be heated prior to being mixed with the emulsified asphalt to a temperature not to exceed F. Following mixing the recycled asphalt pavement material shall be stockpiled and incorporated into the work .
Weather Limitations The plant mixed recycled asphalt pavement shall be performed when a. PMRAP operations will be allowed between May th and September th inclusive in Zone Areas north of US Route from Gilead to Bangor and north of Route from Bangor to Calais .
All repair work will be done with the Residents approval at the Contractors expense. . Curing No new hot mix asphalt pavement or additional layers of PMRAP shall be placed on the recycled asphalt pavement until a curing period of four days has elapsed .
Basis of Payment The accepted quantity of Plant Mixed Recycled Asphalt Pavement will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard complete inplace which price will be full compensation for furnishing all equipment and labor for removing existing pavement regrading and compacting existing gravel base processing mixing testing placing and compacting excess material relocation and for all incidentals necessary to complete the work .
This work will consist of milling to inches of existing bituminous pavement pulverizing and sizing the millings the addition of emulsified asphalt and Portland Cement or hydrated lime to the proportions specified the mixing and placement of the mixture full width as required in the contract including shoulders and compacting the mixture as one continuous operation to the lines grades and thicknesses indicated on the plans or as established by the Resident .
A copy of all test results on the pavement samples shall be included with the mix design .
Pulverized Material Recycled bituminous pavement after milling and sizing will meet the following gradation requirements Sieve Size Passing Limits ½ in in .
Equipment The existing bituminous pavement shall be recycled in a continuous operation using a recycling train consisting of the following major components .
The unit should be capable of recycling the pavement for the entire lane width to the required dimensions in one pass . .
This unit shall precede the larger mainline milling machine to remove existing pavement off any existing paved shoulders .
Screening and Sizing Unit This unit shall be capable of reducing and sizing the recycled asphalt pavement to the specified gradations prior to mixing with the asphalt emulsion and cement or lime additives .
Removal of Existing Pavement The existing pavement surface including cracks shall be visibly free from all foreign matter before recycling commences .
When areas of the pavement surface are inaccessible because of the physical constraints of the equipment the pavement shall be removed by other means and replaced by an approved source of hot mix asphalt . .
e. When the surface is not frozen and when overnight temperatures are expected to be above F. f. Wind conditions as such that the spreading of lime or cement on the roadway ahead of the recycling machine will not adversely affect the operation. . Curing No new hot mix asphalt pavement or additional layers of CIP shall be placed on the recycled asphalt pavement until a curing period of four days has elapsed .
Surface Tolerances The completed recycled pavement surface will be shaped compacted smoothed and true to required line and grade .
The recycled pavement surface shall be protected and closed to traffic until it is determined that surface damage no longer occurs when a test vehicle is passed over it .
The contractor shall have on site a pavement engineer expert in CIP work to direct construction of the control section advise on suitability of mixed material bitumen dispersion within the mixed material moisture control within the mixed material compaction and surface finish .
The removal of existing pavement placement and compaction of any hot mix asphalt required in areas that are inaccessible due to the limitations of equipment shall be paid for as Cold in place Recycle mix per square yard .
The Contractor must stipulate which PGAB grading will be used to construct the entire HMA pavement structure prior to starting work .
On variabledepth courses the first lift of pavement over gravel reclaimed pavement on irregular or milled surfaces or on bridges at least one roller shall be ton pneumatictired .
A ft straightedge or string line placed directly on the surface parallel to the centerline of pavement .
A ft straightedge or string line placed directly on the surface transverse to the centerline of pavement .
When the surface of the existing base or pavement is irregular the Contractor shall bring it to uniform grade and cross section .
In addition hot mix asphalt pavement placed on bridges shall also conform to Section .
c. The Contractor will not be required to cut sample cores from the compacted pavement on the bridge deck unless otherwise directed by Special Provision .
e. The furnishing and applying of the required quantity of sealer for the bridge shoulder areas shall be incidental to placing the hot mix asphalt pavement .
Solvents designed to strip asphalt binders from aggregates will not be permitted as release agents on equipment tools or pavement surfaces .
Any new pavement that shows obvious cracking checking or displacement shall be removed and replaced for the full lane width as directed by the Resident at no cost to the Department .
The Department may allow feathered or lap joints on lower base courses or when matching existing base type pavements .
The Contractor shall apply a coating of emulsified asphalt immediately before paving all joints to the vertical face and in of the adjacent portion of any pavement being overlaid except those formed by pavers operating in echelon .
Where pavement under this contract joins an existing pavement or when the Department directs the Contractor shall cut the existing pavement along a smooth line producing a neat even vertical joint .
Hot mix asphalt plant details c. Stockpile Management to include provisions for a minimum day stockpile d. Make and type of pavers e. Make and type of rollers including weight weight per inch of steel wheels and average contact pressure for pneumatic tired rollers f. Name of QCP Administrator and certification number g. Name of Process Control Technicians and certification numbers h. Name of Quality Control Technicianss and certification numbers i. Mixing transportation including process for ensuring that truck bodies are clean and free of debris or contamination that could adversely affect the finished pavement j .
Testing Plan k. Laydown operations including longitudinal joint construction procedures for avoiding paving in inclement weather type of release agent to be used on trucks tools and rollers compaction of shoulders tacking of all joints methods to ensure that segregation is minimized procedures to determine the maximum rolling and paving speeds based on best engineering practices as well as past experience in achieving the best possible smoothness of the pavement .
The Contractor shall fill all holes in the pavement resulting from cutting cores by the Contractor or the Department with a properly compacted acceptable mixture no later than the following working day .
for Method B based on three random tests shall be removed and replaced at the expense of the Contractor for the full lane width and a length not to be less than ft. Pavement Density The Department will measure pavement density using core samples tested according to AASHTO T. The Department will randomly determine core locations .
The Contractor shall cut inch diameter cores at no additional cost to the Department by the end of the working day following the day the pavement is placed and immediately give them to the Department .
Efforts to obtain optimum compaction will not be waived by the Department unless it is apparent during construction that local conditions make densification to this point detrimental to the finished pavement surface course .
for the HMA used except that cleaning objectionable material from the pavement and furnishing and applying bituminous material to joints and contact surfaces is incidental .
Smoothness Projects Projects to have their pavement smoothness analyzed in accordance with this Specification will be so noted in Special Provision Hot Mix Asphalt Pavement .
Pavement Smoothness The final pavement surface shall be evaluated for smoothness using a Class I or Class II profiler as defined by ASTM E . Smoothness measurements will be expressed in terms of the International Roughness Index IRI as defined by the World Bank in units of inchesmile . .
ACCEPTANCE LIMITS Level USL I inmile II inmile III inmile Computation of Smoothness Pay Adjustment PA PF.QP where Q Quantity of surface course in the Lot excluding shoulders side streets bridge decks ramps acceleration and deceleration lanes PF smoothness pay factor for the Lot P Contract unit price for surface pavement PA pay adjustment .
the Contractor shall take whatever remedial action is required to correct the pavement surface in that Lot at no additional expense to the Department .
Such remedial action may include but is not limited to removal and replacement of the unacceptable pavement .
The Contractor shall pay the cost of retesting the pavement following corrective action .
Description This work shall consist of constructing one or more courses of Hot Mix Asphalt pavement on an approved base in accordance with these specifications and in reasonably close conformity with the lines grades thickness and typical cross sections shown on the plans or established .
The HMA pavement shall be composed of a mixture of aggregate filler if required and asphalt material. . General The materials and their use shall conform to the requirements of Section Hot Mix Asphalt Pavement. . Construction The construction requirements shall be as specified in Section Hot Mix Asphalt Pavement . .
Method of Measurement Hot mix asphalt pavement will be measured as specified in Section .
Basis of Payment The accepted quantities of hot mix asphalt pavement will be paid for at the contract unit price per ton for the mixtures including hot mix asphalt material complete in place .
b PiersAll vertical surfaces and the underside of overhanging portions of caps except that for overpass structures the piers beyond the outside limits of the roadway pavement the vertical surfaces on the back which are not visible from the roadway or sidewalk will not require a rubbed finish .
Any drainage slots in the bridge drains shall be opened both before and after placing the bituminous pavement .
Waterproofing membrane over which hot mix asphalt HMA pavement will be placed shall receive a bituminous tack coat in accordance with Standard Specification Section with a coverage rate of between .
The required laydown temperature of HMA pavement placed on high performance membrane shall be within the tolerances included in the membrane manufacturers written recommendations with the target temperature to be at the high end of the given range but not to exceed degrees Fahrenheit measured at the HMA pavement plant .
No vehicles other than the HMA paving equipment will be permitted on the membrane prior to placing the HMA pavement .
The first layer of HMA pavement placed on a superstructure deck shall be placed with an approved rubber mounted bituminous paver of such type and operated in such a manner that the waterproofing membrane will not be damaged in any way .
The tack coat and HMA pavement may be applied immediately after the membrane is installed .
At least one week prior to installation of any waterproofing membrane the Contractor shall submit the manufacturers written requirements pertaining to overlapping of seams application procedures repairing of damaged membrane and treatment of blistering of the membrane including treatment of blistering either before during or after the first lift of HMA pavement is placed on the membrane to the Resident . .
For superstructure decks Immediately prior to application of the tack coat the entire surface of the membrane shall be rolled with a rubber tired roller and any blisters found in the membrane shall be repaired with guidance from the manufacturers representative as per the manufacturers recommendations similarly if blisters appear during or after placement of the first lift of HMA pavement the membrane shall be repaired with guidance from the manufacturers representative as per the manufacturers recommendations . .
f. Approach Road Surface The approach road surface including the shoulders shall be paved with a inch minimum thickness hot bituminous pavement layer except when specified to be a gravel surface .
Traffic control devices temporary erosion control pavement and dust control will be paid for in accordance with the applicable Contract items .
For underdrain placed under areas of proposed pavement the material shall be placed in inch layers loose measure and thoroughly compacted except that the initial layer of backfill around the pipe may be placed in a layer not exceeding inches .
When posts are driven through pavement the damaged area around the post shall be repaired with approved bituminous patching .
Description This work shall consist of furnishing all materials for and constructing sidewalks of either Hot Mix Asphalt HMA pavement brick or concrete and curb ramp detectable warning plates with truncated domes in conformance with this specification and all other applicable Contract Documents. . Materials General All new Portland cement concrete surfaces shall have protective coating applied in accordance with Section Protective Coating for Concrete Surfaces. . Sidewalk Materials Materials for sidewalks shall meet the requirements specified in the following Sections of Division Materials Aggregate for Untreated Surface Course and Leveling Course .
HMA pavement shall meet the requirements of Section Hot Bituminous Pavement .
All soft and yielding material shall be removed and replaced with acceptable material. . Construct Sidewalk This work shall consist of excavating the existing ground and placing and compacting new aggregate as necessary to build the sidewalk in the new location as shown in the Contract Documents. . Regrading Sidewalk This work shall consist of removing the existing pavement adding and compacting new aggregate as necessary and regrading the gravel base to conform to the grading limits shown in the Contract Documents. . Detectable Warnings Construction New plates shall be set square with the curb edge and the base of the truncated domes shall be set flush with adjacent surfaces to allow for proper drainage .
New concrete shall be placed in the resulting opening and finished and the new plates set into the wet concrete according to the manufacturers recommendations. . New Concrete Curb Ramps New concrete shall be placed and finished for the ramp and the new plates set into the wet concrete according to the manufacturers recommendations. . New HMA Pavement Ramps HMA pavement shall be saw cut and removed to provide an opening that will allow for the dimensions of the cast iron plate surrounded by an additional inch border on all sides of the plate .
HMA pavement sidewalks will be measured by the ton of HMA mixture placed .
Basis of Payment The accepted quantities of sidewalk will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per square yard for concrete sidewalk brick sidewalk and brick driveway aprons and per ton for HMA pavement sidewalk complete and in place .
For regrading sidewalk payment will be for removing existing pavement regrading existing gravel base and adding new material as necessary .
This shall include surface preparation and removal of concrete or HMA pavement and necessary replacement concrete .
Method of Measurement Curb both new and reset will be measured by the linear foot along the front face of the curb at the elevation of the finished pavement complete in place and accepted .
Actual mulch limit will extend ½ feet out from the center of plant or to the pavement edge bridge wall and roadside face of guardrail .
When plant beds are installed near guardrails or as stated in Section .a the space between the plants and the guardrail or the nearest pavement when it extends behind the guardrail shall be treated as a part of the plant bed and shall be weeded and mulched .
Payment for restoration of roadway pavement sidewalks grass areas and resetting curbing removed in conjunction with this work shall be considered incidental to the respective contract prices for each related item except as otherwise provided .
Description This work shall consist of furnishing and placing reflectorized pavement lines and markings removing pavement lines and markings and furnishing and applying reflectorized paint to curbing in reasonably close conformity with the plans and as designated. . Materials Materials shall conform to the requirements specified in the following Sections of Division Materials .
as manufactured by the Davidson Plastic Company East Valley Highway Kent WA or an approved equal. . General All pavement lines and markings shall be applied in accordance with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices .
All pavement markings placed shall meet the tolerance limits shown on the plans .
Temporary pavement marking lines defined in Special Provision Section Maintenance of Traffic Temporary Centerline will be applied as many times as necessary to properly delineate traffic lanes for the safe passage of traffic .
In overnight lane closure areas that are not to be overlaid temporary plastic lines or raised pavement markers shall be used through the length of the taper .
Preparation of Surface Immediately before applying the pavement marking paint to the pavement or curb the surface shall be dry and entirely free from dirt grease oil or other foreign matter .
Application Prior to applying paint for final pavement lines the Contractor shall perform a test for paint thickness by furnishing and placing a piece of smooth clean metal with an area of at least in² in the path of the striping truck .
The wet thickness of paint without beads on final pavement lines shall be a minimum of mils .
On other final pavement markings and on curb where the paint is applied by hand painting or spraying application shall be in two uniform covering coats each at least mils thick .
Glass beads shall be applied to the final and temporary pavement lines marking and curb at the rate of lbs.gal of paint and in sufficient quantity to assure complete and uniform coverage of hand painted surfaces .
Temporary pliant polymer marking material shall be used for temporary markings on the final pavement and on pavements not to be resurfaced when such pavement markings do not conform to the final pavement markings pattern .
The plastic final pavement lines and markings shall be applied in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations by the inlay method of application . .
Establishment Period Inlaid plastic pavement lines and marking material furnished and installed under this contract for final pavement markings shall still be subject to a sixmonth period of establishment .
The period of establishment shall commence as soon as the plastic pavement lines and markings are complete and in place and shall continue for six months .
At the end of the establishment period a minimum of of the plastic pavement lines and markings shall still be in place to be acceptable .
If less than of the plastic pavement lines and markings are in place after six months the Contractor shall replace all unsatisfactory plastic pavement lines and markings on the project without additional payment .
Plastic pavement lines and markings designated for replacement shall be installed according to these specifications unless otherwise directed .
Plastic pavement lines and markings replaced at the end of the six month establishment period will not be subject to a further establishment period . .
Removing Lines and Markings When it is necessary to remove pavement lines and markings it shall be done by high pressure water sand blasting solvent or other acceptable means .
The method chosen must be capable of completely eradicating the existing line or marking without damage to the pavement .
Burning and grinding to remove temporary markings from final pavement or from existing pavement not to be resurfaced will not be permitted . .
Method of Measurement The quantity of permanent pavement marking lines measured for payment will be the number of feet shown in the Schedule of Items in the contract .
Temporary pavement marking lines will be measured as one lump sum for work accepted .
All other pavement markings will be measured by the square foot for work actually done .
The accepted quantity of removing existing pavement markings will be measured by the square foot .
Basis of Payment The accepted quantity of permanent pavement marking lines will be paid for at the contract unit price per foot .
All other permanent pavement markings will be paid for at the contract unit price per square foot .
Payment for final plastic pavement lines and markings will be made in two parts .
The first payment of will be made when plastic pavement lines and markings are placed .
The payment of the remaining will be made at the end of the establishment period for all plastic line and pavement markings accepted .
The accepted quantity of temporary pavement marking lines will be paid for at the contract lump sum price and will include as many applications as required and removal when required .
If allowed by Special Provision the Contractor may utilize Temporary BiDirectional Yellow and White As required Delineators as temporary pavement marking lines and paid for at the contract lump sum price .
Description This work shall consist of furnishing and operating construction equipment as directed by the Resident. . General Equipment used for work under this section shall conform to the following minimum sets of requirements Equipment Description Minimum Size Air Compressor Gasoline or diesel powered unit ft³ per minute at psi with compressor receiver and adequate air hose Air Tool Single compressed air driven hand drill tamper hammer chipper or pavement breaker All Purpose Excavator Approved truck mounted ton capacity lifting at type class foot radius Heavy Duty Purpose Excavator Approved truck ton capacity lifting at mounted type class foot radius Mini All Purpose Excavator Approved truck hp operating weight mounted type class .
inch width Tire ground pressure psi Roller pavement Selfpropelled pneumatic Gross weight ton minimum wheels inch by inch smooth tread tires capable of psi inflation pressure pressure fully ballasted wheel loads pounds or more Brush Chipper Disk Style inch diameter disk Rototiller Rotary cultivator mounted on pneumatic hp tired tractor Stump Chipper Gasoline powered stump chipping hp machine Truck small Pneumatic tired with dump body yd to yd rated capacity manufacturers rating Truck large Pneumatic tired with dump body yd or greater rated capacity manufacturers rated Tractor Mounted Hydraulic Hammer .
The pavement slot for wire shall be to inches below the finished surface and not closer than inches from the edge of pavement or the curb .
The rightangle corners of the pavement slot shall be chamfered to eliminate sharp bends in the loop wires .
All debris and moisture shall be removed from the loop pavement slot before installation of loop wires .
The pavement slot shall be filled to the road surface with an approved sealing compound to form a waterproof bond with the pavement after installing the wire loop .
The elevation of the bottom edge of the regulatory warning and route marker sign panels shall be feet above the elevation of the edge of the pavement or edge of roadway in curbed sections at the sign location .
The elevation of the bottom edge of these sign panels above the elevation of the edge of the pavement on all crossing or connecting roadways shall be feet in rural areas or feet in urban areas .
The pipe shall be placed at a depth so that the top of the pipe shall have no more than a inch reveal from finished surface pavement .
When paving operations or shoulder grading leave a inch or less exposed vertical face at the edge of the traveled way channelization devices shall be placed feet outside the edge of the pavement at intervals not exceeding feet and a inch by inch W Low Shoulder sign shall be placed at a maximum spacing of ½ mile .
When paving operations or shoulder grading leave greater than a inch exposed vertical face at the edge of the traveled way the Contractor shall place shoulder material for a width of at least feet to meet the pavement grade and place channelizing devices as above before the lane is opened to traffic .
Repainting of pavement marking line if required to maintain the effectiveness of the line shall be considered maintenance of traffic control devices .
Inappropriate existing pavement markings shall be removed whenever traffic is rerouted and temporary construction pavement markings shall be placed .
Obliteration and removal of nonapplicable markings and placement of temporary construction pavement markings shall be considered maintenance of traffic control devices and will be paid for under the appropriate Contract item .
For purposes of roadway lighting the photometer is placed on the pavement .
Such payment will be full compensation for moving devices as many times as necessary for replacing devices damaged lost or stolen and for cleaning maintaining and removing all devices used for traffic control including replacing temporary pavement marking lines .
Such payment will be full compensation all days that the Contractor maintains traffic as specified herein and for moving devices as many times as necessary for replacing devices damaged lost or stolen and for cleaning maintaining and removing all devices used for traffic control including replacing temporary pavement marking lines .
Payment for temporary pavement marking lines and pavement marking removal will be made under the respective pay item in Section Pavement Markings .
The pavement shall be free of all loose dirt dust particles grease oil or any other contaminant .
The surface course of bituminous concrete pavement shall be a tight mix of thoroughly compacted material .
The pavement shall be placed a minimum of days before the application of the coating .
The surface of Portland cement concrete pavement shall be a medium broom finish .
The material minus any reclaimed asphalt pavement used in Section b. below shall have a MicroDeval value of .
When RCA is used the portion of the resulting blend of gravel and RCA retained on a ½ square mesh sieve shall contain a total of no more than percent by weight of other recycled materials such as brick concrete masonry block or asphalt pavement as determined by visual inspection .
Aggregates for HMA Pavements Coarse aggregate and fine aggregate for hot mix asphalt pavements shall be of such gradation that when combined in the proper proportions including filler if required the resultant blend will meet the composition of mixture for the type of pavement specified .
percent by weight as determined by AASHTO T . The composite blend minus any reclaimed asphalt pavement used RAP shall have a MicroDeval value of .
sieve minus any reclaimed asphalt pavement used .
Recycled Asphalt Pavement Recycled asphalt pavement shall consist of salvaged asphalt materials from milled pavements or production waste that has been processed before use to meet the requirements of the job mix formula .
It shall be free of winter sand granular fill construction debris or other materials not generally considered asphalt pavement. . RAP for Asphalt Pavement Recycled Asphalt Pavement RAP may be introduced into hotmix asphalt pavement at percentages approved by the Department according to the MaineDOT Policies and Procedures for HMA Sampling and Testing .
If this item is to be used underneath pavement it must have a Micro Deval value of .
Exterior Ready Mixed Paint Exterior paint for wood structures should be a good quality house paint approved by the Resident. . Pavement Marking Paint Paint for final and temporary pavement marking shall meet the requirements of the Maine DOT Maintenance FastDry WaterBased Traffic Paint on file at the Traffic Section in Augusta .
When Type Curbing is required on a curve the pieces shall be shaped as described in the table on the Standard Detail plans. . Preformed Plastic Type of Material This section covers reflectorized plastic materials preformed into rolls or ribbons of various lengths pliability and widths suitable for use as reflecting pavement markings on Portland cement concrete or hot mix asphalt pavement .
The preformed plastic material may be supplied complete with a precoated factory applied adhesive for immediate pavement application without the use of heat solvent or other types of adhesive for immediate pavement application without the use of heat solvent or other types of adhesive operations or it may be furnished with separate adhesives as recommended by the manufacturer .
The affixed material shall be capable of molding itself to the pavement contoured by the action of traffic and maintain its original dimensions and placement under normal traffic conditions at the pavement temperatures which could occur within the State .
Application The preformed plastic material shall be capable of application to non defective pavement surfaces that are dry and free from dirt or other foreign matter .
For normal application the pavement temperature should be at least F and rising .
Special instructions should be supplied by the vendor for application to be made at pavement temperatures below F. Application shall be according to manufacturers recommended procedures .
Plastic pavement marking materials shall only be applied to surfaces with temperatures within the range specified by the manufacturer for optimum adhesion .
Adhesive activators or special coatings for various types of pavement surfaces shall be provided with the preformed plastic material .
Preformed plastics shall be capable of being applied to new asphalt pavement immediately prior to the final rolling of the new surface and of being rolled into place with conventional pavement and highway rollers .
Longitudinal lines shall be offset at least inches from construction joints of Portland cement concrete pavement .
When directed by the Resident opening of inch lengths shall be left at foot intervals in edge lines not inlaid into the pavement surface that are placed on the inside of superelevated curves so as to prevent the ponding of water on the pavement surface. . Precast Concrete Units Precast concrete units shall conform to the plan dimensions and shall meet the requirements of AASHTO M except as modified below .
No damage shall occur in the detector if the pavement loop or leadin becomes short circuited. . Microwave Detectors Microwave detectors shall work on an operational frequency of .
Both woven and nonwoven geotextiles are acceptable however no slitfilm woven fabrics will be permitted and woven geotextiles will not be permitted for subgrade stabilizationreinforcement under pavement structural sections Table StabilizationReinforcement Geotextile Property Values Other Properties Test Method Requirements Geotextile class Class from Table a Permittivity ASTM D .secb Apparent Opening Size AOS ASTM D .mm maximum Ultraviolet Stability Retained Strength ASTM D after hours of exposure aDefault geotextile selection .
Both woven and nonwoven geotextiles are acceptable however no slit film woven fabrics will be permitted and woven geotextiles will not be permitted for subgrade stabilizationreinforcement under pavement structure sections. . Drainage Geotextile The geotextile shall have property values expressed as Minimum Average Roll Value MARV in the weakest principal direction which meet or exceed the values stated below .
