BITUMINOUS CONCRETE FIELD UNIT SUPERVISOR The Agencys Authorized Representative of the Materials Testing and Certifications Section responsible for the evaluation and approval of various aspects of bituminous concrete pavement detailed in these Specifications and supervision of Plant Inspectors utilized at hot mix asphalt plants .
SUBGRADE The graded surface prepared as a foundation for the pavement structure and shoulders of a transportation facility .
WEARING COURSE The uppermost component of a pavement structure .
When the Contract specifies that the base course or the intermediate course of pavement be placed prior to suspension of work for the winter season permanent rather than temporary guardrail shall be installed in accordance with the Contract .
All traffic control devices including but not limited to signs pavement markings pavement marking removals temporary traffic barrier barricades reflectorized plastic drums cones flashing arrow boards and detours shall conform to the latest edition of the MUTCD shall be installed to the satisfaction of the Engineer and shall be functioning prior to the beginning of field work .
Hauling or operation of said vehicles or equipment over any permanent course of any bituminous pavement or any structure during active construction will not be permitted .
equipment materials or vehicles must be parked or placed a minimum of feet from the edge of pavement in all directions or a minimum of feet behind guardrail when not being utilized .
Whenever existing pavement markings conflict with desired traffic patterns within a construction or detour area or otherwise create a potentially misleading confusing or hazardous condition for the traveling public the markings will be completely removed or obliterated by the Contractor to the satisfaction of the Engineer .
The Contractor shall not move or use equipment on any pavement or structure in a manner that may or does cause damage .
This work shall consist of excavating and grading roadways runways and railways slides borrow pits waterways channels intersections approaches and steps in hillside embankments and excavating unsuitable material from the construction area and beneath embankment areas surfaces and pavements .
Solid Rock Excavation shall consist of the removal of hard igneous metamorphic or sedimentary rock that requires blasting or the use of rippers detached rock boulders mortared stone masonry or concrete each having a volume of cubic yards or more and Portland cement concrete pavement including any bituminous surface overlay material encountered in the limits of excavation .
Excavation of Surfaces and Pavements shall consist of the removal and disposal of existing surfaces and pavements that are located outside other excavation and embankment limits .
Bituminous concrete pavement shall conform to the requirements of Section as applicable for the Contract with the exception that the mix design submittal and plant inspection requirements set forth in Section will not apply. . GENERAL CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS .
Prior to the construction of Test Borings and the placement of Controlled Density Flowable Fill the Contractor shall submit to the Engineer sitespecific plans detailing the schedule of work for these two items type and location of drilling sleeve installation pumping system confirmatory boring operation method of filling bore hole with or without voids being encountered and repair of the roadway section sand gravel and pavement .
Grading shall be to full crosssection width at subgrade before placing of any type of subbase or pavement except that partial width construction is permissible where necessary for the maintenance of traffic and shall be done within the allowable tolerances as indicated on the Plans .
The roadway surface at boring hole locations shall be backfilled and then patched using bituminous concrete pavement. . SUBGRADE .
Payment will be full compensation for performing the work specified submitting sitespecific plans as required performing test borings installing sleeves backfilling patching with bituminous concrete pavement including any drilling and blasting required and for furnishing all labor materials tools equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
This work shall consist of the removal disposal and cleanup of bituminous pavements by coarsemilling or finemilling. . EQUIPMENT AND OPERATION .
It shall be able to remove bituminous pavement to an accuracy of inch with conveyors capable of side or front loading to transfer the removed material from the roadway to a truck .
Equipment used for fine or micromilling shall meet the following requirements Equipment shall deploy a cutting head with a carbide or PCD polycrystalline diamond tipped cutting teeth designed for micromilling bituminous pavement to close tolerances .
The carbide or PCD bits shall be arranged in a manner that is capable of producing a final pavement surface having a transverse pattern of inch center to center of each strike area and a target difference between ridge and valley RVD measurement of the mat surface shall not exceed inch .
When traffic shall be maintained for any period of time on a milled area the following conditions apply a All butt joints inch deep or greater shall have a temporary taper or wedge of bituminous concrete pavement installed at a minimum slope of VH .
Tapers andor wedges shall be totally removed prior to placing permanent pavement at the respective butt joint .
If the Contractor lays down temporary pavement to avoid the above nonpayment for milling temporary pavement and subsequent milling shall be at the Contractors expense .
Substantially all of the pavement surface shall be textured .
Extra depth finemilling of isolated low spots will not be necessary if it requires lowering of the overall profile of the pavement .
In all cases the maximum depth of bituminous pavement removal shall be inches .
The quantity of CoarseMilling Bituminous Pavement and FineMilling Bituminous Pavement to be measured for payment will be the number of square yards of surface from which bituminous pavement has been removed on the Plans . .
This work shall consist of texturing bituminous concrete pavement to construct rumble strips disposing of waste millings and cleaning up the pavement. . EQUIPMENT .
Equipment that tears distorts or otherwise damages the pavement adjacent to the milled depressions will not be allowed. . GENERAL CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS .
When it is necessary to maintain traffic over the subbase or where construction hauling occurs over the subbase the upper inches of subbase shall be scarified to restore permeability in the subbase surface compacted and regraded as required or replaced just prior to the placement of any pavement .
This work shall consist of pulverizing the existing pavement together with underlying base course material to the depth and width specified on the Plans or in the Contract adding aggregate materials as required or as ordered by the Engineer adding the stabilizing agent indicated on the Plans mixing the components thoroughly and shaping and compacting the stabilized material to the desired grade and density. . MATERIALS .
The pulverized material shall consist of the existing pavement blended with underlying subbase material andor additional aggregate material and shall conform to the gradation requirements of Table .A .
Pulverization shall be accomplished with a machine having positive depth control adjustments and capable of reducing the pavement material to the specified size .
Stabilization with water shall not be performed during rainstorms nor when the ambient air temperature is below F. The Contractor shall pulverize only that area of pavement that can be stabilized during the same Working Day . .
or less before bituminous concrete pavement is placed on it . .
Aggregate for Bituminous Concrete Pavement .a The grade of performancegraded PG asphalt binder used to produce bituminous concrete pavement shall be as specified in Table .C or Table .F unless otherwise specified in the Contract Documents .
For each pavement type the materials shall be combined and graded to meet the limits specified in Table .A .
For each pavement type the materials shall be combined and graded to meet the limits specified in Table .D .
For Superpave bituminous concrete pavement mixes AASHTO R Superpave Volumetric Design for Asphalt Mixtures will be the method used to develop a mix that will meet the specified Design Criteria in accordance with AASHTO M Superpave Volumetric Mix Design .
v. Bituminous concrete pavement shall be sampled tested and evaluated by the Contractor for each mix typedesign for each Project on a continuous production basis in accordance with the minimum quality control guidelines specified in Table .I .
TABLE .I MINIMUM QUALITY CONTROL CRITERIA Test Action Frequency Test Method Temperature of mix per tons at plant truck Verified thermometer Air voids per tons AASHTO T AASHTO T AASHTO T Cold feed gradation per day AASHTO T Cold feed percentage fractured face and thin and elongated particles Day of initial paving and per week ASTM D PG asphalt binder content per tons Batch slip Extracted gradations per tons AASHTO T AASHTO T AASHTO T Fine aggregate and coarse aggregate moisture content times daily minimum AASHTO T Recycled asphalt pavement RAP moisture content times daily minimum AASHTO T Fine aggregate coarse aggregate and RAP specific gravities Day of initial paving and one per week AASHTO T AASHTO T RAP PG asphalt binder content per day AASHTO T AASHTO T Determine composite PG binder grade per tons AASHTO R Fractured faces for gravel sources only .
For paving operations including placement of temporary pavements the year shall be divided into two seasons InSeason and ExtendedSeason .
The Engineer has the authority to withdraw the approval for use of baghouse fines at any time that the bituminous concrete pavement mix provided by the Contractor is unsatisfactory as determined by the Engineer .
The bottom of the sloped plate shall be mounted inch to inch above the existing pavement .
Prior to paving any mainline or drive surfaces the existing bituminous concrete pavement surface shall be prepared as shown on the plans and as directed by the Engineer .
Grass growing adjacent to pavement or through cracks in the pavement which may hamper the placement of new bituminous concrete shall be removed by the Contractor as directed by the Engineer .
Where bituminous concrete pavement is used to resurface existing pavements and the existing pavement contains irregularities depressions or waves such deficiencies shall be eliminated using extra bituminous material for spot leveling to bring the existing base to uniform section and grade before placing of the required courses of bituminous concrete . .
The use of water to cool the pavement will not be permitted .
All work adjacent to the pavement such as guardrail cleanup and turf establishment shall be completed prior to placing the wearing course .
When bituminous concrete pavement is to be placed on a bridge deck having a waterproofing membrane a rubbertired or rubbertracked paver shall be used to place the binder course of pavement .
Rollers shall operate in static mode when compacting bridge deck pavements .
The existing edge of pavement shall be sawcut or trimmed by mechanical means to provide a vertical edge for placing the handplaced bituminous concrete material .
If the Agency elects to not take cores of any pavement course the Density Pay Factor PFD for that course will be considered equal to ..
The density of the compacted pavement shall be at least .
Acceptance testing to verify the density of the compacted pavement will be done by averaging the densities of a minimum of four cores for each days production for each type of bituminous mix placed .
miles in length bituminous concrete pavement will be analyzed for density according to the procedures specified in this Subsection .
Compacted bituminous concrete pavement specified to be sampled and tested using bituminous concrete pavement core samples for determining density will be analyzed by utilizing the statistical qualitylevel analysis Percent Within Limits PWL method .
The density of the base course pavement after compaction shall not be less than .
For this Subsection the base course will be defined as the first single lift of hot mix asphalt pavement placed directly on the aggregate subbase or Full Depth Reclamation material .
The density of all intermediate and surface courses of compacted pavement shall not be less than .
The Contractor shall fill the core holes at their expense with hot bituminous concrete pavement at a temperature of at least F on the same day that the cores are taken .
Joints between old and new pavements or between each successive days work shall have a thorough and continuous bond between the old and new mixtures .
Transverse butt joints shall be formed by cutting the pavement in a vertical plane at a location approved by the Engineer where the pavement has a true surface as determined using a straightedge at least feet long .
Unless otherwise directed by the Engineer longitudinal joints shall be offset at least inches from any joint in the lower courses of pavement .
Wherever possible a inch space should be maintained between all final pavement markings and parallel joints in bituminous concrete pavement .
The Contractor shall conduct paving operations such that the paving joint between the travel lane and adjacent shoulder will be outside of all longitudinal pavement markings .
For the purposes of longitudinal joint compaction acceptance a lot shall consist of the total Project length of joint constructed per pavement course and the total Project quantity of bituminous concrete mixture compacted in place per pavement course including shoulders .
Prior to the highway being surface tested all Contract items shall be complete such that the Project could be deemed substantially complete unless otherwise directed by the Engineer including but not limited to all guardrail bridge joints and permanent pavement markings installed including all side road markings .
𝐼𝑃𝐼 . . For the evaluation of surface tolerance acceptance a lot shall consist of the total Project quantity of wearing surface of bituminous concrete pavement constructed and measured in place .
The screed shall have the ability to be crowned at the center both positively and negatively and have vertically adjustable extensions to accommodate the desired pavement profile .
Prior to paving the existing bituminous concrete pavement surface shall be prepared as shown on the plans and as directed by the Engineer and in accordance with the provisions of Subsection .
Daily application rates RDA shall be calculated using the following formula 𝑃𝐷𝐴 𝐿𝐷 𝐿𝑅 𝐴 where RDA Daily application rate of polymermodified emulsified asphalt gallonssquare yard ME Ending meter reading gallons MS Starting meter reading gallons A Daily area measured for payment under BWC square yards Field adjustments to the specified application rate of polymermodified emulsified asphalt shall be determined based upon the existing surface condition of the pavement .
Use an adequate number of rollers to complete finishing before the pavement temperature falls below F. Once finished traffic will not be permitted on placed material until the material has cooled to F unless otherwise authorized by the Engineer . .
The quantity of Bonded Wearing Course to be measured for payment will be the number of square yards of pavement surface treated in the complete and accepted work . .
The quantities of Material Transfer Vehicle and Material Transfer Vehicle Cold Mix to be measured for payment will be the number of tons of bituminous pavement transferred by the MTV to the paver in the completed and accepted work as determined by the weigh slips . .
This work shall consist of cold planing and crushing andor screening the existing bituminous pavement adding additional asphalt emulsion and mixing and repaving with the material to the depths lines and grades shown on the Plans Recycling of the existing pavement shall be performed in a manner that does not disturb the underlying materials. . MATERIALS .
The exact application rate may be varied by the Contractor as required by existing pavement conditions and approved by the Engineer .
The Contractor shall furnish a selfpropelled machine capable of planing the existing bituminous pavement to the depth shown on the Plans in one pass .
Recycling operations shall not be performed when either the ambient air temperature or the surface temperature of the pavement to be recycled is below F. Recycling operations shall also not be performed when the weather is foggy or rainy or when weather conditions or predicted weather conditions are such that proper mixing spreading and compacting of the recycled material can not be accomplished .
When it is in the public interest for servicing traffic the Construction Engineer may adjust the ambient air andor pavement temperature requirements or extend the dates of the recycling season. . MOISTURE .
Hot mixed bituminous concrete pavements shall not be placed until the Cold Mixed Recycled Bituminous Pavement material has been allowed to cure and the free moisture content is reduced to a maximum of ..
The required density shall be achieved and maintained until a hot mixed bituminous concrete pavement has been placed .
The quantity of Cold Mixed Recycled Bituminous Pavement to be measured for payment will be the number of square yards of existing pavement which has been recycled in an acceptable manner as determined by actual surface measurements of the lengths and widths of the recycled area as shown on the Plans or as directed by the Engineer .
This work shall consist of furnishing and placing cracksealing material in the cracks of existing bituminous concrete pavement. . MATERIALS .
The melting kettle shall be equipped with a thermostatic control calibrated between F and F. The kettle shall be mounted on rubber tires and be equipped with a metal shield beneath the firebox to protect the pavement .
The ambient air temperature shall be in the range of F to F and the pavement temperature shall be in the range of F to F. When it is in the public interest the Construction Engineer may adjust the specified ambient air andor pavement temperature requirements . .
All cracks must be clean dry and heated to ensure optimal bonding of the sealant material to the existing pavement .
All material removed from the cracks shall be immediately removed from the pavement .
Following crack routing or sawcutting the entire pavement area shall be cleaned using a power broom or blower device .
Special care must be exercised in urban areas to ensure that the pavement area is cleaned after the crack sealing operation and to minimize the creation of dust in the cleaning process .
Immediately prior to the application of the sealer material all cracks shall be cleared of loose pavement vegetation sand dust and any other debris using the hotair lance .
The full length of the cracks shall be heated with the hotair lance to improve bonding of the sealant and pavement .
Care shall be taken not to burn or char the pavement .
Any charred pavement shall be cut out and removed and the crack prepared and resealed .
The joint sealer material should be struck off such that only a thin film band inch or less is left on the pavement .
Optimally the pavement aggregate should be visible through the thin film band .
Any loose material on the surface or in the crack which may contaminate the joint sealer or impede bonding of the sealant to the pavement is to be removed by hand tools prior to crack sealing .
If the pavement must be reopened to traffic prior to air cooling the cooling process may be accelerated with water or other coolant as specified by the manufacturer and approved by the Engineer .
This work shall consist of the application of a membrane to bridge decks to serve as a waterproof barrier between the concrete deck and the bituminous concrete surface pavement .
The temperature of the bituminous concrete pavement to be placed on the membrane shall be as recommended by the membrane manufacturer and approved by the Engineer .
Where bituminous concrete pavement will be applied to the membrane surface a tack coat compatible with the membrane system shall be used between the membrane and the bituminous concrete pavement .
Joints sawn in bituminous concrete pavement shall be filled and sealed with hot poured or cold poured joint sealer or asphaltic plug joint binder appropriate backer rod and an approved bond breaker . .
The joint sealer shall be applied per the manufacturers recommendations however the ambient air and pavement temperatures must be greater than F at the time of application. . SAWED JOINTS .
When placing new bituminous concrete pavement each lift of pavement shall be scored with a single blade cut to a depth of of the lift thickness at the location of the center of the proposed joint .
This work shall be completed prior to exposing the location to traffic or where traffic is not maintained the same Working Day that the lift of pavement is placed .
Prior to placing poured or preformed joint sealers the vertical faces of the sawed joint and the horizontal pavement surfaces within inch of the joint edge shall be thoroughly blastcleaned to improve joint sealant adhesion .
The joint shall be slightly overfilled and the excess sealant shall be leveled with a U or Vshaped squeegee to provide a thin layer of sealant spread over the blastcleaned horizontal pavement surfaces adjacent to the joint .
The joint shall be slightly overfilled and the excess sealant shall be leveled with a U or Vshaped squeegee to provide a thin layer of sealant spread over the blastcleaned horizontal pavement surfaces adjacent to the joint .
The joint shall be slightly overfilled and the excess sealant shall be leveled with a U or Vshaped squeegee to provide a thin layer of sealant spread over the blast cleaned horizontal pavement surfaces adjacent to the joint. . JOINT PROTECTION .
When the Contract Plans designate paved approaches the approaches shall be paved with a minimum inch wearing course of Type III or Type IV bituminous concrete pavement and the approaches and bridge shall have temporary pavement markings applied as per Section .
Bituminous concrete pavement shall conform to the requirements of Section except the mix design submittal and plant inspection requirements set forth in Section will not be required .
The temporary pavement shall extend for the full length of the approaches and the full clearance width described below .
Payment will be full compensation for designing detailing constructing maintaining and removing the bridge and its approaches including placing and removing pavement and pavement markings when paved approaches are required .
This work shall consist of the removal wholly or in part and the satisfactory disposal of all structures including accessories and appurtenances bridge pavements and the backfilling of holes when required. . GENERAL .
The removal of pavement on bridges shall include the removal of bituminous concrete material .
The quantity of Removal of Bridge Pavement to be measured for payment will be the number of square yards of bridge deck from which bituminous pavements have been removed as shown on the Plans or ordered by the Engineer .
The Contract Unit Price bid for Changing Elevation of Drop Inlets Catch Basins or Manholes shall include all the work and costs involved in cutting pavements and excavating around the top of the unit and the bricks to provide room to accomplish the work and shall also include all costs of backfilling around the elevation reset unit up to the bottom of pavement or the upper surface of the unit top as appropriate to the individual location .
The Contract Unit Price bid for Rehabilitating Drop Inlets Catch Basins or Manholes Class I II or III shall include all the work and costs involved in cutting pavements and excavating around the top of the unit and the bricks to provide room to accomplish the work and shall also include all costs of backfilling around the rehabilitated unit up to the bottom of pavement or the upper surface of the unit top as appropriate to the individual location .
Unless otherwise directed by the Engineer the Contractor shall saw all pavements to a minimum depth of inches .
Decommissioning shall include sawcutting existing pavement as necessary excavating to the required depth to remove the cover removal and disposal of covers and grates filling the drop inlet with Controlled Density Flowable Fill and backfilling as necessary .
Pavement shall be sawcut to minimize damage to the adjacent pavement and shall be kept to the minimum required to decommission the drop inlet .
Capping shall include sawcutting existing pavement as necessary excavating to the required depth to remove the top portions of the drop inlet placing a steel plate and backfilling .
Pavement shall be sawcut to minimize damage to the adjacent pavement and shall be kept to the minimum required to cap the drop inlet .
Payment will be full compensation for all necessary cleaning of the interior of the unit to determine the extent of the work for excavating cutting of pavement and backfilling for removing deteriorated materials and designated materials for furnishing all materials including backfill material concrete concrete risers top sections reinforcing steel steps concrete block brick mortar frames grates covers coatings pipe stubs weep holes and underdrain ends required for reconstructing the unit as shown on the Plans or directed by the Engineer and for furnishing all labor tools equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
The bituminous concrete curb shall be placed on bituminous concrete pavement or another hard surface .
All joints adjacent to pavements curbs and structures shall be coated with emulsified asphalt . .
Guardrail posts and anchors shall be installed prior to placing the adjacent top course of pavement unless otherwise directed by the Engineer. . RAIL ELEMENTS .
Polyethylene Plastic Pipe and Fittings HDPE Electrical Conduit .b Bituminous concrete pavement shall conform to the requirements of Section .
Blocking skids casing spacers end seals stainless steel straps bituminous concrete pavement Portland cement concrete pavement reinforcing steel emulsion subbase materials brick end walls and other materials required in conjunction with sleeves will be considered incidental to the Contract Item Sleeves for Utilities .
The valve box shall not transmit shock or stress to the valve and shall be centered and plumb over the wrench nut of the valve with the box cover flush with the surface of the finished pavement or other such level as directed by the Engineer .
The valve nut shall be readily accessible for operation through the opening in the manhole which shall be set flush with the surface of the finished pavement or such other level as specified by the Engineer .
All equipment and supplies furnished by the Contractor shall be available prior to the placement of any bituminous concrete or pavement markings .
When the Contractor places bituminous concrete or pavement markings at more than one location simultaneously the necessary testing equipment shall be furnished at each location .
The submitted sitespecific plan shall also include a layout for each phase of construction showing existing lane configurations existing traffic control devices signs signals and pavement markings driveways ramps and highway intersections and the location of all proposed temporary traffic control devices Flaggers and UTOs .
Payment for temporary traffic barrier and temporary pavement markings will be made under their respective Contract Pay Items when included in the Contract .
This work shall consist of furnishing and placing retroreflective markings including temporary markings and necessary signing on roadway pavement and other surfaces. . MATERIALS .
Retroreflective pavement markings are hereby classified as Waterborne Paint Pavement Markings Durable Pavement Markings Temporary Pavement Markings and Other Related Markings . .
Roadway surfaces shall be clean and dry at the time of application of pavement markings .
The Engineer will inspect the pavement to determine if conditions are suitable for the placement of markings .
The Engineer will check the pavement for cleanliness moisture content and temperature and will check ambient air conditions .
The Engineer will make the final determination as to the suitability of Project conditions for the application of pavement markings .
Where required the Contractor shall clean the surface to be marked to the satisfaction of the Engineer to provide for an acceptable bond between the marking and the pavement or surface .
Weather conditions must be sufficient to allow the placement and curing of the pavement marking material without violating the manufacturers requirements .
Any pavement marking materials spilled or tracked on the roadway surfaces shall be removed by the Contractor to the satisfaction of the Engineer and at no additional cost to the State .
All temporary pavement markings including line striping targets when used shall be applied so that at the end of each working day all centerlines edgeline island markings gore markings lane lines special markings etc .
During paving and cold planing work shall be scheduled so that the pavement markings are complete immediately after the paving and cold planing operations cease for the day .
When line striping targets LSTs are not shown on the Plans but are used as a shortterm substitute for other temporary pavement markings they shall be placed as directed by the Engineer and will be paid for as the equivalent quantity of temporary pavement marking for which the LSTs are substituted .
However if it becomes necessary to replace those temporary LSTs with either more LSTs or the actual temporary pavement markings designated for that particular location no further payment for the temporary pavement markings at that particular location will be made .
At all times the Contractor shall have on hand on the Project all necessary materials equipment and labor to place any and all necessary interim pavement markings including temporary line striping targets required by the Plans or as directed by the Engineer .
The pavement marking equipment shall meet the approval of the Engineer and shall be maintained in working condition at all times .
The pavement marking equipment shall be of standard commercial manufacture of the type capable of satisfactorily applying the designated material at required application temperatures rates and manufacturers recommended application practices .
Equipment shall include adequate process controls to regulate the application of marking materials and maintain required temperatures pressures and delivery speed of components in the pavement marking .
The pavement marking equipment shall be operated in accordance with recommendations of the equipment manufacturer unless otherwise directed by the Engineer .
At the time of application of durable pavement markings the pavement surface and ambient air temperatures shall be as per the manufacturers published specified application temperatures and the dew point shall be ºF or more below the ambient air temperature .
If the manufacturers published recommendations are unavailable the pavement surface and ambient air temperatures shall be a minimum of ºF .
When it is in the public interest the Engineer may authorize the application of pavement markings under conditions that vary from these limitations or the manufacturers published recommendations .
Placement of pavement markings may be suspended at the discretion of the Engineer during peak traffic hours or at any time when in the Engineers judgment traffic is being unduly hampered delayed by the work or when traffic interferes with the quality of work .
All equipment and devices necessary for the application of pavement markings and protection thereof and for the protection of the traveling public shall be as usually required for work of this type as shown on the Plans or as directed by the Engineer and shall be furnished by the Contractor. . WATERBORNE PAINT PAVEMENT MARKINGS .
Retroreflective waterborne paint pavement markings shall be applied by a method in which the liquid paint is applied to the road surface and the glass beads are immediately applied on the paint and firmly embedded therein .
The markings shall be applied at a rate to create a uniform wet film inplace minimum thickness as follows unless otherwise specified in the Contract Documents a mils for pavement constructed under the same Contract as the markings with a minimum application rate of square feet per gallon .
b mils for all other pavement surfaces with a minimum application rate of square feet per gallon .
Durable pavement markings shall be used at those locations shown on the Plans or directed by the Engineer .
Durable pavement markings are classified as pavement marking tape epoxy paint thermoplastic markings and polyurea paint .
Durable pavement markings shall be installed within two weeks of the placement of the wearing course .
Where possible and where applicable a inch gap should be maintained between thermoplastic pavement markings and parallel joints in bituminous concrete pavement .
Type A Pavement Marking Tape when used as a final durable marking shall be applied only by being inlaid in the bituminous pavement during the rolling operation or in a recess as defined in Subsection .
Type B Pavement Marking Tape when used as a final durable marking shall be applied only by being inlaid in the bituminous pavement during the rolling operation or in a recess as defined in Subsection .
c Pavement Marking Tape Type C. Type C Pavement Marking Tape when used as a final durable marking shall be applied only by being inlaid in the bituminous pavement during the rolling operation or in a recess as defined in Subsection .
d Pavement Marking Tape Type D. Type D Pavement Marking Tape when used as a final durable marking shall be applied only by being inlaid in the bituminous pavement during the rolling operation or in a recess as defined in Subsection .
Epoxy paint shall be applied at a rate to create a uniform wet film in place minimum thickness as follows unless otherwise specified in the Contract Documents mils for paverplaced pavement constructed under the same Contract as the markings with a minimum application rate of square feet per gallon .
mils for all other pavement surfaces with a minimum application rate of square feet per gallon .
The thermoplastic pavement marking compound shall be extruded onto the pavement surface in a molten state .
Following an application of glass beads to the marking surface and upon cooling to normal pavement temperatures the resultant marking shall be an adherent retroreflective stripe of the specified thickness and width that is capable of resisting deformation by traffic .
Thermoplastic material shall be applied to the pavement surface by the extrusion method wherein the bottom of the extrusion shoe is the pavement and the top and other three sides are contained by or are part of suitable equipment for maintaining the temperature and controlling the flow of material .
The equipment used for the placement of thermoplastic pavement markings shall be of two general types a .
Bituminous concrete primer shall be applied to pavements older than two years at the application rates and procedures recommended by the thermoplastic material manufacturer .
When applying durable diagonal pavement markings that are to be enclosed within durable long line borders the Contractor shall apply the diagonals in such a manner as to allow a maximum of a single overlap and no gaps between the diagonals and the long lines .
Polyurea paint shall be applied at a rate to create a uniform wet film inplace minimum thickness as follows unless otherwise specified in the Contract Documents mils for paverplaced pavement constructed under the same Contract as the markings with a minimum application rate of square feet per gallon .
mils for all other pavement surfaces with a minimum application rate of square feet per gallon .
Temporary pavement markings are classified as temporary pavement marking tape removable pavement marking mask line striping targets LSTs and traffic paint with glass beads .
Unless otherwise indicated in the Contract the Contractor may choose any of the above as being acceptable for temporary pavement markings .
This tape for pavement markings is classified as temporary and is removable and shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturers requirements .
Black or other compatible pavement color pavement marking mask is classified as removable .
Line striping targets are intended to be substitutes for pavement markings for not longer than Calendar Days .
Line striping targets shall be maintained and replaced as needed or as directed by the Engineer until replaced by a temporary or permanent pavement marking .
For solid longitudinal pavement markings line striping targets shall be placed at foot intervals .
For dashed pavement markings line striping targets shall be placed in groups of three spaced at feet with the groups separated by foot spaces or as determined by the Engineer .
Temporary paint applied on the base or intermediate courses of pavement shall have a minimum thickness of mils .
Temporary markings on the wearing course of pavement that remain in place for fewer than Calendar Days shall be Temporary Pavement Marking Tape or Line Striping Targets .
Paint will not be permitted for use as a temporary marking which remains in place for fewer than Calendar Days on the wearing course of pavement. . OTHER RELATED MARKINGS .
Recessed pavement markings shall be installed as specified for permanent markings .
The use of gangstacked diamond cutting blades is required for asphalt pavement surfaces .
Recesses shall be clean dry and free of laitance oil dirt grease paint or any other foreign contaminants prior to application of the pavement markings .
If the Contractor wishes to use pavement markings or markers that are not specified in this Section the Contractor shall submit samples technical data installation instructions and if applicable removal instructions to the Engineer for approval at least Calendar Days before the date the markings or markers are to be placed .
Existing markings shall be obliterated in such a manner and by such means that a minimum of pavement scars are left and all the existing markings are removed e.g .
by grinding a square or rectangle on the pavement to remove a letter or arrow or grinding a large rectangle to remove a word so that the outline of the letter symbol or word is not ground into the pavement and therefore still legible even though the marking has been removed .
The quantity of pavement marking edge lines and centerlines of the types and sizes specified to be measured for payment will be the number of linear feet applied in the complete and accepted work as measured along the centerline of the pavement stripe .
The quantity of Stop Bar of the type specified to be measured for payment will be the number of linear feet applied in the complete and accepted work as measured along the centerline of the pavement stripe .
The quantity of Line Striping Targets to be measured for payment will be the number of individual targets installed on the pavement and removed when no longer needed .
The quantity of Painted Curb to be measured for payment will be the number of linear feet applied in the complete and accepted work as measured along the centerline of the pavement stripe .
The Contract Unit Price for recessed pavement marking items will also include all labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary for the placement of the recess and any necessary cleaning drying or conditioning of the recess prior to placement of the marking .
The Contract Unit Price for pavement marking items that are used as temporary pavement markings including tape raised pavement markers paint and line striping targets as specified in Subsection .
The costs of maintaining marking capability for interim pavement markings at all times will not be paid for directly but will be considered incidental to the pavement marking items in the Contract .
The Contractor is responsible for supplying necessary materials and equipment recommended by the manufacturer to determine the surface moisture condition of the pavement .
This work shall consist of furnishing and placing geotextiles in underdrain trenches under embankments for embankment reinforcement under riprap and stone fill behind retaining structures over roadbed subgrades between railbed and roadbed subgrades and beneath pavement overlays. . MATERIALS .
Unless otherwise specified the conduit for the cable shall be placed not less than inches below the top of curb in the sidewalk areas and not less than inches below the finished grade of pavement when passing under roadways .
Controller to pavement units No .
The traffic control signal systems shall not operate without the pavement markings and signal related signing in place .
The traffic signals shall not operate without the pavement markings and signal related signing in place .
The temporary traffic control signal system or temporary flashing beacon system installed at the designated location shall include all necessary existing or Contractor provided materials and equipment shown on the Plans including but not limited to controllers flashers wiring conduit strain poles associated signs sign posts pavement markings electrical service vehicle detectors span wires interconnect cables signal heads warning beacons and lights .
Pavement marking shall meet the requirements for temporary pavement markings unless otherwise shown on the Plans .
Unless otherwise shown on the Plans detectors designed to be installed in the roadway shall be cut and sealed in the pavement in the same manner as permanently installed detectors .
The quantity of Vehicle Loop Detector to be measured for payment will be the number of linear feet of pavement cut and sealed measured from the curb containing the loop and leadin wires in the complete and accepted work .
When the sleeve is installed without conduit the pay limits and the excavation and backfill will be paid in the same manner as specified for culverts in Subsection .. Payment for the above Contract Unit Prices will be full compensation for furnishing transporting handling and installing the materials and equipment specified including excavation backfill concrete hanger hardware for pole mounting of cable pole identification cutting and resealing the pavement and for furnishing all labor tools equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
Payment will include the installation and removal of strain poles signal heads controller and cabinet luminaires signs sign posts flashing beacons pavement markings wiring conduit and all other materials necessary for a fully operational Temporary Traffic Signal System complete in place .
Payment of the above Contract Unit Prices will be full compensation for furnishing transporting handling and installing the materials and equipment specified including excavation backfill hanger hardware for cable and signals span wires poles cutting and resealing pavement providing electrical service and power and for furnishing all labor tools equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work to maintain the system while it is required and then to completely remove it from the Project and properly dispose of it when so directed by the Engineer .
b Payment for Temporary Traffic Signal System and Temporary Flashing Beacon will be made as follows When the entire system has been installed at a site including signing and pavement markings and working for hours to the satisfaction of the Engineer of the Contract Unit Price for each will be paid .
Aggregate for bituminous concrete pavement shall meet the following requirements a Bituminous Concrete Pavement Aggregates .
Coarse aggregate for bituminous concrete pavement shall consist of clean hard crushed stone crushed gravel or crushed igneous rock and be uniformly graded .
Fine aggregate for bituminous concrete pavement shall consist of stone screenings or a combination of stone screenings screened natural sand andor manufactured sands and other fine aggregates such that at least of any individual stockpile of the fine aggregate shall pass a inch .
The gradation of the coarse aggregate shall be such that when combined with the fine aggregate the composite gradation shall meet the gradation requirements for bituminous concrete pavement specified in Table .A or Table .D .
The gradation of the fine aggregate shall be such that when combined with a coarse aggregate the composite aggregate meets the gradation requirements for bituminous concrete pavement specified in Table .A or Table .D .
Recycled asphalt pavement RAP and recycled asphalt shingle RAS products may be used individually or in combination in the production of bituminous concrete .
The gradation of recycled asphalt materials shall be such that when combined with a coarse and fine aggregate the composite aggregate shall meet the specified gradation requirements for Marshall bituminous concrete in Subsection .A or Superpave bituminous concrete pavement specified in Subsection .B . .
When RAP is used to produce bituminous concrete pavement the resulting mixture shall meet all Specification requirements for the types of mix specified .
When a bituminous concrete pavement is proposed using RAP the Contractor shall submit with the mix design information an analysis of the RAP material .
When a bituminous concrete pavement is proposed using RAS the Contractor shall submit with the mix design information an analysis of the RAS material .
When crushed gravel is used as coarse aggregate in Marshall bituminous concrete pavements at least shall have at least two fractured faces in accordance with the requirements of ASTM D . For Superpave bituminous concrete pavements the following design criteria must be met a. Coarse Aggregate Angularity .
The Agency has identified a potential stripping problem with some granite and quartzite aggregates used in the production of bituminous concrete pavement .
Readymixed traffic paint suitable for marking on either bituminous or Portland cement concrete pavements shall conform to the following requirements a Polyurea Pavement Markings .
Glass beads for pavement markings shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M Type unless otherwise specified .
Thermoplastic pavement markings shall comply with the requirements of AASHTO M . Thermoplastic Pavement Markings shall have a lead content less than .
Acceptable Type A Pavement Marking Tape shall be one of the nonremovable permanent pavement marking tapes on the Agencys Approved Products List that exhibit high adhesion high durability and high retroreflectivity .
Acceptable Type B Pavement Marking Tape shall be one of the nonremovable pavement marking tapes on the Agencys Approved Products List .
These markings shall be used in lower AADT locations in long line applications as specified in the Contract Documents and shall conform to the requirements of ASTM D . c Pavement Marking Tape Type C. Acceptable Type C Pavement Marking Tape shall be one of the nonremovable pavement marking tapes on the Agencys Approved Products List .
These markings shall be used at intersection locations only as specified in the Contract Documents and shall conform to the requirements of ASTM D . d Pavement Marking Tape Type D. Acceptable Type D Pavement Marking Tape for legends and symbols shall be one of the nonremovable pavement marking tapes on the Agencys Approved Products List .
Acceptable Pavement Marking Tape shall be one of the removable pavement marking tapes on the Agencys Approved Products List and shall conform to the requirements of ASTM D . d Pavement Marking Mask .
