STANDARD SPECIFICATION ROADWORKS DoI REFERENCE TEXT October Page standard specification for roadworks miscellaneous provisions provision for traffic clearing grubbing and rehabilitation earthworks conformance testing pavements and shoulders stabilisation spray sealing dense graded asphalt slurry surfacing miscellaneous concrete works drainage works protection works road furniture and traffic control devices pavement marking landscape ducting and conduits traffic control signals traffic counting stations street lighting directional boring measurement and payment referenced australian standards other referenced authorities and documents acts regulations and codes civil standard drawings for roadworks nt climate zones table this document specifies the general standards of materials and workmanship required by the department for construction of civil road network assets This page deliberately left blank STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT DECEMBER Page PO Box Palmerston NT ABOUT THIS SPECIFICATION This document was prepared by the Department of Infrastructure Planning and Logistics DIPL and specifies the general standards of materials and workmanship required by the Department for roadworks .
Check levels at centre line and to edges of pavement .
The survey pegs must be installed in pairs one on each side of the pavement positioned and marked to have the same chainage .
The survey pegs are to be marked with the design relative level of the finished pavement and the chainage at which each survey peg is located .
The finished pavement design levels are at points in the centre of the pavement for pavements with equal numbers of traffic lanes in each direction of travel .
The finished pavement design levels are at points in the centre of adjacent lanes which have opposite directions of travel for pavements with unequal numbers of traffic lanes in each direction of travel .
Where new pavement surfacing or existing pavement resurfacing is being undertaken install temporary raised reflective pavement markers at the end of each day and prior to the loss of daylight at m maximum spacing .
Only use temporary raised reflective pavement markers that conform to AS .
Section .. For long term road construction works where sealed detours merge into existing sealed pavements or where sealed side roads merge into sealed detours line mark transition areas in accordance with the standard drawing for Line Marking CS and in accordance with AS including the setting out of arrows letters numerals and chevrons .
Carry out removal of markings in such a manner as to minimise damage to pavement surfaces .
This includes all works within the trafficked lanes m prior to the stop line m past the stop line that affects the normal daily traffic flow at the intersection or for road reserve or median excavations greater than mm within the area defined by the traffic signal poles and associated pits between the traffic signal poles and associated traffic signal control cabinet .. Traffic Count Stations Count Stations have inpavement detection systems installed and cutting off or closing traffic lanes can have an impact on their operation .
Pavement resheeting only Remove seal from site and replace with similar volume of pavement .
SUBGRADE SURFACE The prepared surface immediately beneath the pavement and shoulder layers .
UNPAVED AREAS Those areas within the road reserve boundary which are not part of the road pavement including any medians not paved batters and table drains and blocks but excluding footpaths and vehicle access strips .
Cut back the existing formation and pavement as shown on the drawings by not less than mm on each edge to sound densely compacted material to form a uniform edge curved or straight where applicable .
Pastoral Access Roads .. For in situ pavement materials comply with the following CBR day soaked at MMDD to AS minimum .
Determination of pavement surface texture depth sand patch method NTTM .
Retroreflectivity testing of pavement marking NTTM .
Retroreflectivity testing of pavement marking wet condition AUSTROADS TEST METHODS AGPTH Austroads Guide to Pavement Technology Part H Test Methods AGPTT Pretreatment and Loss on Heating of Bitumen Multigrade and polymer Binders rolling thin film oven RTFO test AGPTT Handling Viscosity of Polymer Modified Binders Brookfield Thermosel AGPTT Flash Point of Polymer Modified Binders AGPTT Shear Properties of Polymer Modified Binders ARRB ELASTOMETER AGPTT Torsional Recovery of Polymer Modified Binders AGPTT Toughness of Polymer Modified Binders ARRB Extensiometer AGPTT Softening Point of Polymer Modified Binders AGPTT Deformation Resistance of Asphalt Mixtures by the Wheel Tracking Test .
or less Conformance Nonconformance Subgrade shoulder subbase unsealed pavement base shoulder base select fill levees structures and culverts in fill bridge foundation backfill bridge abutment fill .
or less Conformance Nonconformance Sealed pavement basecourse .
or less Conformance Nonconformance Sealed pavement subbase Stabilised basecourse .
DEFINITIONS BASE BASE COURSE That uppermost layer of constructed material immediately above the subgrade or subbase and below the pavement surface sealed or unsealed extending for the full width of the pavement and shoulder .
The pavement structure refers to the pavement layers in combination above the subgrade surface to support the traffic loadings .
SHOULDER That layer of material immediately above the subbase or subgrade and adjacent to the pavement .
SUBBASE One or more layers of material placed over the subgrade and below the basecourse extending for the full width of the pavement and shoulder. . MATERIAL PROPERTIES .. Natural Gravel Obtain natural gravel from sources of naturally occurring deposits .
Blends of Natural Gravel and Fine Crushed Rock Not permitted in urban areas for sealed pavements .
Sand Clay Comply with this clause when sand clay forms an integral part of the pavement andor shoulder design .
.. Onformation Mixing and Placing Place material in uniform layers over subgrade surface or lower layers of the pavement .
Final Pavement Surface Final pavement layers must be in a homogeneous uniformly bonded condition free from layering cracking disintegration or surface tearing .
The finished pavement layer must be dense even textured and tightly bonded free of laminations and roller indentations .
The pavement layer must retain these characteristics after rotary brooming and be suitable to receive bituminous surfacing .
PAVEMENTS AND SHOULDERS STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT DECEMBER Page Allow the top mm of the pavement layer to dry back to a Moisture Ratio Rm equal or less than for FCR and for natural gravel .
Where pavement thickness is mm or greater scarify to not less than mm depth and recompact where finish not achieved .
Where pavement thickness is less than mm scarify and recompact to full depth where finish not achieved. . RECONSTRUCTION AND REHABILITATION OF EXISTING PAVEMENTS .. Widening Saw cut back the existing pavement by not less than mm width on each edge to sound material .
Construct pavement and shoulder as specified .
Strengthening by Granular Overlay on Existing Pavement This clause is not applicable to pavements which are not sealed .
Saw cut across existing pavement at each end of work .
If sealed remove seal from existing pavement .
Construct a strengthening layer over the full width of the existing pavement and shoulder and the widening as specified .
Strengthening by Granular Overlay on Reworked Existing Sealed Pavement This clause is not applicable to pavements which are not sealed .
Saw cut across existing pavement at each end of work .
Moisture condition and compact reworked existing pavement to the Dry Density Ratios specified in Table .
Construct a new strengthening basecourse layer over the full width of the reworked pavement and shoulder and any widening to thickness specified .
Moisture condition and compact pavement to the Dry Density Ratios specified in Table .
Hold point Obtain the Superintendents approval for pavement conformance prior to any surfacing work .
.. Roughness testing sequence Data must be collected in the sequence shown in the table within days of completion of testing of the relevant pavement layer .
Ensure that the pavement is free of loose material and debris when testing is done for unbound granular bases measurements must be undertaken prior to sweeping of the pavement and free water is not present on the pavement when testing is undertaken .
Table Testing sequence for pavement type Pavement type Testing sequence Spray seal on granular base Before application of spray seal and after completion of the final wearing surface .
Asphalt pavement thickness mm and over Prior to and after the application of the final wearing course .
Roundabouts Railway lines m after the event Bridge joints m after the event Intersections stop bar to stop bar Inspection pit covers and related surface defects within the wheel paths m including the event Side streets specified in the PSRs deemed to affect pavement ride quality the width of the side street plus m after the event Surface defects related to existing culverts which are not part of the works under the Contract width of culvert plus m after the event and Cattle grids. . OTHER REQUIREMENTS Refer to PROJECT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS in THE RFT .
AS Bitumen emulsions for construction and maintenance of pavements .
Preparation of Layer Scarify existing pavement sections and new material where necessary full depth before spreading .
.. Compaction Compact parallel to the centre line of the pavement and for the full depth of the stabilised layer .
Commence compaction at the lower edge of the pavement and work progressively towards the crown or the higher edge .
Filling or addition of material to the surface of the pavement to meet tolerance requirements will not be permitted .
.. Commencement and Continuity of Work Complete full width stabilisation of pavement in one day .
Laying PAVING MACHINE Deposit and spread the pavement material in one operation using selfpropelled mechanical tamperspreader .
areas under m Take samples for Liquid Limit Plastic Limit Linear Shrinkage California Bearing Ratio from the unstabilised pavements .
Only the finished compacted pavement complying with level tolerance and layer thickness will be tested .
Resistance to stripping of cover aggregates from binders AS Bituminous emulsions for the construction and maintenance of pavements AS .
Retroreflective materials and devices for road traffic control purposes Raised pavement markers AS Residual bitumen for pavements AS .
Road tank vehicles for dangerous goods Tankers for bitumen based products AS Oils for reducing the viscosity of residual bitumen for pavements AS Geotextiles Methods of Test AS .
PRIME An application of a Primer to a prepared base without cover aggregate to provide penetration of the surface temporary waterproofing and to obtain a bond between the pavement and the subsequent seal or asphalt .
Preparation of pavement surfaces .
Installation of temporary pavement markers .
PREPARATION OF PAVEMENT Remove raised reflective pavement markers .
Repair any damage to the pavement surface caused by the removal of raised reflective markers with an emulsionsand mixture before sealing .
Sweep the entire pavement surface to remove loose stones dust dirt and foreign matter immediately before spraying .
Remove water from the surface of primed or sealed pavements before applying binder .
Include pavement widening .
.. Atmospheric Conditions Commence spraying only when pavement temperature is in excess of C or has been in excess of C for at least one hour .
For cutback work commence spraying when pavement temperature is in excess of C . For emulsion work commence spraying when pavement temperature is in excess of C . Cease spraying if rain threatens or in windy or dusty conditions .
Set the height of the spraybar so that the lower faces of the nozzles are mm or that specified on the calibration certificate above the pavement when the sprayer is full .
Start and finish each spray run on a protective strip of paper placed on the pavement .
Place paper on the pavement and masking around areas to be sprayed or wherever the sprayer is stationary on the road pavement .
Installation of Temporary Pavement Markers Temporary Pavement Markers to conform to AS .. Spacings of temporary pavement markers to be in accordance with AS .
Any strips of pavement not adequately covered with sprayed material to be sprayed later with the hand attachment . .
Bond the fabric to the pavement with a tack coat sprayed mm wider than the fabric and in accordance with the Superintendents directions for location .
Apply aggregate to sprayed binder within minutes where the pavement temperature is C or greater .
minutes where the pavement temperature is between and C . Polymer Modified Binders Apply aggregate within minutes irrespective of pavement temperature .
AS Bituminous emulsion for the construction and maintenance of pavements .
AS Bitumen for pavements .
.. Reclaimed Asphalt Pavement RAP Crush and screen RAP from milling or excavation of existing asphalt pavements .
If the Contractor suspects that the base layer is inadequate for asphalt construction the Contractor must inform the Superintendent ensure that the surface has been adequately prepared to achieve shape and level requirements where required ensure that the exposed granular base layer is tightly bound and free from vegetation and other foreign matter ensure there are no laminations or false pavements within the exposed surface remove all foreign matter by sweeping or other means and ensure that exposed granular layers have sufficiently dried back to the requirements of the Final Pavement Surface clause in PAVEMENTS AND SHOULDERS prior to the application of the bituminous spray primer seal .
Cold Planing Unless otherwise specified or directed by the Superintendent cold planing shall be carried out in such a manner as to leave a uniform surface parallel with the specified ultimate finished surface of the pavement .
Shape and Roughness Where surface shape of an existing pavement is corrected by cold planing the application of the resurfacing asphalt layer is considered to be new work .
The pavement must be dry and dust free before any application of tack coat .
Longitudinal joints must be located within the lane line of the pavement or the traffic sump line .
Following rolling the resultant joint must be smooth and of similar texture to the pavement in general .
Cut back existing pavement to a true level surface with no deviation .
Cut back must be a minimum of mm or be sufficient in length to match existing pavement levels and to also maintain cross falls .
Transverse Match of Overlay to Existing Pavement Saw cut existing asphalt pavement mm depth along the match line of joint .
Remove taper wedge of existing asphalt pavement along the overlay side of match joint .
Feather the asphalt overlay down to the existing pavement to achieve a maximum slope of in and for the full width of the pavement .
Ensure depth of overlay above existing pavement in taper wedge area is not less than mm .
Temporary Ramps Provide compacted asphalt ramps measuring a maximum grade relative to existing surrounding pavement grades where transverse joints are left overnight under traffic .
The Superintendent will carry out all conformance testing of materials and completed pavement properties through the Conformance Testing Panel Period Contract .
for Tables .. Conformance Sampling and Testing Frequencies The Superintendent will undertake conformance sampling of asphalt materials taken from trucks at the mixing plant and finished asphalt pavement in accordance with the requirements of CONFORMANCE TESTING .
Finished Pavement Properties Finish pavement surfaces smooth dense true to shape and to the following tolerances Thickness Average not less than specified .
AS Bituminous emulsions for the construction and maintenance of pavements .
That traffic does not damage the work on newly treated sections of pavement. . MATERIALS .. Binder Hold Point Use bitumen emulsion binder complying with AS .
Spreading Equipment Attach to the mixing machine a mechanical spreader box distributor equipped with flexible material in contact with the pavement surface to prevent loss of the slurry surfacing mix from the spreader and capable of distributing the slurry surfacing mix across the width of the box without segregation or overflow while assuring by its design and adjustments that the required width and depth of spread are maintained on varying grades crowns and superelevations .
Add sufficient water to provide a mix of workable consistency and this may be varied slightly to suit the surface texture of the pavement and the pavement temperature .
Sweeping Pavement Hold Point Immediately prior to any application of slurry surfacing mix sweep the pavement as necessary to ensure that the surface is free of loose material stones dirt dust and foreign matter by the use of a mechanically operated rotary road broom unless otherwise authorised by the Superintendent .
Hold point Do not commence spreading of the slurry surfacing mix until the prepared pavement has been endorsed by the Superintendent .
SET OUT Unless following a satisfactory edge line or centre line place pavement marks on the surface at intervals of not more than metres for the slurry surfacing machine to follow while mixing and spreading . .
Maximum Mean Departures From The Job Mix Sieve Size In mm By Mass Aggregate . . . . . . . . Bitumen Content . . SLURRY SURFACING STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT DECEMBER Page TEMPERATURE If the pavement temperature exceeds degrees C. immediately prior to the application of the slurry surfacing mix thoroughly wet the surface of the pavement and all crack faces with water .
It should not be used for concrete pavements .
Concrete pavements require a specific one off specification developed as required .
Brace pipes of mm diameter and greater with toms until the completion of the embankment and pavement .
Reinstate to subgrade level trenches cut through pavements and other construction by backfilling the trench with stabilised select fill compacted to relative compaction .
Construct basesubbase layers of the pavement in accordance with PAVEMENTS AND SHOULDERS .
Reinstate trenches cut outside of pavements and other construction by backfilling with standard fill compacted to relative compaction. . INLET AND OUTLET STRUCTURES AND MAINTENANCE HOLES Construct in accordance with the specifications .
Where trench excavated through pavement compact upper layer of base course gravel to relative compaction and reinstate surface .
Form the top mm of the vertical face nearer the pavement and any exposed outer face true to line and level .
Finish flush with the top of the pavement .
Where adjacent pavement is sealed overlap the bituminous seal on the margins by not less than mm .
Level or mm of top of adjacent pavement. . OTHER REQUIREMENTS Refer to PROJECT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS in the RFT .
OTHER MARKINGS All diagonal lines chevron markings and messages on the pavement including symbols words numerals arrows and kerb markings .
TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICE Any sign signal pavement marking or other installation placed or erected for the purpose of regulating warning guiding or providing for the safety of road users .
Heights for signs Unkerbed Roads Fingerboard G and street name signs G m above the near edge of the pavement .
m above the near edge of the pavement .
Post sizes for galvanized pipe posts are for sign clearance of less than m above the pavement .
Place the grid centre line on the centre line of the road pavement .
The grid grade and levels to conform to the grade and levels of the adjacent road pavement .
Place and compact select fill behind the abutments of the grid up to the base of the pavement .
Reinstate pavement layers with base material .
GENERAL This section specifies the materials testing and standards of workmanship for marking of pavements with road marking paint andor thermoplastic material including glass beads. . STANDARDS Conform to the following Standards and Publication unless specified otherwise ASNZS set Paints and related materials Methods of test ASNZS ..
Paints and related materials Thermoplastic pavement marking materials For use with surface applied glass beads AS .
Paints and related materials Pavement marking materials Waterborne paint For use with surface applied glass beads APAS Road marking paint thermoplastic APAS Road marking paint water borne APAS Glass beads for pavement marking paint NTMTM NT Materials Testing Manual NTTM NT Test Methods .
OTHER MARKINGS All diagonal lines chevron markings and messages on the pavement including symbols words numerals arrows and kerb markings .
TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICE Any sign signal pavement marking or other installation placed or erected for the purpose of regulating warning guiding or providing for the safety of road users .
CONTRACTOR ACCREDITATION All pavement marking work must be carried out by a contractor accredited to the Painting Contractor Certification Program PCCP in a class or category applicable to the work .
Audio Tactile Markings Thermoplastic used for audio tactile pavement markings must comply with AS .
Appendix K Field tests for thermoplastic pavement marking material and Appendix L Field determination of skid resistance wet pendulum method at any time up to vehicle passes the skid resistance value of beaded unprofiled base material must be not less than .
Paints and related materials Pavement marking materials Part Thermoplastic pavement marking materials For use with surface applied glass beads AS .
Paints and related materials Pavement marking materials Part High performance pavement marking systems APS Pavement marking materials cold applied plastic APS Glass beads for use in pavement marking paints .. Materials Witness Point Generally A two part Poly Methyl Methacrylate resin based pavement marking material that complies with the requirements for colour luminance and bead content of AS .
sprayed or screeded onto the pavement containing pre mixed glass beads with additional dropon beads being added during application conforming with the following requirements of AS .
Setting out The location of all pavement markings on new surfaces including reflective raised pavement markers shall be set out by spotting with paint or other approved method prior to application of the markings .
The location of all pavement markings over existing markings shall match the existing except where directed otherwise .
For continuous thermoplastic pavement marking mm drainage gaps shall be provided at a maximum spacing of m m to allow adequate drainage of the pavement surface .
Witness Point Obtain approval from the Superintendent for the type of equipment to be used for applying pavement marking materials .
Permitted tolerance for the length width and spacing of all pavement markings mm. . WORKMANSHIP HOLD POINT Set out markings so that they are straight with smooth even curves where necessary .
Remove any marking material beyond the defined marking leaving a neat and smooth marking on the pavement .
Reinstate pavement markings that are damaged by traffic during paint drying time and remove all tyre pickup marks. . FIELD TESTING Wet film thickness Check the thickness of the wet film applied to the road pavement by the method of procedure for Operation of Wet Film Thickness Comb NTTM .. Glass bead application Check the application rate of glass beads to the surface of the marked line by the method of Field Procedure for Measurement of the Rate of Application of Spherical Glass Beads NTTM ..
Wear assessment limits The degree of wear is defined as the area of pavement marking remaining after a period of time relative to the initial area of the pavement marking .
Wear limits for pavement marking intact area after six months .
Remark pavement marking that does not conform to the specified limits at the Contractors expense including the costs of all testing. . RESEALING CONTRACTS Conform to the requirements set out in this section and to the following requirements for resealing work including enrichments spray sealing rejuvenation and emulsion coats .
The Principal will pay the Panel Contractor direct for the pavement marking work .
Coordination of Pavement Marking Work The Contractor is responsible for coordination of the pavement marking work .
Make all arrangements necessary with the pavement marking Panel Contractor to meet the following requirements For urban work complete the pavement marking within two days of resealing work .
For rural work complete the pavement marking within four days of resealing work .
Retain all traffic control and warning devices necessary until pavement marking is completed .
Record all localities and extent of pavement marking to reinstate to existing arrangements .
Provide this information to the panel contract line marker and coordinate all pavement marking works . .
Appendix K Field tests for thermoplastic pavement marking material and Appendix M Determination of retroreflectivity marking must achieve a minimum level of reflectivity of mcdluxm at time of application .
.. Pavement Preparation Ensure each RRPM site is free of dirt oil grease paint and any other material which would affect the bond of adhesive to the pavement .
Abrasive blast chip or burn pavements that can not be cleaned by sweeping .
Do not place markers over joints in concrete pavement .
Removal of pavement marking must not adversely affect the integrity of the road surface .
.. Raised Reflective Pavement Marker Removal Where required remove raised pavement markers by breaking the bond between the adhesive the road surface and the base of the raised pavement marker .
Repair all divots caused by the removal of raised pavement markers with hot melt adhesive or epoxy adhesive to the level of the surrounding pavement. . OTHER REQUIREMENTS Refer to PROJECT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS in the RFT .
In areas of no kerbing terminate duct crossings clear of the pavement as specified .
Where trench excavated through pavement backfill above subgrade level with base gravel as specified in PAVEMENTS AND SHOULDERS compacted to relative compaction .
metres above the pavement level any arrow aspects are located to the left or right side as appropriate of the associated round aspects and they are as specified .
Cable will be V HT .. Supply and install the cable for the loop in a saw cut in the pavement surface .
AS Bitumen emulsions for the construction and maintenance of pavements .
Detector Loop Witness Point Install cable for loop in saw cut in pavement surface .
Backfill around the cable to the pavement surface with polymer modified bituminous emulsion .
Drill mm hole through base of guide and mm into road pavement for each fixing .
Make allowance for pavement or shoulder materials outside the carriageway width not included in measurement .
Make allowance for variation in pavement thickness and deformation of existing pavement .
Removal of existing pavement markings measured as an item .
.. Pavement Marking Resealing Contracts The Superintendent will pay for all pavement marking work directly to the Panel Contractor selected to perform the pavement marking work under this contract .
Measurement of completed pavement marking will be done jointly with the reseal contractor the panel contract linemarker and the Superintendent .
Recording of localities and extent of pavement marking work including set out prior to line marking activities are measured as an item .
Include all activities required to coordinate the pavement marking work .
R Resistance to stripping of cover aggregates from binders ASNZS set Lighting for roads and public spaces AS Bitumen emulsions for construction and maintenance of pavements ASNZS Coldformed structural steel hollow sections AS Aluminium and aluminium alloys Anodic oxidation coatings ASNZS High strength steel bolts with associated nuts and washers for structural engineering AS Unplasticised PVC UPVC downpipe and fittings for rainwater AS set Methods of testing soils for engineering purposes AS .
Raised pavement markers retroreflective and nonretroreflective AS The storage and handling of flammable and combustible liquids Includes Amdt Amdt AS R Methods of test for textiles Physical tests Determination of maximum force using the grab method ISO MOD AS Bitumen for pavements ASNZS Glass beads for pavementmarking materials Includes Amdt ASNZS set Buried corrugated metal structures ASNZS .
Water services AS Oils for reducing the viscosity of residual bitumen for pavements AS Concrete structures Includes Amdt Amdt Supp AS .
R Thermoplastic pavement marking materials For use with surface applied glass beads AS .
R High performance pavement marking systems ASNZS Precast concrete pipes pressure and nonpressure AS set Methods of testing rocks for engineering purposes AS Portable traffic signal systems AS Cold mix asphalt for maintenance patching available withdrawn AS Pruning of amenity trees AS Soils for landscaping and garden use REFERENCED DOCUMENTS STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT DECEMBER Page Referenced Australian Standards Use Standards and their amendments current months before the date for the close of tenders except where different editions andor amendments are required by statutory authorities including but not limited to NATA and the National Construction Code including the Building Code of Australia .
Particular requirements for safety isolating transformers for general use IEC Ed MOD Includes Amdt ISO Earthmoving machinery Machinemounted audible travel alarms and forward horns Test methods and performance criteria REFERENCED DOCUMENTS STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT DECEMBER Page OTHER REFERENCED AUTHORITIES AND DOCUMENTS Other Referenced Authorities and Documents AAPA Australian Asphalt Pavement Association APAS Australian Paint Approval Scheme APAS APS Pavement marking materials cold applied plastic APAS APS Glass beads for use in pavement marking paints APVMA Australian Pesticides and Veterinary Medicines Authority AGBT Austroads Guide to Bridge Technology AGPT Austroads Guide to Pavement Technology AGPTB Part B Asphalt AGPTH Part H Test Methods AGPTK Part K Seals AGPTT Austroads Guide to Pavement Technology Test methods AGPTT Pretreatment and Loss on Heating of Bitumen Multigrade and polymer Binders rolling thin film oven RTFO test AGPTT Segregation of Polymer Modified Binders AGPTT Ease of Remixing of Polymer Modified Binders AGPTT Handling Viscosity of Polymer Modified Binders Brookfield Thermosel AGPTT Flash Point of Polymer Modified Binders AGPTT Shear Properties of Polymer Modified Binders ARRB ELASTOMETER AGPTT Torsional Recovery of Polymer Modified Binders AGPTT Force Ratio of Polymer Modified Binders ARRB Extensiometer AGPTT Softening Point of Polymer Modified Binders AGPTT Compressive Limit of Polymer Modified Binders AGPTT Rubber content of digested crumb rubber binders Trichlor bath method AGPTT Specification Framework for Polymer Modified Binders and Multigrade Bitumens AGPTT Deformation Resistance of Asphalt Mixtures by the Wheel Tracking Test .
Base The layer of pavement immediately above the subgrade or subbase andor below the bituminous surfacing extending for the full width of the traffic lanes .
Shoulder The layer of material immediately above the sub base or subgrade and adjacent of the pavement .
Subgrade Surface The prepared surface immediately beneath the pavement and shoulder layers .
Unpaved Areas Those areas within the road reserve boundary which are not part of the road pavement including any medians not paved batters and table drains and blocks but excluding footpaths and vehicle access strips .
Where new pavement surfacing or existing pavement resurfacing is being undertaken install temporary raised reflective pavement markers at the end of each day and prior to the loss of daylight at m maximum spacing .
Only use temporary raised reflective pavement markers that conform to AS .
Section .. For long term road construction works where sealed detours merge into existing sealed pavements or where sealed side roads merge into sealed detours line mark transition areas in accordance with the standard drawing for Line Marking CS and in accordance with AS including the setting out of arrows letters numerals and chevrons .
Carry out removal of markings in such a manner as to minimise damage to pavement surfaces .
This includes all works within the trafficked lanes m prior to the stop line m past the stop line that affects the normal daily traffic flow at the intersection or for road reserve or median excavations greater than mm within the area defined by the traffic signal poles and associated pits between the traffic signal poles and associated traffic signal control cabinet Traffic Count Stations .. Count Stations have inpavement detection systems installed and cutting off or closing traffic lanes can have an impact on their operation .
EARTHWORKS AND DRAINAGE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT DECEMBER Page EARTHWORKS AND DRAINAGE . . OUTLINE DESCRIPTION This section specifies the maintenance requirement for drainage and the maintenance requirement for formation and subgrade on periodic pavement maintenance projects .
Maintain pavement dimensions in accordance with Drawing No .
REMOVAL OF EXCESS MATERIAL HOLD POINT Generally this work applies to the removal of unsuitable material such as silt rubble and sand debris dumped on windrows floodways pavements and drains .
Cut back the existing formation and pavement as shown on the drawings by not less than mm on each edge to sound densely compacted material to form a uniform edge curved or straight where applicable .
areas under m Take samples for Liquid Limit Plastic Limit Linear Shrinkage California Bearing Ratio from the unstabilised pavements .
Maintain pavement dimensions in accordance with Drawing No .
Maintain pavement dimensions in accordance with Drawing No .
Crushed Rock Not permitted in urban areas for sealed pavements .
Sand Clay Properties Property Required value Plasticity Index maximum for sealed pavements maximum for unsealed pavements .
The term gravel sheeting refers to the sheeting of pavement and shoulders with gravel sand clay or other suitable approved materials .
Gravel Resheeting Lots greater .. than m Gravel sheet pavement and shoulders in section lots greater than m. Locate and push up gravel material in accordance with the Material Extraction Areas and Water Sources clause in MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS .
Gravel Resheeting from Stockpile .. Gravel sheet pavement and shoulders in section lots greater than m. Load from existing stockpile haul to site and dump gravel material .
Gravel Repairs to Wash outs and .. Blow outs Gravel sheet repair pavement and shoulder wash outs and blow outs in section lots less than m. Locate and push up gravel material in accordance with the Material Extraction Areas and Water Sources clause in MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS .
GRADING AND GRAVEL SHEETING STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT DECEMBER Page Gravel Repairs to Wash outs and .. Blow outs from Stockpile Lots less than m Gravel sheet repair pavement and shoulder wash outs and blow outs in section lots less than m. Load from existing stockpile haul to site and dump gravel material .
OnFormation Placing and Mixing .. Place material in uniform layers over subgrade surface or lower layers of the pavement .
Where pavement thickness is mm or greater scarify to not less than mm depth and recompact where finish not achieved .
Where pavement thickness is less than mm scarify and recompact to full depth where finish not achieved .
Hold Point Obtain the Superintendents approval for pavement conformance prior to any surfacing work .
.. Roughness testing sequence Data must be collected in the sequence shown in the table within days of completion of testing of the relevant pavement layer .
Ensure that the pavement is free of loose material and debris when testing is done for unbound granular bases measurements must be undertaken prior to sweeping of the pavement and free water is not present on the pavement when testing is undertaken .
Table Testing sequence for pavement type Pavement type Testing sequence Spray seal on granular base Before application of spray seal and after completion of the final wearing surface .
Asphalt pavement thickness mm and over Prior to and after the application of the final wearing course .
Roundabouts Railway lines m after the event Bridge joints m after the event Intersections stop bar to stop bar Inspection pit covers and related surface defects within the wheel paths m including the event Side streets specified in the PSRs deemed to affect pavement ride quality the width of the side street plus m after the event Surface defects related to existing culverts which are not part of the works under the Contract width of culvert plus m after the event and Cattle grids .
Any undamaged pavement may be bypassed by the grader .
Where damaged pavement is encountered grade the pavement running surface to remove corrugations and fill in ruts holes and depressions .
In the case of saturated table drains it may only be possible to open grade the centre of the pavement removing sand and debris to the shoulder .
Maintenance Grade Carriageway Grade the carriageway pavement and shoulder surface .
Cut the pavement and shoulders to remove all corrugations and fill in all ruts holes and depressions .
Cut the pavement and shoulders to remove all corrugations and fill in all ruts holes and depressions .
Spread the accumulated material uniformly over the pavement and shoulders to a thickness of GRADING AND GRAVEL SHEETING STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT DECEMBER Page to mm to fill depressions and to obtain the typical cross section as shown on the Drawing No .
Cut the pavement and shoulders to remove all corrugations and fill in all ruts holes and depressions .
Spread the accumulated material uniformly over the pavement and shoulders to a thickness of to mm to fill depressions and to obtain the typical cross section as shown on the Drawing No .
Cut the pavement and shoulders to remove all corrugations and fill in all ruts holes and depressions .
Spread the accumulated material uniformly over the pavement and shoulders to a thickness of to mm to fill depressions and to obtain the typical cross section as shown on the Drawing No .
Cut the pavement and shoulders to remove all corrugations and fill in all ruts holes and depressions .
Spread the accumulated material uniformly over the pavement and shoulders to fill depressions and to obtain the typical cross section as shown on the Drawing No .
Cut the pavement and shoulders to remove all corrugations and fill in all ruts holes and depressions .
Spread the accumulated material uniformly over the pavement and shoulders to fill depressions and to obtain the typical cross section as shown on the Drawing No .
Cut the pavement and shoulders to remove all corrugations and fill in all ruts holes and depressions .
Spread the accumulated material uniformly over the pavement and shoulders to fill depressions and to obtain the typical cross section as shown on the Standard Drawing .
Scarify andor rip the full width of the pavement and shoulders mixing both won and insitu materials to obtain a uniform homogenised blend of mm compacted thickness .
Cut the pavement and shoulders to remove all corrugations and fill in all ruts holes and depressions .
Spread the accumulated material uniformly over the pavement and shoulders to fill depressions and to obtain the typical cross section as shown on the Drawing No .
Scarify andor rip the full width of the pavement and shoulders mixing both won and insitu materials to obtain a uniform homogenised blend of mm compacted thickness .
Attain and maintain pavement dimensions with standard Drawing No .
Cut the pavement and shoulders to remove all corrugations and fill in all ruts holes and depressions .
Spread the accumulated material uniformly over the pavement and shoulders to fill depressions and to obtain the typical cross section as shown on the Drawing No .
Scarify andor rip the full width of the pavement and shoulders mixing both won and insitu materials to obtain a uniform homogenised blend of mm compacted thickness .
STABILISATION MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT DECEMBER Page STABILISATION MAINTENANCE . . OUTLINE DESCRIPTION This section specifies the stabilisation requirements of materials for use in sealed and unsealed roads shoulders verges and inverts and the insitu wet mixing of existing pavement and shoulders by pulverisation. . STANDARDS Comply with the Acts Regulations Guidelines and Codes applicable to the works .
Materials to be stabilised .. Stabilise the existing subgrade layer or the existing pavement and shoulder layer .
Materials to be Wet Mixed .. Pulverise and wet mix the existing pavement and shoulder layer including seal. . INSITU STABILISATION Preparation of Subgrade Layer ..
Shoulder Layer Scarify the existing pavement sections and new material where necessary full depth before spreading .
Use purpose designed pavement reclaimer with an undercut rotor stabiliser .
Compact parallel to the centre line of the pavement and for the full depth of the stabilised layer .
Commence compaction at the lower edge of the pavement and work progressively towards the crown or the higher edge .
Do not fill or add material to the surface of the pavement to meet tolerance requirements .
Maintain clear of vehicular traffic for four days. . PULVERISATION AND WET MIXING Prepare pavement and shoulder layer mix compact and finish the layer all in accordance with the insitu stabilisation clauses .
Break up and pulverise the existing pavement and shoulder layer including the existing sealed surface with a pavement reclaimer to a maximum particle size of .
Samples for Liquid Limit Plastic Limit Linear Shrinkage CBR will be taken from the unstabilised pavements .
Sample only from the finished compacted pavement complying with level tolerance and layer thickness .
Australian Standards .. AS Methods for sampling and testing aggregates AS Bitumen emulsions for construction and maintenance of pavements AS Manual of uniform traffic control devices AS .
Retroreflective materials and devices for road traffic control purposes Raised pavement markers retroreflective and non retroreflective AS Residual bitumen for pavements AS Methods for the determination of the flash point of flammable liquids closed cup General AS Cutback bitumen AS set Methods of testing bitumen and related roadmaking products AS .
Methods of testing bitumen and related roadmarking products Longterm exposure to heat and air AS set Aggregates and rock for engineering purposes AS Oils for reducing the viscosity of residual bitumen for pavements Austroads .. AGPTH Austroads Guide to Pavement Technology Part H Test Methods .
SCOPE Spray sealing treatments for routine maintenance include Prime Primerseal Initial Seal or Reseal With conventional bitumen cutback bitumen or bitumen emulsion binder With modified binder SPRAY SEALING MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT DECEMBER Page Incorporating geotextile fabric reinforcement Spray sealing work consists of Supply and delivery of materials Storage and handling of raw materials Precoating of aggregate Preparation of pavement surfaces Preparation of bituminous materials Application of primer andor primer binder andor binder Spreading and rolling of aggregate Removal of loose aggregate .
Remove raised reflective pavement markers .
Repair any damage to the pavement surface caused by the removal of raised reflective markers with an emulsionsand mixture before sealing .
Sweep the entire pavement surface to remove loose stones dust dirt and foreign matter immediately before spraying .
Remove water from the surface of primed or sealed pavements before applying binder .
Include pavement widening .
Atmospheric Conditions .. Commence spraying only when pavement temperature is in excess of ºC or has been in excess of ºC for at least one hour .
For cutback work commence spraying when pavement temperature is in excess of ºC .
For emulsion work commence spraying when pavement temperature is in excess of ºC .
Set the height of the spraybar so that the lower faces of the nozzles are mm or that specified on the calibration certificate above the pavement when the sprayer is full .
Start and finish each spray run on a protective strip of paper placed on the pavement .
Place paper on the pavement and masking around areas to be sprayed or wherever the sprayer is stationary on the road pavement .
Installation of Temporary Pavement Markers Temporary Pavement Markers to conform to AS .. Spacings of temporary pavement markers to be in accordance with AS or as directed by the Superintendent .
Any strips of pavement not adequately covered with sprayed material to be sprayed later with the hand attachment .
Apply aggregate to sprayed binder within minutes where the pavement temperature is ºC or greater .
minutes where the pavement temperature is between and ºC .
Polymer Modified Binders Apply aggregate within minutes irrespective of pavement temperature .
Refer to SPRAY SEALING for bitumen requirements. . OUTLINE DESCRIPTION This section specifies the repairs and minor rehabilitation to existing bituminous surfaces and pavements with asphalt and includes the repair of potholes edge defects surface deformations and cracks .
Pavement Profiling The use of a pavement profiler to remove worn oxidised aged or out of shape pavements and for correcting poor surface conditions to make the pavement suitable for resheeting or resealing .
Prime An application of a Primer to a prepared base without cover aggregate to provide penetration of the surface temporary waterproofing and to obtain a bond between the pavement and the subsequent seal or asphalt .
Regulation patching Surface repairs and shape correction without dig out andor squaring up will usually not be straight sided due to irregularities in the pavement and feathering repair techniques .
Wearing surface The section of pavement upon which the traffic travels .
This includes the layers of asphalt or spray seal in a flexible pavement above the base . .
Defect types are grouped into one of the following modes of pavement distress Deformations Includes corrugations depressions rutting and shoving .
Edge breaks Occur along the interface of a sealed pavement and unsealed shoulder .
Patch An area of pavement surface where the original has been replaced or covered .
Finish the pothole slightly higher than adjacent pavement surface between mm and mm .
Remove all debris and any loose materials on the pavement .
Reconstruction Patching .. Patch defect areas requiring squaring up and or the removal of distressed pavement .
Excavate the distressed pavement to sound material or to a depth of mm .
Large areas with fine cracks and minimal pavement distortion will be spray sealed slurry sealed or resurfaced with plant mix in accordance with other sections of the specification. . MATERIALS Aggregates ..
The pavement must be dry and dust free before any application of tack coat .
Provide ramps of compacted asphalt maximum grade relative to pavement grade when joints are left overnight on trafficked pavements .
Longitudinal joints shall not be left overnight on a pavement in use by traffic .
Transverse Match of Overlay to Existing Pavement Saw cut existing asphalt pavement mm depth along the match line of joint .
Remove taper wedge of existing asphalt pavement along the overlay side of match joint .
Feather the asphalt overlay down to the existing pavement to achieve a maximum slope of in and for the full width of the pavement .
Ensure depth of overlay above existing pavement in taper wedge area is not less than mm .
Avoid ponding of water on the pavement surface .
Start and finish each spray run on a protective strip of paper placed on the pavement .
Place paper on the pavement and masking around areas to be sprayed or wherever the sprayer is stationary on the road pavement .
Any strips of pavement not adequately covered with sprayed material to be sprayed later with the hand attachment .
Apply aggregate to sprayed binder within minutes where the pavement temperature is ºC or greater .
minutes where the pavement temperature is between and ºC .
Polymer Modified Binders Apply aggregate within minutes irrespective of pavement temperature .
and does not apply to buildings bridges or concrete pavements .
Brace pipes of mm diameter and greater with toms until the completion of the embankment and pavement .
Reinstate to subgrade level trenches cut through pavements and other construction by backfilling the trench with stabilised select fill compacted to relative compaction .
Construct basesubbase layers of the pavement in accordance with PAVEMENTS AND SHOULDERS .
Reinstate trenches cut outside of pavements and other construction by backfilling with standard fill compacted to relative compaction .
Where trench excavated through pavement compact upper layer of basecourse gravel to relative compaction and reinstate surface .
Form the top mm of the vertical face nearer the pavement and any exposed outer face true to line and level .
Finish flush with the top of the pavement .
Where adjacent pavement is sealed overlap the bituminous seal on the margins by not less than mm .
Level or mm of top of adjacent pavement .
Traffic Control Device Any sign signal pavement marking or other installation placed or erected for the purpose of regulating warning guiding or providing for the safety of road users .
Heights for signs Unkerbed Roads Fingerboard G and street name signs G m above the near edge of the pavement .
m above the near edge of the pavement .
Post sizes for galvanized pipe posts are for sign clearance of less than m above the pavement .
Repair and maintain each required section of the cattle grid or assembly as shown on the Standard Drawings and details below Grid centre line are placed on the centre line of the road pavement .
Grid grade and levels are to conform to the grade and levels of the adjacent road pavement .
Place and compact select fill behind the abutments of the grid up to the base of the pavement .
Reinstate pavement layers with base material .
This section specifies the materials testing and standards of workmanship for marking and re marking of pavements with road marking paint andor long life material .
Other Markings All diagonal lines chevron markings and messages on the pavement including symbols words numerals arrows and kerb markings .
Traffic Control Device Any sign signal pavement marking or other installation placed or erected for the purpose of regulating warning guiding or providing for the safety of road users .
All pavement marking work must be carried out by a contractor accredited to the Painting Contractor Certification Program PCCP in a class or category applicable to the work .
The location of all pavement markings on new surfaces including reflective raised pavement markers shall be set out by spotting with paint or other approved method prior to application of the markings .
The location of all pavement markings over existing markings shall match the existing except where directed otherwise .
Remove any marking material beyond the defined marking leaving a neat and smooth marking on the pavement .
Reinstate pavement markings that are damaged by traffic during paint drying time and remove all tyre pickup marks as per Removal Of Markings clause .
Permitted tolerance for the length width and spacing of all pavement markings or mm .
Removal of pavement marking must not adversely affect the integrity of the road surface .
.. Field Testing Wet Film Thickness Comb Check the thickness of the wet film applied to the road pavement by the method of procedure for Operation of Wet Film Thickness Comb NTTM .
Wear assessment The degree of wear is defined as the area of pavement marking remaining after a period of time relative to the initial area of the pavement marking .
Wear limits for pavement marking intact area after six months .
Remark pavement marking that does not conform to the specified limits at the Contractors expense including the costs of all testing .
Paints and related materials Pavement marking materials Part Thermoplastic pavement marking materialsFor use with surface applied glass beads AS .
Paints and related materials Pavement marking materials Part High performance pavement marking systems APS Pavement marking materials cold applied plastic APS Glass beads for use in pavement marking paints PAVEMENT MARKING MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT DECEMBER Page .. Materials Witness Point Generally A two part Poly Methyl Methacrylate resin based pavement marking material that complies with the requirements for colour luminance and bead content of AS .
sprayed or screeded onto the pavement containing pre mixed glass beads conforming to ASNZS with additional dropon beads being added during application conforming with the following requirements of AS .
Setting out For continuous thermoplastic pavement marking mm drainage gaps shall be provided at a maximum spacing of m m to allow adequate drainage of the pavement surface .
.. Pavement Preparation Ensure each RRPM site is free of dirt oil grease paint and any other material which would affect the bond of adhesive to the pavement .
Abrasive blast chip or burn pavements that can not be cleaned by sweeping .
Do not place markers over joints in concrete pavement .
.. Raised Reflective Pavement Marker Removal Where required remove raised pavement markers by breaking the bond between the adhesive the road surface and the base of the raised pavement marker .
Repair all divots caused by the removal of raised pavement markers with hot melt adhesive or epoxy adhesive to the level of the surrounding pavement .
Appendix K Field tests for thermoplastic pavement marking material and Appendix M Determination of retroreflectivity .
Audio tactile markings Thermoplastic used for audio tactile pavement markings must comply with AS .
Appendix K Field tests for thermoplastic pavement marking material and Appendix L Field determination of skid resistance wet pendulum method at any time up to vehicle passes the skid resistance value of beaded unprofiled base material must be not less than .
Remove cut material or other detritus from the grass cutting process from gutters cycle paths walk tracks and road pavements as the work proceeds .
.. Weeding Operations Weed any areas and at road pavement and kerb junctions within garden beds and within or around any other structure or feature occurring within the road reserve which can not be controlled by slashing mowing or trimming .
m over road pavements .
Hold Point Do not prune branches exceeding a calliper size of mm at trunk which overhang the road pavement without the approval of the Superintendent .
Remove any carcass from the road pavement and shoulders within one hour of observation or notice .
Control weeds in the following areas as a minimum along road reserve boundaries along fence lines around the base of trees along pipelines in mulch beds at joints contained within concrete slabs at junctions of road pavement and concrete kerb .
Do not allow irrigation water other than that carried by wind to flow onto the road pavement .
Remove stones grass or other debris from the sealed pavement following slashing operations .
Slash both sides of roadway from the edge of pavement sealed or unsealed to the cleared tree line including cuttings tops of batters at cuttings fill batters inlets and outlets of culverts protection works and around road furniture .
ALICE SPRINGS AND TENNANT CREEK REGIONS Slash both sides of roadway from the edge of pavement to the outer edge of formation including cuttings fill batters inlets and outlets of culverts protection works and around road furniture .
Detector Loop An inpavement wiring configuration including leadin wires to detect or count vehicle movements or both .
Coordinate with the pavement contractor in order for the prefabricated loops to be installed and to ensure loops are placed in the correct sequence .
Detectors Cut Into Pavement Supply and install the cable for the loop in a saw cut in the pavement surface .
Detectors Prefabricated Supply and install the prefabricated detector loop allowing for mm of asphalt cover over the prepared pavement surface .
Sweeping includes all turning stopping crossing and acceleration or deceleration areas including line marked areas across the whole of the road pavement within the area of the intersection .
Sweeping will include all turning stopping crossing and acceleration or deceleration areas including line marked areas across the whole of the road pavement within the area of the median break .
UNSEALED RUNWAYS Roll gravel runways and taxiways when there is moisture in the pavement but not saturated to incorporate loose material and to compact the surface .
Cut grass from the edge of pavement and seal to the extent of the rest areas truck parking bays and boat ramp areas or to the cleared tree line .
.. Weeding Operations Weed any areas and at road pavement and kerb junctions within garden beds and within or around any other structure or feature occurring within the road amenity areas which can not be controlled by grass cutting or trimming to comply with the service level requirements .
.. Gravel Resheeting Measured in square metres for mm compacted thickness of gravel material in pavement and shoulder where material is sourced and imported from a location up to a distance of km from the site .
This item applies to lot section sizes greater than m. MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT DECEMBER Page Include in the rate the pavement or shoulder materials outside the carriageway width not included in measurement .
.. Gravel Resheeting from Stockpile Measured in square metres for mm compacted thickness of gravel material in pavement and shoulder where material is imported from an existing gravel material stockpile up to a distance of km from the site .
This item applies to lot section sizes greater than m. Include in the rate the pavement or shoulder materials outside the carriageway width not included in measurement .
.. Gravel Repairs to Wash outs and Blow outs Measured in square metres for mm compacted thickness of gravel material in pavement and shoulder where material is sourced and imported from a location up to a distance of km from the site .
This item applies to lot section sizes less than m. .. Gravel Repairs to Wash outs and Blow outs from Stockpile Measured in square metres for mm compacted thickness of gravel material in pavement and shoulder where material is imported from an existing gravel material stockpile up to a distance of km from the site .
.. Supply Topup Materials Measured in square metres for nominated top up compacted thickness layer material of mm in subgrade pavement and shoulder where material is sourced and imported from a location up to a distance of km from the site .
AS Bitumen emulsions for the construction and maintenance of pavements ASNZS Cold formed structural steel hollow sections AS Aluminium and aluminium alloys Anodic oxidation coatings ASNZS High strength steel bolts with associated nuts and washers for structural engineering AS Unplasticised PVC UPVC downpipe and fittings for rainwater AS set Methods of testing soils for engineering purposes AS .
Raised pavement markers retroreflective and nonretroreflective AS The storage and handling of flammable and combustible liquids Includes Amdt Amdt AS R Methods of test for textiles Physical tests Determination of maximum force using the grab method ISO MOD AS Bitumen for pavements ASNZS Glass beads for pavementmarking materials Includes Amdt ASNZS set Buried corrugated metal structures ASNZS .
Plumbing and drainage Water services AS Oils for reducing the viscosity of residual bitumen for pavements AS Concrete structures Includes Amdt Amdt Supp AS .
Determination of durability Resistance to degradation by light heat and moisture ASNZS Design for installation of buried concrete pipes Includes Supp AS Guide to residential pavements AS .
R Thermoplastic pavement marking materials For use with surface applied glass beads AS .
R High performance pavement marking systems ASNZS Precast concrete pipes pressure and nonpressure AS set Methods of testing rocks for engineering purposes AS Portable traffic signal systems AS Pruning of amenity trees AS Soils for landscaping and garden use AS Composts soil conditioners and mulches Includes Amdt ASNZS Slip resistance classification of new pedestrian surface materials ASNZS Slip resistance measurement of existing pedestrian surfaces ASNZS Steel reinforcing materials Includes Amdt ASNZS Hotdip galvanized zinc coatings on fabricated ferrous articles AS Earthmoving machinery Machinemounted forward and reverse audible warning alarm Sound test method withdrawn See ISO ASNZS .
Table Other Referenced Authorities And Documents AAPA Australian Asphalt Pavement Association Guide to the manufacture storage and handling of polymer modified binders APAS Australian Paint Approval Scheme APAS APS Pavement marking materials cold applied plastic APAS APS Glass beads for use in pavement marking paints APVMA Australian Pesticides and Veterinary Medicines Authority AGBT Austroads Guide to Bridge Technology AGPT Austroads Guide to Pavement Technology AGPTB Part B Asphalt AGPTH Part H Test Methods AGPTK Part K Seals AGPTT Austroads Guide to Pavement Technology Test methods AGPTT Pretreatment and Loss on Heating of Bitumen Multigrade and polymer Binders rolling thin film oven RTFO test AGPTT Handling Viscosity of Polymer Modified Binders Brookfield Thermosel AGPTT Flash Point of Polymer Modified Binders AGPTT Shear Properties of Polymer Modified Binders ARRB ELASTOMETER AGPTT Torsional Recovery of Polymer Modified Binders AGPTT Toughness of Polymer Modified Binders ARRB Extensiometer AGPTT Softening Point of Polymer Modified Binders AGPTT Compressive Limit of Polymer Modified Binders AGPTT Laboratory protocol for the preparation of crumb rubber modified binders AGPTT Specification Framework for Polymer Modified Binders and Multigrade Bitumens AGPTT Deformation Resistance of Asphalt Mixtures by the Wheel Tracking Test .
