No payment will be made for this portion of the Work. . Operation of Pavement Brooms on Highway No mechanical pavement broom shall be operated on any highway without a rotating amber flashing light in operation .
Once the crushed granular base surfacing or pavement work has commenced on any portion of the new reconstructed or relocated highway no overloads will be permitted on that portion unless written approval is given by the Ministry Representative. . Health and Safety .. Occupational Health and Safety Program The Contractor shall provide an Occupational Health and Safety Program at the time of the preconstruction meeting and have it in place prior to the commencement of any Work .
Asphalt pavement shall be stockpiled for recycling in a specified location or disposed of in a location approved by the provincial Environmental Agencies as directed by the Ministry Representative . .
The Contractor shall consider the condition of the pavement used for detours and its impact on the safety and function of the detour .
The Contractor shall be responsible for the application and removal of all temporary pavement marking and reflective devices .
When traffic lanes have to be redefined for Long Duration Work the Contractor shall eradicate all redundant temporary or pavement markings that are not required for the intended traffic patterns .
As these materially are not well suited for longterm traffic they are usually overlaid by surface course materials HFSA or asphaltconcrete pavement .
i WellGraded Base WGB WGB is the standard base course material used for pavement structures .
.. Subbase Aggregates A granular material placed between the subgrade and the base course aggregates providing strength and drainage to the pavement structure .
Additional base or subbase granular materials will be of such thickness as may be considered necessary to provide supporting strength for the flexible pavement structure. . Construction of Subbase ..
Unless otherwise specified on the Contract Drawings or by the Ministry Representative the mesh shall terminate mm above the highway edge of pavement elevation .
.. Strikeoff and Finishing Machines Strikeoff and finishing machines for surfacing concrete such as slabs on grade pavements etc .
remove residues from the surfaces by rubbing with clean dry burlap but with no addition of neat cement to the surface during the sacking operation and finally cure the surfaces as specified in SS .. Table M DIMENSIONAL TOLERANCES Trueness of bearing surfaces such that there is no gap over mm under a m straight edge Trueness of bridge deck surfaces such that there is no gap over mm under a m straight edge Trueness of slope pavement surfaces such that there is no gap over mm under a m straight edge Trueness of other surfaces exposed to view such that there is no gap over mm under a m straight edge Curbs and parapets such that there is no gap over mm under a m straight edge Horizontal distance to concrete surfaces mm Elevations of concrete surfaces except bearings and decks mm Elevations of bridge deck surfaces mm Elevations of bearing surfaces mm Variation from plumb but not more than mm Dimensions of members over m mm Dimensions of members under m mm mm Location of anchor bolts mm Projections of anchor bolts other embedments mm NOTE The tolerances listed in Table M are acceptable only in so far as they do not prevent the proper fit of structural members .
Glass beads for pavement marking shall Be colourless Be at least by weight as true spherical shape as determined with a Roundness Tester by ASTM D with exception of the um size Have smooth lustrous and free of air inclusions dark specs milkiness incipient fractures surface films or other imperfect finishing characteristics Have spheres exhibit an index of refraction of not less than when tested by the liquid immersion method at oC Meet requirements of AASHTO M and Have a silca SiO content greater than .
Performance Specifications .. Longitudinal Pavement Markings The Contractor shall a Layout all with no additional payment Longitudinal Pavement Markings as identified on the Drawings or existing pavement markings in accordance with the Ministrys Manual of Standard Traffic Signs and Pavement Markings or as instructed by the Ministry Representative .
.. Transverse Chevron and Crosshatch Pavement Markings The Contractor shall a Repaint the Transverse Chevron and Crosshatch Pavement Markings with no additional payment as identified on the Drawings or existing pavement markings to conform to the Ministrys Manual of Standard Traffic Signs and Pavement Markings .
Film per cent Intact Chipping ASTM D from time of application to June th of the subsequent year in which the marking was painted. . Quality Assurance This section establishes how the pavement markings will be accepted or not accepted for conformance to the Specifications .
The selected test sites must be representative of the line type sprayed on the pavement surface of that day e.g .
.. Test Report A test report shall be produced for each checkpoint area and will include the following information a Test date b Average of the readings at each test location expressed as millicandelas per square metre per lux mcdmlx the average of the readings will be reported for each traffic direction for centerlines SECTION TRAFFIC MARKING PAINT AND SPECIAL MARKINGS BC MoT of c Geographical location of the test site referenced by offsets from LKIRFI landmarks d Identification of the pavement marking material tested type colour date painted and transverse location on road line type e Identification of the instrument used f Value and date of standardization of the instrument standard panel used g Remarks concerning the overall condition of the line such as rubber skid marks carryover of asphalt snow plow damage and other factors that may affect the retroreflectivity measurement h Ambient temperature and i Operators name .
Pavement markings will be tested as per ASTM D . Newly applied pavement markings must exceed the photographic reference standard of .
.. Daytime visibility When viewed dry or wet in the daytime the pavement markings shall be readily visible for a forward distance of m or as far forward as possible until obstructed by the road geometry if less than m. Daytime visibility will be assessed visually .
If applicable payment shall also cover restoration of roadway gravel and pavement damaged by the Contractors operations .
Scope This Section describes the protection of concrete bridge decks with Rubberized Asphalt Prefabricated Membrane Prefabricated Membrane and an overlay of hot applied asphalt pavement .
Traffic Restrictions All traffic other than construction equipment directly associated with the installation of the Prefabricated Membrane and placement of asphalt pavement shall be prevented from using areas of of BC MoT the deck that have received surface preparation until paving of that area is completed. . Job Site Conditions In addition to the suppliermanufacturers specifications the following conditions shall apply .
Weather Limitations Application of Primer and installation of Prefabricated Membrane and pavement overlay shall be undertaken only during stable weather when precipitation has not occurred during the previous hours and is not imminent and when the minimum ambient and concrete surface temperature is at least oC and rising .
The uppermost edge of the Membrane Detailing Strip shall be placed and extended up the face of curb or parapet to mm below the finished height of the asphalt pavement overlay and terminated in a mm deep saw cut in the face .
vi bridge ends a mm wide Membrane Detailing Strip shall be installed over the joint between the existing pavement and the bridge deck .
.. Traffic On Prefabricated Membrane Traffic shall not be permitted on the Prefabricated Membrane prior to installation of the first lift of asphalt pavement with the exception of vehicles and equipment engaged in installing the asphalt pavement Only vehicles or equipment provided with pneumatic tires or with flat tracks with rubber bonded pads shall be permitted on the Prefabricated Membrane .
Prior to commencing asphalt pavement construction the weight of equipment including loaded trucks paver and rollers and their maximum combined weight must be accepted by the Ministrys responsible Bridge Engineer .
Asphalt materials mix design mix production and hot mix asphalt pavement construction shall meet the requirements of SS and SS .
The asphalt pavement mix shall be paver laid and compacted in two nominal mm lifts .
from overlap to underlap and where more than one width of pavement is to be laid the first width shall be laid starting at the lower edge transversely i.e .
on super elevated bridges the first mat of pavement is to be started at the lower edge of the deck to avoid shifting of the mat on the membrane .
The bottom of the side end plate shall slide freely otherwise the entrapped asphalt mix could damage the underlying Prefabricated Membrane xii screed adjustments during paving shall be made in such a way as to achieve a specified thickness of mat surface texture smoothness and designed pavement geometrics xiii the bridge deck joints drains and other openings except weep holes shall be protected to avoid intrusion of asphalt during the paving operation and xiv during a one lane at a time construction method as on bridges partially open to traffic the constructed pavement mat shall terminate not less than mm from the edge of installed Prefabricated Membrane in order to provide a sufficient area for lapping of the next sheet of the Prefabricated Membrane .
Asphalt pavement will be measured in tonnes in place .
Preliminary and General This Section describes the materials equipment professional standards and end product requirements for the construction of hot mix asphalt pavement and related shouldering operations .
Payment of the Contract Unit Prices for the asphalt pavement product is contingent on the product meeting the Quality Control QC Plan professional standards and quality requirements of this Section and is subject to payment adjustments upward and downward in accordance to the provisions provided in this Section .
Authorization means formal approval for future actions frequently changing the Contract requirements. . General Description of the Work Generally the work associated with the construction of asphalt pavement and shouldering by EPS consists of the following Preparing a QC Plan for review before commencing the Work and providing at the production site a testing facility to provide the data needed to implement that plan Supplying screening crushing processing and improving aggregate to produce asphalt mix aggregate Supplying and delivering asphalt cement and spray primer meeting the requirements of SS Preparing mix designs which once reviewed and accepted by the Ministry Representative become the basis for the accepted Job Mix Formula Heating the asphalt mix aggregate and mixing it with asphalt cement to produce asphalt mix that meets the Job Mix Formula Hauling placing compacting and finishing the asphalt mix and Supplying hauling placing and compacting shoulder gravels .
.. Asphalt Cement AC A bitumenbased liquid binder used in asphalt pavement .
.. Driving Lane A single lane in any area of the pavement other than a shoulder or a barrier flare .
.. Levelling Course LC Asphalt mix used to improve crossfall level and strengthen existing pavements .
Recycled Asphalt Mix RAM A carefully controlled hot plant mix of asphalt cement graded high quality aggregate and reclaimed asphalt pavement .
.. Smoothness A measure of the longitudinal profile of the pavement surface measured as International Roughness Index IRI .
The QC Plan must include a detailed description of the means by which the Contractor shall use the quality control test results to ensure that the workmanship SECTION ASPHALT PAVEMENT CONSTRUCTION EPS BC MoT of asphalt materials aggregate mix production paving and pavement compaction processes will be controlled to keep the product within the specified limits .
Without limitation and unless otherwise specified in the Special Provisions the following items shall not be left in a Ministry pit Surplus milled or rubblized asphalt pavements Reject mix Fuel contaminated materials or Other waste products .
b MARSHALL MIXES The asphalt mix design for Class and Class pavements shall be carried out under Marshall design criteria using the designated equipment and procedures as contained in the Asphalt Institutes Mix Design Methods for Asphalt Concrete MS current version .
The mix design must be reviewed and accepted by the Ministry Representative prior to commencement of pavement construction .
Prepared Granular Bases and Old Pavements All prepared granular bases or old pavements which are to be paved shall be prime coated or tack coated at specified rates .
Adjacent Mats Joints Edges and Letdowns .. Longitudinal Joints Longitudinal joints in the Top Lift of asphalt pavement will only be permitted where lane dividing lines are to be painted .
Vertical surfaces of roadway appurtenances shall be tack coated to the top of the new pavement only .
Contact Edge The contact edge of abutting cooled asphalt pavement shall be thoroughly painted with a uniform coat of emulsified asphalt .
Discontinued Paving When paving is discontinued in any lane on a traffic bearing roadway the asphalt pavement shall be tapered down at a minimum slope of .
.. Traffic Traffic will not be permitted on the finished pavement until it has cooled to such a temperature as to ensure that no deformation or flushing of the surface will occur .
It involves construction of base course aggregate adjacent to a Lift of pavement which will be overlaid by one or more Lifts of asphalt .
Adjacent Pavement Damage If the adjacent asphalt pavement is damaged during the shouldering operation the damage shall be repaired to the satisfaction of the Ministry Representative at no expense to the Ministry .
.. Interim Shouldering For safety reasons when a roadway with gravel shoulders is used by the travelling public an intermediate layer of shouldering aggregate shall be placed following final rolling of levelling course or multiple Lifts of asphalt pavement thicker than mm in advance of the main shouldering operation .
General Payment at the Unit Prices for the supply of primertack coat materials the application of the spray primertack coat the supply of paving aggregates into stockpile the construction of asphalt pavement including the supply of asphalt cement and for shouldering shall be full compensation for completing the supply and installation of asphalt pavement and shouldering on prepared surfaces in accordance with the contract requirements .
Any obvious defects as determined by the Ministry Representative such as but not limited to the following may be cause for automatic rejection of asphalt pavement regardless of the values of any other acceptance parameter Individual bumps and dips that exceed mm over m Areas of excess or insufficient asphalt Improper matching of longitudinal and transverse joints Roller marks or roller pickups Excess tracking of prime or tack coat Areas contaminated by fuel oil or other deleterious materials Tire marks or Cracking or tearing .
When asphalt pavement is rejected because of obvious defects the minimum area of rejection will be the actual length of the defect for the full width of the driving lane in which the defect exists .
SECTION ASPHALT PAVEMENT CONSTRUCTION EPS of BC MoT Subject to the exception noted below only acceptable asphalt pavement will be included in the payment quantity .
The overlay quantity will not be included in the payment quantity but The quantity of asphalt pavement covered by the overlay will be included in the payment quantity whether or not it was acceptable .
Such payment shall be compensation in full for all work including but not limited to loading the aggregate into the feeders drying the aggregate supplying metering and adding the asphalt cement mixing loading weighing hauling dumping spreading compacting and finishing the asphalt pavement. . Asphalt Mix Antistrip Additives .. Where Specified in the Special Provisions Where the Special Provisions direct the addition of an antistrip additive all costs associated with supplying storing and blending the additive into the asphalt mixes shall be incidental to the prices bid for the varying classes of asphalt mix .
The Contractor shall prepare the cores prior to the submission by removing all material not representative of the pavement Lift to be tested .
For additional Lifts repeat Steps a to e. The final Lift shall be a minimum thickness of mm and finished to a level higher but not exceeding mm than the elevation of the surrounding pavement .
Percent Density The average inplace density will be determined from core samples of the completed Lift of pavement .
The average inplace density will be determined from mm diameter core samples of the completed Lift of pavement .
One opportunity will be provided to the Contractor using nondestructive test methods to isolate the area of low density and conduct additional compaction providing no damage is incurred to the new pavement .
Aggregate gradation will be determined for each Lot from loose mix samples of the completed Lift of pavement .
Lot A Lot shall be one kilometre length of Top Lift pavement for each driving lane .
Determination of Surface Segregation The finished pavement shall be homogeneous free from segregation and shall be uniform with respect to surface texture .
A segregated area is defined as an area within the driving lanes of the pavement wherein the texture differs visually from the texture of the surrounding pavement .
The Ministry Representative with the Contractors Representative will observe the finished pavement to evaluate the existence severity and extent of segregation and other surface defects .
Moderate Significantly more stone than surrounding pavement matrix of asphalt binder and coated sand particles is reduced .
Lot A Lot for smoothness shall be one kilometre length of Top Lift pavement for each driving lane .
Determination of Pavement Smoothness The finished pavement surface shall be tested by the Ministry using a Class I precision rolling profile measuring instrument to determine the longitudinal profile and compute the International Roughness Index IRI in each driving lane .
Applies if the criteria in any one or more of the adjacent columns occurs or more or more or more The profile shall be measured over the entire length of the pavement exclusive of structures and shoulder areas .
.. Remedial Work If the test results on a SubLot of pavement indicate a payment reduction or rejection because of smoothness the Contractor may propose remedial work to improve the smoothness .
In all other respects the whole overlay will be subject to the same specifications as the pavement being overlaid .
REJECT REJECT Whether the overlay is applied as a corrective measure or is placed over otherwise acceptable pavement in order to match an adjacent lane acceptability and payment will be determined as follows Acceptability and eligibility for either positive or negative payment adjustment will be determined entirely on the results of testing and observations conducted on the overlay regardless of test results that have been obtained on the underlying overlaid Lift of pavement but The payment quantity for application of the Unit Prices for asphalt pavement and the quantity to which any payment adjustment is to be applied will be derived from the tonnage of mix in the underlying overlaid Lift .
The Plan shall address all elements that affect the quality of the hot mix hot laid asphalt pavement including but not limited to the following Purchased Materials asphalt cement characteristics additives purchased aggregates etc .
The Contractor shall advise the Ministry Representative in writing on an ongoing basis of the application rate. . Density The Contractor should take core samples to determine actual pavement density .
At the start of paving the Contractor should take a minimum of two pavement cores from each SubLot .
Scope This Section covers the provision of pavement drainage with the construction of necessary asphalt curbing and drainage outlets using cast iron catch basins or asphalt spillways together with pipe or paved outfalls .
Asphalt Curbs .. Integral Asphalt Curb Where specified in the Contract Documents asphalt concrete curb integral with the asphalt concrete highway pavement shall be constructed to the dimensions indicated on Drawing SP .
ii Prior to construction of the curb the affected pavement area shall be dry and cleaned of loose or deleterious materials .
Location of Drainage Outlets On completion of pavement and curb construction and in conjunction with the installation of any precast concrete barriers the Contractor shall install or construct drainage outlets at the low point of curves in the vertical alignment and at such other locations designated by the Ministry Representative .
Note The exact low point on the pavement may be determined by allowing water to flow along the surface to the actual lowest point on the pavement adjacent to the curb or barrier .
This low point shall be clearly marked on the pavement. . Excavation At the locations designated by the Ministry Representative the asphalt pavement and any SECTION PAVEMENT DRAINAGE of BC MoT curbing shall be accurately cut away and the highway shoulder excavated to the dimensions consistent with the installation of Cast Iron Catch Basins Drawing SP or the construction of Asphalt Spillways Drawing SP .
The excavation shall as nearly as possible have vertical sides and shall be so done as to cause minimum disturbance of the adjacent compacted base and pavement structures .
Bedding shall be a minimum of mm thick to permit accurate setting of the catch basin in mortar at the correct level true to alignment with curbing barrier or pavement edge as shown on Drawing SP .
Riprap of mm minimum dimension shall be placed at the pipe outlet as shown on Drawing SP. . Dishing Spillways and Completion The asphalt pavement adjacent to the drainage outlet shall be constructed to the profile and cross sections indicated for the type of outlet being installed .
The asphalt pavement surface shall be so shaped as to channel all collected water to the outlet orifice and no ridges or other obstructions shall be left which may impede the flow of water to the drainage outlet .
Where the asphalt pavement abuts a cast iron catch basin box the contact face of the box shall be painted with liquid or emulsified asphalt as specified in SS .. prior to placing the asphalt concrete .
The maximum allowable percentage of RAP allowed in asphalt pavement will be based on the classification of the roadway and the location of the mix in the pavement structure or as identified in the Special Provisions. . Roadway Categories Roadways are divided into the following categories Category A All numbered Highways .
The roadway Category shall be identified in the Special Provisions. . Definitions Reclaimed Asphalt Pavement RAP Removed andor reprocessed pavement materials containing asphalt and aggregates .
These materials are generated when asphalt pavements are removed for reconstruction andor resurfacing .
Deformation and flow of the asphalt binder in asphalt mix is important in determining asphalt pavement performance. . Allowable RAP Addition Rates The maximum RAP allowed in the asphalt mix shall be determined by the contribution of the RAP Asphalt Cement AC towards the total AC content in the mix by weight as per the percentages specified in Table A .
when applicable Should a change in the source or addition rate of RAP be made after the mix design has been approved a new mix design andor job mix formula shall be submitted to the MoT for review. . Payment Adjustments SS PART F PAYMENT ADJUSTMENTS shall apply to all work utilizing reclaimed asphalt pavement in the asphalt mix unless otherwise specified in the Special Provisions .
Full Depth Pavement Removal RAP can also be obtained from the removal of the existing pavement using a bulldozer or a backhoe .
This process typically results in large chunks of pavement that may be contaminated with underlying soils .
This material usually has fewer fines than the typical RAP since it wasnt milled or broken up during pavement removal and the AC is less aged than RAP since it hasnt been subjected to environmental aging .
For stockpiles of RAP from multiple sources particularly stockpiles containing oversize fragments of RAP or pavement slabs the material should be processed to produce RAP with a maximum size of .
If the asphalt mix from an existing pavement is to be used as RAP mm diameter cores should be extracted at a frequency of at least one core every .
The asphalt mix from the pavement lift to be recycled should be tested to determine the properties of the aggregates and the asphalt cement in the pavement .
Removal of initial surface treatment at Contractors option Very poor Wet look with noise like a wet pavement Reseal of affected area .
Scope This work consists of preparing a foundation for placement of new surfacing by cold milling the existing pavement surface to the depth and width as indicated on the Drawings .
Kill Switch All pavement milling machines shall be equipped with a kill switch installed or approved by the manufacturer of the milling machine .
Pavement Removal The existing pavement shall be removed to the depth and width as specified in the Special Provisions on the drawings or as directed by the Ministry Representative to provide a surface that is free of longitudinal and transverse irregularities .
The use of a heating device to soften the pavement will not be permitted .
At the end of the milling shift or at the end of each section to be milled prior to reopening the road to traffic the pavement shall be cleaned and swept so that all loose material is removed .
When the milling operation traverses intersecting roads or on and off ramps the transition from the milled surface to the existing pavement shall be at a maximum slope of or as directed by the Ministry Representative .
All metal and concrete faces must be cleaned of old pavement and painted with primer prior to repaving .
The unit price shall be for all things furnished and done including servicing all equipment replacing teeth on the cutting drum performing all work to remove the existing pavement by milling and the provision for a traffic control person as set out in SS .. No additional payment will be made to load haul and place the material in stockpile. . Asphalt Mix Asphalt mix required to repair the milled surface as set out in SS .
All metal and concrete faces must be cleaned of old pavement and painted with primer at the Contractors expense prior to repaving .
Payment of the contract Unit Prices for the HotInPlace asphalt pavement product is subject to adjustments upward and downward in accordance to the provisions provided in EPS. . General Description of Work The Contractor will be responsible for the following work associated with the construction of HotInPlace asphalt pavement by EPS Preparing a Quality Control Plan for evaluation before commencing the Work and providing at the production site a testing facility to provide the data needed to implement that plan .
Recycling the existing highway pavement by heating milling reprocessing with or without the addition of rejuvenating agents or admix virgin mix as specified remixing replacing and compacting using a multistage hot milling process and rollers .
All equipment and instruments shall be in good mechanical condition and capable of performing the work in accordance with this Section Equipment shall have the capability to process the existing pavement to a minimum depth of mm yielding an average mass of kgm of the existing pavement being processed .
The activated heated screed shall be complete with augers and strikeoff device in accordance with SS and be capable of distributing and placing the reprocessed mix to the full width of the pavement being recycled .
Individual preheating and reprocessing units shall be equipped in such a way that the operator and other workers are not exposed to any hazardous fumes or gases produced from the equipment operation the heated pavement or from the addition of the rejuvenating agent in accordance with all applicable regulations .
The Asphalt Admix becomes an integral component of the recycled pavement structure .
BC MoT of .. Smoothness A measure of the longitudinal profile of the pavement surface .
A Lot is defined as follows for the application of the contract requirements for a Denisty A Lot shall be one days scheduled production of at least hours of pavement recycling where no changes have occurred to criteria such as but not limited to Approved Job Mix Formula Specific thickness to be processed Required materials addition rate Change in the ratio of the components making up the HotInPlace Recycled Pavement .
b Smoothness A Lot shall be one kilometre length of recycled pavement for each driving lane .
.. Driving Lane A single lane in any area of the pavement other than a shoulder or a barrier flare .
.. HotInPlace Recycled Pavement Shall be the results of the process where recycling the addition of admix andor rejuvenating agents the spreading compacting and finishing of the asphalt pavement have taken place to form a quality finished product .
The Hot InPlace Recycled Pavement may be comprised of the following components existing asphalt pavement admix andor rejuvenating agents. . Quality Control .. General Quality Control by the Contractor is the sum total of activities by the Contractor to ensure that a product meets contract specification requirements .
The Ministry will not take samples for quality control testing and will in no manner assist in any degree or in any aspect of the Contractors operation in the production of asphalt pavement beginning from the production of aggregate through the compaction of asphalt mix .
The Quality Control Plan must also include a detailed description of the means by which the Contractor shall use the quality control test results to ensure that the asphalt materials aggregate mix production recycling and pavement compaction processes will be controlled to keep the end product within the specified limits .
a Recycling The existing highway pavement shall be heated milled reprocessed with or without the addition of a rejuvenating agent or virgin mix as specified .
c Longitudinal Edges Contractor shall ensure that the longitudinal edges of the recycled pavement are blended to conform in elevation with the adjacent pavement unless this surface is scheduled to be recycled .
h Existing Paved Surfaces Existing paved surfaces shall be clean to avoid contamination of the recycled pavement .
l Longitudinal Joints Longitudinal joints in the top lift of asphalt pavement will generally only be permitted where lane dividing lines are to be painted .
BC MoT of TABLE A STANDARD SAMPLING AND TESTING PROCEDURES FOR VIRGIN ASPHALT ADMIX AND HOTINPLACE RECYCLED PAVEMENT Item Procedure ASTM Test Reference Bulk Specific Gravity and Density of NonAbsorptive Compacted Bituminous Mixtures D Theoretical Maximum Specific Gravity and Density of Bituminous Paving Mixtures D Sampling Compacted Bituminous Mixtures for Laboratory Testing D Resistance to Plastic Flow of Bituminous Mixtures Using Marshall Apparatus D or AASHTO T Determining Asphalt Content by Ignition Methods for Admix D TABLE A TEST SAMPLE SOURCE LOCATIONS Test Sample Source Density mm diameter road cores Smoothness Centre of Lane v Pavement Drainage The Contractor shall at all times ensure that the appropriate cross slopes for safety and positive pavement drainage are maintained .
.. Field Adjustment of the Job Mix Formula andor Recycled Pavement During construction the Ministry may require field adjustments to the job mix formula andor recycled pavement .
The Contractor shall prepare the cores prior to submission by removing all material not representative of the pavement lift to be tested .
Determination of Pavement Smoothness The finished pavement surface shall be tested by the Ministry using either a Class I precision rolling profile measuring instrument or a non contact Inertial Profiling measuring instrument to determine the longitudinal profile and compute the International Roughness Index IRI in each driving lane .
The profile shall be measured over the entire length of the pavement exclusive of structures and shoulder areas .
and in the case of top lift pavement only the pavement smoothness as reported by the International Roughness Index IRI meets the following requirements All SubLots shall have an IRI value .
.. Remedial Work If the test results on a Sub Lot of pavement indicate a payment reduction or rejection because of smoothness the Contractor may propose remedial work to improve the smoothness .
Any obvious defects as determined by the Ministry Representative such as but not limited to the following will cause for automatic rejection of asphalt pavement regardless of the values of any other acceptance parameter Individual bumps and dips that exceed mm over m BC MoT of Areas of excess or insufficient asphalt Improper matching of longitudinal and transverse joints Roller marks Tire marks Segregation or Cracking or tearing When asphalt pavement is rejected by reason of obvious defects the minimum area of rejection will be the actual length of the defect for the full width of the driving lane in which the defect exists .
The Contractor will sample the pavement at locations randomly reselected by the Ministry within three site occupancy days following receipt of the appeal such that a total of five new core specimens are extracted throughout the Lot .
In all other respects the repaving will be subject to the same specifications as the pavement being replaced .
Whether the cold milling and repaving is applied as a corrective measure acceptability and payment will be determined as follows Acceptability and eligibility for either positive or negative payment adjustment will be determined entirely on the results of testing and observations conducted on the repaving regardless of test results that have been obtained on the HotInPlace recycled pavement The payment quantity for application of the Unit Prices for asphalt pavement and the quantity to which any payment adjustment is to be applied will be derived from the square metres of recycled pavement affected by the repaving .
General Payment for HotInPlace Recycle of asphalt pavement will be at the Contract Unit Price per Square Metre .
Payment at Unit Prices for supply of virgin aggregates the supply of asphalt cement the supply of rejuvenating agents the supply of virgin asphalt mix and the HotInPlace recycling construction of asphalt pavement shall be full compensation for completing the supply and installation of HotInPlace asphalt pavement on prepared surfaces in accordance with the contract requirements .
The first m on HotInPlace asphalt pavement recycling production will not be subject to bonuspenalty payment adjustments but will be required to meet minimum specification requirements for quality and workmanship .
The Contract Unit Price shall be to supply store heat apply and proportioning of the agent with the asphalt pavement mixture reclaimed from the roadway .
The overlay quantity will not be included in the admix payment quantity but The admix used in quantity of recycled pavement removed by the cold milling and repaving will be included in the admix payment quantity whether or not it was acceptable .
Such payment shall be compensation in full for all work including but not limited to loading the aggregate into the feeders drying the aggregate metering and adding the asphalt cement mixing loading weighing hauling dumping spreading compacting and finishing the asphalt pavement and shall also include all costs of quality control .
.. HotInPlace Recycled Asphalt Pavement EPS Payment for HotInPlace Recycled Asphalt Pavement EPS constructed in place shall be at the Unit Price per square meter for the quantity of recycled pavement in accordance with the Contract requirements .
Subject to the exception noted below only acceptable recycled asphalt pavement will be included in the payment quantity .
The overlay quantity will not be included in the admix payment quantity but The admix used in quantity of recycled pavement removed by the cold milling and repaving will be included in the admix payment quantity whether or not it was acceptable .
Such payment shall be compensation in full for all work including but not limited to recycling metering adding the rejuvenating agent adding spreading compacting and finishing the asphalt pavement and shall also include all costs of quality control .
.. Payment for Acceptable Work The following end product properties of recycled asphalt pavement will be measured for acceptance Density Smoothness .. Payment for Rejected Work Made Acceptable When defects have been remedied in Lots or SubLots which had been rejected payment for the original quantity of material in those Lots or SubLots will be made subject to payment adjustments and penalty assessments and subject to SS .. No payment will be made for any material used to replace repair or overlay rejected work and all corrective work shall be performed entirely at the Contractors expense .
If the quantity of Asphalt pavement actually incorporated into the works is less than the estimated quantity as stated in the Schedule the Ministry will purchase aggregate up to of the quantity required by the contract to be paid under the appropriate Unit Price Item for Aggregate in Stockpile .
The Plan shall address all elements that affect the quality of the HotInPlace recycled asphalt pavement including but not limited to the following Supply of Asphalt Materials Supply of rejuvenating agents Identification of source and proof of quality of virgin aggregates to be supplied Virgin aggregate production and its gradation control Quality of virgin aggregate components Stockpile management Asphalt plant calibration and proportioning of aggregate components Mixing including asphalt cement content control Process temperature controls Admix Material and Rejuvenating Agent application rates and processed dimensions placing and finishing Joints Density Smoothness and Segregation The Plan shall also include the following The name of the Quality Control testing agency and its proven capability to provide the specific services required for the project .
The Contractor is to advise the Ministry Representative on an ongoing basis of the application rate. . DENSITY The Contractor shall take core samples to determine actual pavement density .
At the start of paving the Contractor may take a minimum of two pavement cores from each SubLot .
SAMPLE PREPARATION The upper recycled portion of the cores shall be separated from other pavement layers by sawing or other effective methods .
Rolls shall be free of flat areas dents openings or projections which will mar the surface of the pavement .
Description of Work Surface treatment shall consist of the application of a selected asphalt binder material to a previously constructed bituminous pavement or a well compacted crushed granular surface followed by the application and embedment of a courses of selected aggregate to provide a new surface which shall be impervious to moisture have a nonskid texture high luminosity and good riding qualities .
The roller shall be provided with ample ballast space and be so constructed that the specified wheel load can be uniformly applied to all the wheels to provide similar contact pressure under all wheels when rolling on a level pavement .
Preparation of Roadway The patching and levelling of the pavement to be sealed may be part of a sealcoating contract or may be effected by others . .
Description Wherever the pavement is in a worn open dry or porous condition or on gravel surfaces which in the opinion of the Ministry Representative would result in high absorption of the asphalt binder the surface shall be presealed .
Scope This work consists of restoring the asphalt concrete pavement surface to a less permeable condition .
The work includes routing when requested cleaning and filling the crack with sealant and dusting or sanding. . Purpose The purpose of crack sealing shall be to prevent moisture from penetrating into the road base through surface cracks and to extend pavement life .
Sand On pavements that require the use of High Float Emulsified Asphalt the Contractor shall supply blinding sand .
Router The Contractor shall provide a vertical router capable of routing asphaltic pavements to a depth of mm and a width of mm .
It shall be capable of a minimum production of metres per hour even when following meandering cracks without unnecessary pavement cutting. . Cleaner The cleaner unit shall be a hot compressed air fed propane fired device capable of cleaning heating and drying routed cracks with not less than .
General Crack sealing shall only be performed when the pavement surfaces are dry and the crack and road base are dry or nearly dry no visible moisture and the surface temperature shall be oC .
TABLE A REQUIREMENT ASTM Test Description D Specification for joint and crack sealants hot applied for concrete and asphalt pavements SECTION PAVEMENT CRACK SEALING of BC MoT TABLE B BLINDING SAND GRADATION REQUIREMENTS Sieve Size mm Passing . . . . . . Cracks up to mm in width shall be widened by using a router to form a sealant reservoir mm in width and from mm to mm in depth .
The routing speed shall be such that the pavement is carefully cut not broken or torn out and the sides of the rout are smooth and uniform .
The surface of the pavement and routed crack shall be cleaned of all dust and routing debris .
Routing should not be carried out on pavements that are of such an age that pavement fractures or spalls occur along the edge of the freshly routed crack .
Normally pavement fractures or spalls should not occur unless pavements are in excess of years old .
It will then be struck off to leave a uniform amount of sealant directly over the crack with the edges of the spread evenly feathered to overlap on the pavement surface from a minimum of mm to a maximum of mm on each side of the crack .
The Contractor shall ensure that traffic is kept off the sealed cracks until the sealant has properly set up and will not be damaged or pulled out by the passage of traffic. . Rubberized and Elasticized Asphalt Sealants These shall be used on pavements that are less than years old and where the majority of cracks are less than mm in width .
Excess dusting material shall be removed. . High Float Emulsified Asphalt High Float Emulsified Asphalt shall be used on pavement where there are depressions or lipping at the cracks or majority of cracks are mm in width .
The unit price shall be full compensation for all labour equipment and materials supplied as required to rout or clean with compressed air and seal the pavement cracks as specified .
Where directed by the Ministry Electrical Representative excavations shall be shored to avoid the SECTION ELECTRICAL AND SIGNING BC MoT of cutting of pavement sidewalks and curb and gutter .
Where directed by the Ministry Electrical Representative excavations shall be shored to avoid the cutting of pavement sidewalks and curb and gutter .
Trenchless Conduit Installation Where noted on the Drawings the Contractor shall install the conduit using a suitable trenchless technology to avoid cutting the existing pavement or sidewalk .
Asphalt pavement restoration shall be Class medium mix installed in three mm lifts unless otherwise noted or directed by the Ministry Electrical Representative .
The Contractor shall use a pavement saw to cut pavement and shall exercise care to obtain a neat uniform excavation line along the edge of the pavement .
The Contractor shall also prevent the existing base gravel from sloughing and undermining the pavement .
Where three lifts of asphalt pavement are being placed to reinstate a trench the first two lifts shall be compacted with vibratory equipment capable of operating within the excavated area and of compacting over the whole of it .
The third lift shall be compacted with rolling equipment to produce a uniform surface matching the adjacent existing pavement .
The Contractor shall use a pavement saw to cut existing concrete unless otherwise directed by the Ministry Electrical Representative and shall obtain a neat uniform cut along the edge of concrete .
The Unit Price shall include all costs for layout of the loop asphalt cutting and preparation of pavement cuts supply and installation of loop conductors or preformed loops as applicable to the underground junction box traffic counter post or cabinet supply and installation of backer rod sand and loop sealant and all other labour equipment and materials necessary to complete the installation . .
There shall be no appreciable ambient wind and the pavement shall be dry. . Stacking Qualities When cones are nested together the base of each cone shall be substantially in contact with the top of the base of the cone immediately below it in the stack .
