Granular Base A layer of granular material of specified type and thickness between the subbase and the base of the pavement surface .
PCP Precast Concrete Pipe Pavement A layer or layers of asphaltic or Portland cement concrete placed over an existing pavement base subbase or subgrade .
Classification of Excavated Materials All excavated materials shall be classified for purposes of payment as rock muck earth or pavement as described herein .
.. Pavement Excavation Material classified as pavement shall be asphaltic concrete Portland cement concrete and Portland cement stabilized soil i.e .
.. Common Earth Excavation Material classified as common earth excavation shall include all other materials of whatsoever nature that may not be defined as rock muck or pavement .
.. Earth Excavation for Pipe Material classified as earth excavation for pipe shall include all other materials of whatsoever nature that may not be defined as rock muck or pavement which result from the installation or replacement of roadway culverts .
Basis of Payment The measured volume of excavation shall be paid for at the unit bid price per cubic metre for excavation of rock muck pavement or earth material as the case may be and this price shall be full compensation for all the work including hauling and disposal of waste materials hauling and stockpiling of surplus material hauling and placement of suitable material including compaction equipment tools labour water for compaction and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
pavements .
The surface to be fine graded shall be to the width specified by the Engineer but shall not be less than the width of the proposed pavement plus mm on either side .
The shaping and compaction operations shall continue until the surface conforms to the specified requirements and shall be repeated as required to maintain the surface until it is covered by pavement .
The excavated surface shall be shaped to slope away from the pavement at a rate of and shall be compacted in accordance to Section to of Standard Proctor Density .
Description This work shall consist of the supply and placement of aggregate milled asphalt pavement borrow or topsoil on the shoulders of the roadway. . Material The material to be supplied under this Section shall be of the type specified in Schedule C of the Tender and shall be approved by the Engineer prior to placement .
Where excavation is to be performed through existing pavement cut pavement in accordance with Section .
Description This work shall consist of raising or lowering existing corrugated steel or concrete catch basins and concrete manholes or valve boxes to meet the final pavement elevation. . Material The Contractor shall supply the appropriate type of material to perform the required work .
The Contractor when lowering existing corrugated steel catch basins shall cut and remove any existing pavement around the catch basin excavate around the catch basin to a depth sufficient to adjust the catch basin to the desired elevation .
The Contractor shall cut the catch basin vertically to remove the ring and cover and shall reset the ring and cover into the corrugation at the new pavement elevation .
Payment of pavement restoration shall be made in accordance with Section .
Drain Tile Location The drain tile is to be placed in the shoulder of the highway along a line parallel to the outside edge of the pavement or as outlined in the plans or drawings or as directed by the Engineer . .
All asphalt pavement in the work area shall be cut and removed by the Contractor before the excavation is started .
All asphalt pavement shall be cut and removed by the Contractor before excavation commences .
Method of Measurement Measurement for payment under this Section shall be the number of square metres of pavement to which tack coat is applied .
Description This Section defines the requirements for the materials equipment and methods to be followed for production transportation of hot mixed hot laid asphaltic concrete for pavement construction and other purposes. . Material All materials to be incorporated into the work will be subject to test by the Engineer to determine suitability .
The placement of seal course shall not be permitted until the Contractor has demonstrated in the trial area that the materials equipment personnel and methods of operation are capable of producing a satisfactory pavement meeting design and specification requirements .
The finished surface of any pavement course shall have a uniform texture and be free of visible signs of poor workmanship .
Any obvious defects as determined by the Engineer will be cause for rejection of the pavement .
The Department reserves the right to reject pavement not meeting the requirements of this specification and reserves the right to require that the Contractor replace the pavement at no cost to the Department .
The Contractor shall provide competent workmen who are capable of correcting all pavement irregularities .
The stringline shall be set on the outer edges of the pavement so that the paver is directed at all times by the alignment stakes and not by the edge of the preceding courses .
When matching into an existing asphaltic concrete pavement the transverse joint for the first lift shall be prepared by cutting the existing pavement to a straight vertical face and removing such area and depth of the existing pavement as may be necessary to ensure the full depth of asphaltic concrete thickness to be placed .
Successive lifts shall be offset from the previous joint by a minimum of m and shall be prepared by cutting the existing pavement to a straight vertical face and removing such area and depth of the existing pavement as may be necessary to ensure the successive lift thickness .
A lot will be terminated when the operation changes from one pavement course to another or moves to a different contract .
Random pavement core samples obtained from each sublot will not be taken within mm of a longitudinal or transverse joint or pavement edge .
Random pavement core samples shall be obtained not later than the next working day after the compaction of the lot .
Holes resulting from the removal of pavement samples shall be repaired to the satisfaction of the Engineer in conformance to the specification .
Compulsory Corrective Work Procedures Corrective work shall consist of Removal and Replacement of the surface course of asphaltic concrete pavement .
Removal and Replacement On each of the metre segments affected the Contractor shall remove by cold planing and replace the full width of the lane and the full depth of the surface course of asphaltic concrete pavement affected including paved shoulders .
Incidental Corrective Work Corrective Work may result in additional incidental costs including but not limited to tack coat additional shoulder gravelling guardrail adjustments reapplication of pavement markings etc .
Basis of Payment Payment under this Section shall be at the unit bid price per tonne for each type of hot mix asphaltic concrete and this price shall be full compensation for materials other than those supplied by the Department handling hauling storing stockpiling cutting of existing pavement painting of joints mixing hauling placing and compacting hot mix asphaltic concrete tools labour equipment materials and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
Mechanical Broom Shall be of an approved type suitable for pavement use. . Construction ..
Surface Preparation Before chip seal operations commence the contractor shall completely clean the pavement of all dirt and other debris .
.. Pavement Restoration and Crack Filling Pavement restoration and crack filling shall be carried out to repair pavement potholes and cracks prior to the carrying out of the chip seal surface treatment operations .
The pavement restoration shall be in accordance with Section .
Measurement for pavement restoration shall be in accordance with Section .
Payment for pavement restoration shall be in accordance with Section .
Weather Limitation The slurry seal shall not be applied if either the pavement or air temperature is below C and falling but may be applied when both pavement and air temperatures are above C and rising .
The rate of application of the fog spray shall be adjusted during the day to suit temperatures surface texture humidity and pavement surface dryness .
If the coarse aggregate settles to the bottom of the mix the slurry will be removed from the pavement .
No streaks caused by oversized aggregate will be left in the finished pavement .
Description This work shall consist of the routing and sealing of random and straight cracks in asphaltic concrete and Portland cement concrete pavement. . Material Material used for sealing shall be specifically designed to form resilient adhesive and effective seals for cracks and joints .
The kettle shall be portable mounted on rubber tires and equipped with a metal shield beneath the fire box to protect the pavement. . Construction Method The bags shall be stripped from the compound and the material shall be cut into blocks of approximately .
The joints shall be sealed in a neat manner so that upon completion of the work the surface of the sealing material shall be flush with or not more than mm below the adjacent pavement surface .
Description .. General This Item defines the requirements for the supply and placement of hot mixed conventional asphaltic concrete for pavement construction and other purposes .
When matching into an existing asphaltic concrete pavement the transverse joint for the first lift shall be prepared by cutting the existing pavement to a straight vertical face and removing such area and depth of the existing pavement as may be necessary to ensure the full depth of asphaltic concrete thickness to be placed .
Successive lifts shall be offset from the previous joint by a minimum of m and shall be prepared by cutting the existing pavement to a straight vertical face and removing such area and depth of the existing pavement as may be necessary to ensure the successive lift thickness .
The Contractor shall reinstate the pavement at each core sample location in conjunction with removal of the core by dewatering the core hole and filling it with hot mixed asphaltic concrete in mm lifts to the pavement surface elevation compacting each lift with blows using a standard compaction device .
The smoothness of the final lift of newly placed asphaltic concrete pavement will be checked with a High Speed Profiler as soon as possible after final rolling .
Compulsory Corrective Work Procedures Corrective work shall consist of Removal and Replacement of the surface course of asphaltic concrete pavement .
Removal and Replacement On each of the metre segments affected the Contractor shall remove by cold planing and replace the full width of the lane and the full depth of the surface course of asphaltic concrete pavement affected including paved shoulders .
Incidental Corrective Work Corrective Work may result in additional incidental costs including but not limited to tack coat additional shoulder gravelling guardrail adjustments reapplication of pavement markings etc .
Removal and Replacement The full thickness of the appropriate lift of pavement in the rejected Lot shall be removed by cold milling or other means as approved by the Engineer .
Overlaying The overlay shall extend the full width of the underlying pavement surface and have a finished compacted thickness of not less than mm for a base course and mm for a surface course .
Basis of Payment Asphaltic Concrete Payment under this Section shall be at the unit bid price per tonne for each type of hot mix asphaltic concrete and this price shall be full compensation for materials other than those supplied by the Department handling hauling storing stockpiling cutting of existing pavement painting of joints mixing hauling placing and compacting hot mix asphaltic concrete tools labour equipment materials and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
Description This Section defines the requirements for the materials equipment and methods to be followed for production transportation of hot mixed hot laid asphaltic concrete for driveway pavement construction and other purposes. . Material Hot Mix Asphaltic Concrete used under this section shall be in accordance to section .
Method of Measurement Measurement for this item shall be the number of tonnes of each type of asphaltic concrete acceptably placed for driveway hookups measured from the outside pavement edge of the mainline paving work to a location determined by the Department for each driveway . .
Description This work shall consist of pulverizing asphaltic concrete portland cement soilcement or combinations thereof in place and utilization of the pulverized material as a base course. . Construction Method The Contractor is responsible for determining the depth of pulverization required for the pavement structure .
The pulverized material may be spread across an area smaller or larger than the original pavement .
Method of Measurement Measurement for payment under this Section shall be the number of square metres of pavement pulverized inplace .
The purpose of this work is to allow the proper grade transition with the existing pavements .
Method of Measurement The quantity to be measured under this Section shall be the number of square metres of pavement which have been cold planed and tacked . .
Work shall be scheduled so that at the end of each day all patches are flush with the adjacent pavement and so that no planed areas are left open .
The timing and order of individual tasks may be affected. . Construction Method A sectional view shall be shown on the Drawings that illustrates the location of the reinforcement in the pavement .
f Reinforcement mesh shall be bonded to the pavement by rolling in place with a pneumatic roller weighing no less than ten tonnes .
c Reinforcement mesh shall be bonded to the pavement by rolling in place with a pneumatic roller weighing no less than ten tonnes .
Basis of Payment Reinforcement mesh shall be paid at the unit bid price per square metre and this price shall be full compensation for preparing the pavement surface supplying placing and rolling the mesh .
Description The work carried out under this Section shall include the restoration of pavement surfaces cut or damaged during the course of other work. . Construction Method The Contractor shall excavate level and clear the area to be restored to a depth of mm if the adjacent pavement is asphaltic concrete combined with soilcement stabilization or to the subgrade if the adjacent pavement consists of full depth asphaltic concrete or asphaltic concrete combined with a granular base course .
Where the adjacent pavement includes a granular base course the Contractor shall place equivalent granular material by hand in the area to be restored in layers not exceeding mm and shall compact each layer in accordance with Section to Standard Proctor Density .
The granular material shall be placed to the top of the granular base course in the adjacent pavement .
The Contractor shall clean and apply tack coat to the edges of adjacent pavement .
Method of Measurement The quantity to be paid for under this Section shall be the number of square metres of pavement restored as authorized by the Engineer .
No measurement for payment shall be made under this Section for pavement restoration required as a result of the Contractors negligence in performing any components of the work . .
Description This work shall consist of cutting pavement in neat and straight lines or as directed by the Engineer. . Construction Method The Contractor shall cut to the full depth of pavement using a saw or jackhammer the lines on the pavement surface as designated by the Engineer .
The Contractor shall ensure that all such cuts are neat straight vertical and that pavement to be left in place is not damaged . .
Method of Measurement Measurement for payment under this Section shall only apply to pavement cut with the Engineers approval .
The quantity to be measured under this Section shall be the number of linear metres of pavement cut to full depth .
Basis of Payment Payment under this Section shall be at the unit bid price per linear metre of cut pavement and this price shall be adjusted for cuts greater than mm according to the following formula mm Additional Thickness x Unit Bid Price mm The unit bid price shall be full compensation for equipment tools labour and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
Description This work shall consist of the restoration of the pavement to the lines as directed by the Engineer. . Construction Method The Contractor shall cut to the full depth of the pavement excavate and level .
The Contractor shall clean and apply tack coat to the edges of the adjacent pavement .
Method of Payment The quantity to be paid for under this Section shall be the number of square metres of pavement excavated and patched . .
Basis of Payment The number of square metres of pavement excavated and patched shall be paid for at the unit bid price per square metre and this price shall be full compensation for excavation supply and placement of tack coat material supply and placement of asphaltic concrete compaction and all equipment tools labour and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
Method of Measurement The quantity to be measured under this Section will be the number of square metres of pavement which has been cold planed . .
Description This work includes the cold planing of the existing asphalt concrete transporting the reclaimed asphalt pavement RAP and constructing a RAP stockpile. . Construction Method The cold planer shall be a selfpropelled commercially designed unit equipped with automatic longitudinal and transverse grade and slope controls .
The delineators shall be erected m from edge of pavement on the shoulder at a spacing of m on highway sections or as specified by the Engineer .
Description Temporary marking tape or Temporary Overlay Markers TOMS shall be placed on all new asphaltic concrete base and seal courses all surface treatments all milled pavement surfaces and all tack coated asphaltic concrete base courses as work progresses with no new road surface left unmarked overnight. . Material Temporary marking shall consist of reflective pavement marking tape or TOMS with adhesive backing .
Install detector loops in a slot formed in the pavement to the details indicated on the Drawings .
