On contracts which involve the construction of a concrete bridge or concrete pavement the Contractor shall equip the office with a concrete test cylinder curing tank of capacity not less than .
On Trans Canada Highway projects where pavement is to be removed and replaced without provision for diverting traffic over other paved areas the work shall be carried out in conformance with the following provisions .
For projects of length less than km initially no more than one continuous stretch of pavement of length no greater than km may be removed .
After completion of subgrade and after completion of the placing of Granular B and when at least of the Granular A operations have been carried out over this initial pavement removed section then more old pavement may be removed in a continuous stretch for an addition length of up to km .
After at least km of road has been paved and at least of the Granular A operations have been completed on the remaining unpaved part then an additional km of pavement may be removed .
The scarifying and reshaping shall be carried out within the lengths designated by the Engineer and within the width to be covered by the proposed pavement plus .m on each side or to such other width as the Engineer may designate .
Except for the special cases of preparation on an existing or a proposed shoulder adjacent to existing pavement the preparation of the road surface shall be carried out in accordance with Section Grading of Fill Section Grading of Cuts and Section Scarifying and Reshaping .
Preparation of Existing Shoulder When Recapping with Addition of Paved Shoulder Where it is intended to recap existing pavement and simultaneously add a paved shoulder where a gravel shoulder existed before then the Contractor shall prepare the existing shoulder prior to the placing of additional Granular A and paving .
Preparation of Existing Granulars Prior to Providing Gravel Shoulder on Previously Paved Area Where existing pavement has been removed because it is intended to provide a gravel shoulder then the Contractor shall level off and compact the existing granulars prior to shouldering with additional selected granular base course .
.. Excavation of Existing Gravel Shoulder Prior to Butt Jointing Additional Pavement Where it is intended to widen existing pavement by butt jointing new pavement against existing pavement then the existing gravel shoulder material shall be removed so that the required new Granular B and Granular A may be placed in preparation for the new pavement .
Spreaders shall consist of a box to hold shouldering material and a suitable mechanism to control the width and rate of application and to prevent materials getting onto the pavement .
Granular materials for shoulder construction shall be placed directly on the shoulder and any spillage and materials dragged onto the pavement surface shall be immediately removed without damage to the pavement and the area so effected shall be thoroughly cleaned by the use of a power broom or other suitable method .
Shouldering operations shall not commence along any section of pavement until hours have elapsed from the time of completion of the final pavement course in that section but the shouldering operations shall be completed within days of the final pavement course on sections which are open to traffic. . COMPACTION All Granular A Granular B Granular C and the maintenance grades materials placed on the roadway or placed on shoulders shall be compacted to not less than of the maximum Standard Proctor Dry Density ASTM D. Compaction operations shall be carried out as closely as possible behind the placing and spreading operation .
An example where this might occur would be in connection with the installation of a culvert across an existing paved road and the Contractor chose in one operation to place temporary backfill right up the level of the pavement instead of placing backfill only to subgrade and then placing the required select granulars .
SCOPE This section covers the requirements for the supply and application of Tack Coat to pavement surfaces prior to repaving with asphaltic concrete. . MATERIALS Tack coat shall consist of SS or SSh emulsified asphalt diluted with an equal volume of water prior to the application .
The slot of each nozzle shall be set at degrees to the axis of the spray bar and the spray bar shall be set at a height above the existing pavement that will permit the fan from each nozzle to overlap its neighbouring fan by exactly half .
On old pavement the diluted emulsion shall be applied at the rate of .
However on pavement which was placed during the previous construction season the rate of application shall be as directed by the Engineer .
This rate will not exceed the rate for old pavement .
SCOPE This specification covers the Departments requirements for the production placing and compaction of hot mix hot laid base course surface course and leveling course asphalt concrete for pavement construction .
provides aggregate and asphalt pavement specifications and general requirements that are common to both method specification and end product specification projects .
The base surface and leveling course asphaltic concrete pavement shall consist of asphaltic cement coarse and fine mineral aggregate blending sand plus mineral filler if required combined as hereinafter specified placed and compacted on a prepared base in conformity with the lines grades dimensions and cross sections as staked by the Engineer .
Prior to the start of and throughout pavement production current copies of certification of all project asphalt binders shall be provided to the Department .
The amount of RAP in the pavement mixture will be limited to and subject to the following conditions Preparation and submission of a Marshall Asphalt Design Mix Formula including all supporting documentation for the asphalt mixture containing RAP for the Departments approval is the responsibility of the Contractor .
The use of nonmilled reclaimed asphalt pavement is subject to the approval of the Department .
The quality of the aggregate in the RAP and the quality of the final pavement mixture shall meet all requirements set forth in this specification .
Once a mix design has been designated or approved by the Engineer the Contractor shall be required to produce a pavement mixture conforming to the following mix control tolerances .
In no case shall cold asphalt be allowed in the pavement mix .
The purpose of the Materials Transfer Device is to minimize segregation during placement of the asphalt pavement and to increase the smoothness of the pavement surface by reducing the number of stops and starts during the placement of the asphalt pavement .
Immediately after any pavement course is laid and before roller compaction is started the surface and edges shall be checked and any irregularities adjusted by the addition or removal of mixture .
No pavement shall be removed from a roadway that can not meet the requirement of replacing the asphalt before the end of the paving season .
Any irregularity in the pavement surface at the joint shall immediately be corrected by the addition of or removal of mixture .
Keyed Joints When overlaying existing asphalt concrete pavement keyed joints shall be constructed at both ends of the project at all intersecting roads ramps and at all bridge decks in the repaving area .
Keyed joints will only be required between the final lift of pavement and the existing pavement unless otherwise directed by the Engineer .
When existing pavement has been removed in advance of paving the joint area the Contractor shall construct a temporary hot mix asphalt concrete ramp taper at the joint area to a slope of at least horizontal to vertical HV .
General Requirements for Compaction The pavement mixture shall be compacted to a density of of the Maximum Theoretical Density of the comparative laboratory Marshall mixture based on the criteria given in Section Physical Requirements for Mixture .
In all cases the production and placing of the pavement mixture shall be controlled so that all rolling shall be completed before the pavement mat temperature falls below degrees Celsius .
Static rolling will be conducted only to remove any irregularities in the pavement surface .
When paving in echelon the contactor shall provide sufficient rollers required to compact the asphalt pavement to the required degree of compaction .
Cores shall not be taken within .m of the pavement edge or longitudinal joint nor closer than m from transverse joint .
However the length of time to core the pavement may by extended as approved by the Engineer in order to exclude Saturdays Sundays and holidays unless the Contractor is placing asphalt concrete on either day or to meet the minimum tonne production requirement described above .
Immediately following each coring operation the Contractor shall reinstate the pavement at the core sample location in conjunction with removal of the core by dewatering the core hole and filling it with hot mixed asphalt concrete in mm lifts to the pavement surface elevation compacting each lift with blows using a standard Marshall hammer .
. . . . . . . . . . REJECT . . . . Requirement for Asphaltic Leveling Course Asphaltic Leveling Course shall be used to fill surface depressions on old pavement to restore the surface to the original profile and cross section .
Any obvious defects as determined by the Engineer will be cause for rejection of the pavement course .
Segregation is defined here as areas with predominantly coarser texture than that of the surrounding pavement and will normally be first identified visually .
However any areas of medium segregation that deteriorate prior to being overlaid by another pavement course must be repaired at the Contractors cost .
All areas of severe segregation in any pavement course will require removal and repair across the full lane width .
Defects as determined by the Engineer which occur in the finished surface of any pavement course during the two year warranty period resulting from poor workmanship shall be repaired by the Contractor .
.. Pavement Smoothness Pavement Smoothness Measurement The smoothness of the finished surface of the top lift of the pavement structure shall be determined after final rolling of the surface to be tested .
Profile Index Limits The surface of the profiled pavement shall conform to the following Smoothness requirements Table Smoothness Requirements Roadway Alignment Section Profile Index mm m RLU CLASSIFICATION AND ABOVE mm OR LESS INTERCHANGE RAMPS TAPERS AND HIGHWAYS OF LOWER CLASSIFICATION THAN RLU NA FORM March If the Smoothness requirements are not met the Contractor shall repair the sections or pay a price adjustment based on the Profile Index .
These price adjustments will be applied based on the square meters of the final pavement surface as outlined in Table .
For price adjustment purposes the width of the final pavement surface includes the driving lane and adjacent shoulders .
Profile measurements will terminate metres from the end of each bridge deck or from a joint between existing pavement and the new pavement .
Retesting to Verify Original Testing Results Should the Contractor request retesting of pavement sections due to an excessive PI or excessive bump and dip heights and the Department approves the retest then the Contractor shall bear all costs associated with testing if the original results are confirmed .
Overlaying When an additional lift of asphalt concrete is used to improve smoothness it shall extend the full width of the pavement surface and have a finished compacted thickness sufficient to produce compliance with smoothness limits and produce a uniform final surface closely matching the existing asphalt pavement .
FORM March .. ASPHALTIC PATCHING Asphaltic patching involves patching pot holes in bituminous pavement patching cuts for culverts or patching transverse cracks with hot mix asphaltic concrete .
These adjustments shall apply to the areas of pavement represented by these samples .
Measurement for Payment for the Cutting and Removal of Asphaltic Pavement The cutting and removal of pavement in connection with the preparation of joints as required in Section shall be measured for payment in accordance with Section Cutting Asphaltic Pavement and Section Storage or Disposal of Old Asphaltic Pavement except where the preparation of joints is required as the result of a break in the paving operations in which case no measurement for payment will be made for either cutting asphaltic pavement or storage or disposal of old asphaltic pavement .
Basis of Payment for the Cutting and Removal of Asphaltic Pavement Where cutting and removal of pavement is carried out in order to prepare a joint resulting from a break in the paving operations then no payment will be made for the cutting and removal of the pavement since such work is considered part of the basis of payment for asphaltic base and surface courses .
FORM March However where other asphaltic pavement is cut and removed then payment will be in accordance with Section Cutting Asphaltic Pavement and Section Storage or Disposal of Old Asphaltic Pavement .
Placement The Contractor shall not place asphalt concrete during rain or when the surface is frozen nor when the pavement surface shows signs of freestanding water or when the air temperature at surface is below C. A Material Transfer DeviceVehicle shall be used at no extra cost to transfer the asphalt mixture from the transport vehicles to the asphalt spreader .
Keyed Joints When overlaying existing asphalt concrete pavement keyed joints shall be constructed at both ends of the project at all intersecting roads ramps and at all bridge decks in the repaving area .
Keyed joints will only be required between the final lift of pavement and the existing pavement unless otherwise directed by the Engineer .
FORM March When existing pavement has been removed in advance of paving the joint area the Contractor shall construct a temporary hot mix asphalt concrete ramp taper at the joint area to a slope of at least horizontal to vertical HV .
Surface Defects The finished surface of any pavement course shall have a uniform texture and be free of visible signs of defects .
Segregation is defined here as areas with predominantly coarser texture than that of the surrounding pavement and will normally be first identified visually .
However any areas of medium segregation that deteriorate prior to being overlaid by another pavement course must be repaired at the Contractors cost .
All areas of severe segregation in any pavement course will require removal and repair across the full lane width .
Defects as determined by the Engineer which occur in the finished surface of any pavement course during the two year warranty period resulting from poor workmanship shall be repaired by the Contractor .
m of the pavement edge or longitudinal joint nor closer than m to a transverse joint .
Immediately following each coring operation the Contractor shall reinstate the pavement at the core sample location in conjunction with removal of the core by dewatering the core hole and filling it with hot mixed asphalt concrete in mm lifts to the pavement surface elevation compacting each lift with blows using a standard Marshall hammer .
The pavement thickness shall be determined from the cores obtained in Asphalt Density .
FORM March Material Application Rate Rehabilitated Pavements On rehabilitated pavements hot mix asphalt shall be applied to the roadway at the rate or rates specified by the Engineer .
The appropriate backup information including calculations for determining the application rate shall be provided with the application rate including paving start and end stations pavement widths intersection areas etc .
Rejected Mill and Fill andor rejected with no remedial work required at the discretion of the Engineer Rejected Mill and Fill Overlay andor rejected with no remedial work required at the discretion of the Engineer Pavement Smoothness The smoothness of the finished surface of the top lift of the pavement structure shall be determined after final rolling of the surface to be tested .
Profile Index Limits The surface of the profiled pavement shall conform to the following Smoothness requirements FORM March Table Smoothness Requirements Roadway Alignment Section Profile Index mm m RLU CLASSIFICATION AND ABOVE mm OR LESS INTERCHANGE RAMPS TAPERS AND HIGHWAYS OF LOWER CLASSIFICATION THAN RLU NA If the Smoothness requirements are not met the Contractor shall repair the sections or pay a price adjustment based on the Profile Index .
These price adjustments will be applied based on the square meters of the final pavement surface as outlined in Table .
For price adjustment purposes the width of the final pavement surface includes the driving lane and adjacent shoulders .
FORM March Profile measurements will terminate metres from the end of each bridge deck or from a joint between existing pavement and the new pavement .
Retesting to Verify Original Testing Results Should the Contractor request retesting of pavement sections due to an excessive PI or excessive bump and dip heights and the Department approves the retest then the Contractor shall bear all costs associated with testing if the original results are confirmed .
The asphalt concrete mix used to construct the overlay shall meet the same requirements as the pavement which is overlaid .
The overlay shall extend the full width of the underlying pavement surface and have a finished compacted thickness of not less than mm .
These adjustments shall apply to the areas of pavement represented by these samples .
SCOPE This specification covers the requirements for single layer chip seal surface treatment of pavement together with the requirements for patching and filling cracks in the pavement prior to the chip seal surface treatment operations. . MATERIALS .. Chip Seal Aggregate The chip seal aggregate must be crushed and shall be of a high quality and be free of soft disintegrated stone clay or other deleterious materials .
Mechanical Broom The mechanical broom shall be of an approved type of power broom suitable for pavement use. . CONSTRUCTION ..
Surface Preparation Before chip seal operations may begin the Contractor shall completely clean the pavement of all dirt and other debris .
.. Patching and Crack Filling Patching and crack filling shall be carried out to repair pavement pot holes and cracks prior to the carrying out of the chip seal surface treatment operations .
FORM March All pot holes shall be patched by means of multiple layer emulsion and chip seal aggregate applications to fill the hole level with the surrounding pavement .
SCOPE This specification covers the work of sealing pavement cracks with a crack sealant compound .
This specification covers two methods of sealing pavement cracks .
Vertical sides of the cut shall be perpendicular to the pavement surface .
The Contractor shall remove all dirt dust and debris from the pavement and this shall be considered as incidental to the work . .
Avoid leaving small islands of pavement which are or could be broken loose .
Two or more cracks shall not be joined by routing through uncracked pavement or routed in areas where a crack does not exist .
Following routing the pavement surface and the routed crack shall be cleaned with high compressed air free of oil to rid cracks of debris andor moisture .
The Contractor shall remove all dirt dust and debris from the pavement .
The hot air lance should be used at all times and kept moving at a pace that will avoid burning the surrounding pavement .
Adjacent pavement surface must also be clean and dry .
The sealant compound shall not be applied with evidence of any dampness on or within the pavement or in the pavement pores .
Care should be taken to avoid spillage of the material on the pavement .
BASIS OF PAYMENT Payment at the contract price for crack sealing shall be compensation in full for all labour materials and equipmentuse to supply samples of sealant to the Department clean out andor rout the cracks that the Engineer requires to be treated clean the routed cracks dry the cracks supply and apply sealant to the required depth clean up all sealant spillage on the pavement supply and apply cement or lime to the treated cracks to prevent tacking together with that portion of the cost of providing the required traffic control not covered by the provisions of Section Wages of Flagperson .
SCOPE This specification covers the requirements for coldmilling existing pavement .
The machine shall have automatic grade control and be able to load milled material directly into trucks or be able to windrow the material for subsequent pickup by other equipment. . OPERATIONS The existing pavement shall be removed to the depth specified in the unit price table .
Should the pavement not be removed to the required depth in the first pass then the Contractor shall return again to mill down the pavement to the required depth .
In areas where the cold milling equipment can not remove the pavement to the depths required such pavement shall be removed to the required grade using other means acceptable to the Engineer .
If a transverse vertical cut is milled in the existing pavement at the limit of the work area the contractor shall immediately construct with hot mix asphalt concrete a temporary smooth .
SCOPE Pulverizing is a process by which the existing asphalt pavement is crushed in place into small size particles and mixed with part of the existing granular base to total depth equivalent to twice the old asphalt thickness .
The pulverized mixture is relevelled and reprofiled prior to compaction. . PROCEDURE The Contractor shall pulverize the existing asphalt pavement asphalt and granulars to a total maximum depth of mm unless noted otherwise in the unit price table .
m. .. Excavation Where bituminous pavement must be removed to adjust or rebuild a structure the pavement shall be cut and excavated .
Adjustment When manhole or catch basin covers are to be raised only to accommodate resurfacing of the adjacent pavement the Contractor may use manhole cover lift rings to raise the cover a sufficient height to accommodate the thickness of resurfacing material .
Basis of Payment for the Adjustment and Rebuilding of Manholes Catch Basins and Ditch Inlets Payment at the contract price per metre for adjustment and rebuilding of manholes catch basins and ditch inlets shall be full compensation for all labour materials and equipmentuse to supply all materials except frame and grate frame and cover or grating required to carry out the alteration regardless of size or type cut remove and dispose of existing asphalt carry out all necessary excavation after pavement sidewalk and curb and gutter have been removed remove and dispose of concrete and bricks in the structure salvage the grating frame and cover frame and covers or frames and grates place and cure castinplace concrete place precast concrete adjustment units place and parge bricks place such additional ladder rungs as may be required place any required manhole rings place anchor bolts or full mortar bed as appropriate reinstall salvaged frame and cover frame and grate frames and grates or grating or install new frame and cover as required provide any required unwatering and shearing and shoring place and compact backfill and supply place and compact Granular A Granular B and asphalt including liquid and blending sand together with all other items of work necessary for the satisfactory completion of the work except for the cutting and removal curb and gutter and sidewalk which will be paid for under separate contract items .
This work is typically required prior to paving or pavement recapping operations so that the level of the valve box cover will match the level of the proposed recapped finish grade . .
Where the valve box is set in pavement the Contractor shall cut the existing pavement to a square or rectangular shape around the valve box .
The bottom of the excavation and each layer of select granulars shall be compacted to of the maximum Standard Proctor DensityASTM D. In pavement recapping operations the top of the compacted ClassA shall be brought level with the bottom of the existing pavement then the area around the valve box shall be patched with hot mix asphaltic pavement to the full depth of the existing pavement .
The asphaltic pavement shall meet the GOVERNMENT OF NEWFOUNDLAND AND LABRADOR Department of Transportation and Works Highway Design Division FORM March requirements for either asphaltic base or asphaltic surface course as stipulated in Section Hot Mix Asphaltic Concrete .
Immediately prior to patching the vertical faces of the existing pavement shall be treated with a continuous thin coating of hot asphalt cement .
Compaction of the hot mix asphaltic pavement shall conform with the requirements for compaction given in Section Hot Mix Asphaltic Concrete subsection .
BASIS OF PAYMENT Payment at the contract price for Adjustment of Water Valve Box shall be compensation in full for all materials labour and use of equipment to supply all materials including Selected Granular Base Course ClassA and ClassB asphalt cement and asphaltic concrete to cut existing pavement to excavate existing pavement and granular materials from around the valve box to adjust the valve box to the required grade to place and compact Other Material ClassB and ClassA to treat the cut edge of existing pavement with asphalt cement to place and compact hot asphaltic concrete around the adjusted valve box and to dispose of all waste materials .
JOINTS When concrete curb and gutter is constructed immediately adjacent to another structure such as concrete pavement concrete sidewalk catch basin frame or gutter outlets then the Contractor shall construct a full depth isolation joint between the structure and the curb and gutter .
When concrete curb and gutter is constructed adjacent to asphalt pavement control joints shall be spaced at intervals not exceeding metres .
However when concrete curb and gutter is constructed adjacent to concrete pavement control joints shall coincide with joints in the pavement .
JOINTS When the rock embedded concrete gutter is to be constructed abutting another structure such as concrete pavement concrete sidewalk concrete retaining wall or catch basin frame then the Contractor shall construct a full length isolation joint of depth equal to the depth of the gutter .
When abutting asphaltic pavement no joint is necessary .
SCOPE This specification covers the requirements for the installation of asphalt curb on top of existing pavement .
Should the pavement where asphalt curb is to be placed be older than one year then treatment with emulsion will be required .
Should pavement be required to widen existing pavement to construct a base for the curb then such pavement shall be compensated for separately in accordance with the provisions of Section Hot Mix Asphaltic Concrete .
DESCRIPTION This work shall include labour materials and equipmentuse to cut asphaltic pavement along lines set by the Engineer .
Cuts shall be made using an approved pavement cutter .
The cuts shall be made straight and vertical and be made in such a manner that will allow neat tieins with new pavement . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT Payment shall be at the Contract Unit Price per metre for cutting of asphaltic pavement .
SCOPE This specification covers the requirements for the excavation of asphaltic pavement together with either the storage of the debris or the disposal of the debris. . EXCAVATION The Contractor shall excavate the asphaltic pavement from within the limits staked by the Engineer .
Care shall be taken in excavating the pavement so as not to contaminate the underlying granular base course .
In the case when the asphaltic pavement debris is to be stored care shall also be taken not to excavate underlying granular materials with the pavement .
STORAGE Where the contract item designates that old asphaltic pavement is to be stored the Engineer shall select a site where all the excavated asphaltic pavement is to be stockpiled .
Old asphaltic pavement that is to be stored shall be handled transported and stockpiled at all times in such a manner that will avoid contamination by any deleterious material .
GOVERNMENT OF NEWFOUNDLAND AND LABRADOR Department of Transportation and Works Highway Design Division FORM March The pavement debris shall be hauled to the stockpile site and spotdumped and levelled and then succeeding loads shall be dumped and levelled on top of the others to form a neat unified elevated stockpile . .
DISPOSAL On those jobs where the contract item states that the old asphaltic pavement is to be disposed of then the old asphaltic pavement debris for disposal shall become the property of the Contractor .
As approved by the Engineer the Contractor shall be permitted to use old asphalt pavement in shouldering operations and as a surface stabilizer on gravel roads .
MEASUREMENT FOR PAYMENT Measurement for payment will be by means of the volume of pavement excavated from within the required limits calculated as the product of the exposed surface area of the excavated pavement before removal times the centreline thickness of the asphalt .
The volume of the excavated pavement shall be calculated in cubic metres rounded to two decimal places . .
Basis of Payment for Storage of Old Asphaltic Pavement Payment at the contract price for storage of old asphaltic pavement hauled km or under shall be payment in full for all labour materials and use of equipment to excavate the old pavement breakup the pavement transport the debris up to km and place the debris in a stockpile .
In the case of storage of old asphaltic pavement the grading of the stockpile floor and the supply and placing of the Granular A mat for the stockpile shall be paid for in accordance with Section Grading of Cuts and Section Selected Granular Base for Granular A respectively .
Basis of Payment for Disposal of Old Asphaltic Pavement Payment at the contract price for disposal of old asphaltic pavement shall be payment in full for all labour materials and use of equipment to excavate the old pavement and provide all transportation and any other costs to remove the debris from the site .
Where bituminous pavement must be removed prior to removing a manhole or catch basin the pavement shall be cut and excavated .
The work of cutting and excavating the pavement shall be carried out and GOVERNMENT OF NEWFOUNDLAND AND LABRADOR Department of Transportation and Works Highway Design Division FORM March paid for in accordance with Section Cutting Asphaltic Pavement and Section Storage or Disposal of Old Asphaltic Pavement. . DEMOLITION Demolition shall be carried out in such a manner and with such equipment so as not to disturb adjacent pavement utilities or other works to be left in place and with such care as to leave undamaged materials designated to be salvaged .
Waste Material Disposal. . EXCAVATION Where bituminous pavement must be removed prior to carrying out excavation then such excavation of pavement shall be carried out and paid for in accordance with Section Storage or Disposal of Old Asphaltic Pavement .
When it is necessary to cut and remove a section of pavement sidewalk or curb and gutter or similar item in order to remove a manhole or catch basin then payment will be made for each item cut and removed in accordance with the appropriate specification .
GOVERNMENT OF NEWFOUNDLAND AND LABRADOR Department of Transportation and Works Highway Design Division FORM March Precautions shall be taken to prevent any damage to the pavement by the slipform paver truck mixers or other equipment .
The rails shall be secured to even lines such that the centre of the rail is mm above the edge of pavement .
The rails shall be secured to even lines such that the centre of the rail is mm above the edge of pavement .
The tops of the posts shall be cut to a point mm above the edge of the pavement as shown on drawing Section Wooden Guide Post or cut otherwise as directed by the Engineer .
Potential hazards and conflicts will increase in the work area if The work area is close to the travel lanes A physical obstruction exists uneven pavement trucks turning etc .
metres from the edge of travelled lane or asphaltic pavement whichever is nearest or the excavation is more than one .
The protection board is not designed for exposure and should be tack coated and paved as soon as practical. . At the vertical faces of all curbs a mm by mm asphalt impregnated strip shall be placed such that the top of the strip is flush with the top of the proposed asphaltic pavement . .
Old decks will generally require the removal of larger expanses of old hot mix pavement and waterproofing which is not well bonded scaled or spalled concrete must be removed and replaced with Portland cement concrete .
The rubber membrane shall extend up the face of the curbs or barrier walls to the top of the hot mix asphaltic pavement or into the chase where this has been provided .
The joint sealing compound shall be poured in place after the asphaltic pavement reaches ambient air temperature .
Sufficient compound shall be poured into the groove so that upon completion of the work the surface of the compound will be flush with the surface of the pavement when the air temperature at time of pouring is oC or over or mm below the surface of the pavement when the temperature is below oC .
If the compound subsides to a level below the surface of the pavement a second pouring will be required .
The old asphaltic pavement and granulars shall be excavated as required from within the limits as described above removed loaded transported and disposed of at a site approved by the Engineer .
The cutting of old asphaltic pavement to be excavated shall be as outlined in accordance with Section of the Specifications Book Cutting Asphaltic Pavement .
Care shall be taken in excavating the pavement on the approaches so as not to contaminate or over excavate the underlying granular base course .
FORM March The Contractor shall transport the pavement debris to the waste disposal area then place and trim the debris to sightly proportions .
.. Payment Measurement for payment for the removal and disposal of old asphaltic pavement shall be in cubic metres rounded to one decimal place .
Measurements shall be made before the removal and shall be the plan area of the pavement surface multiplied by the measured thickness actually removed .
Measurement for payment regarding the cutting of old asphaltic pavement will not be made .
The basis of payment at the contract unit price for the removal and disposal of old asphaltic pavement under the appropriate item of the Structure Rehabilitation Unit Price Table shall be full compensation for all labour materials and equipment use for saw cutting excavation removal loading and transporting the old asphalt and waste from the job to disposal site off loading placing the debris and trimming to sightly proportions .
Removal and disposal of old asphaltic pavement and deck rehabilitation shall be covered in Section of the Specifications Book Rehabilitation of Concrete Structures .
The length shall be in accordance with the length of existing pavement removed and disposed of as determined by the Engineer generally m from the abutment back wall .
Payment for cutting existing asphaltic pavement removal transportation and disposal of old disposal of old asphaltic pavement will be made in accordance with Section of the Specifications Book for Rehabilitation of Concrete Structures .
The basis of payment for cutting existing asphalt removal transportation and disposal of old asphaltic pavement on rehabilitation type projects shall be made in accordance with terms outlined elsewhere in the Section of the Specifications Book for Rehabilitation of Concrete Structures .
