PCCP portland cement concrete pavement PDA pile driving analysis PG performance grade asphalt POTW Publicly Owned Treatment Works PVC polyvinyl chloride QC quality control QCQA quality controlquality assurance QCP quality control plan RAP recycled asphalt pavement RCBA reinforced concrete bridge approaches RCRA Resource Conservation and Recovery Act RS seal coat asphalt emulsion RTFO rolling thin film oven SAE Society of Automotive Engineers SC slow curing asphalt SCA slow curing asphalt with additive SF steel furnace slag SHRP Strategic Highway Research Program SMA stone matrix asphalt SSD saturated surface dry SSPC The Society for Protective Coatings SWPPP Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan TCLP Toxicity Characteristic Leaching Procedure TSR tensile strength ratio UA utility asphalt UL Underwriter Laboratory UST underground storage tank VFA voids filled with asphalt VMA voids in mineral aggregate VOC volatile organic compounds WWR welded wire reinforcement .
. . Open to Unrestricted Traffic The condition that exists when all pavement work is completed including surface courses and shoulders .
All safety features including guardrail and signs are in place and pavement markings are in the final marking pattern. . Pavement Structure The combination of subbase base course and surface course placed on a subgrade to support the traffic load and distribute it to the roadbed . .
Nearly equivalent sized materials will be accepted unless the nearly equivalent material is outside specified working tolerances in the contract documents. . RightofWay A general term denoting land property or interest therein usually in a strip acquired for or devoted to a highway. . Road A general term denoting a public way for purposes of vehicular travel including the entire area within the rightofway. . Roadbed The graded portion of a highway within top and side slopes prepared as a foundation for the pavement structure and shoulders . .
Subcontractor An individual partnership firm corporation or combination of same to whom the Contractor sublets part of the contract. . Subgrade The upper portion of a roadbed upon which the pavement structure and shoulders are constructed. . Substructure All of that part of the structure below the bearings of simple and continuous spans skewbacks or arches and tops of footings of rigid frames together with backwalls wingwalls and wing protection railings . .
The profiling of existing pavements beyond tiein points for proper ride profiling of existing ditches for proper flow and visual observations that driveways or sidewalks may be constructed satisfactorily will be required .
Interstate routes and other divided lane pavements shall be checked for the vertical clearance under structures to ensure that a minimum of ft is maintained over the traffic lanes and paved shoulder .
Ramps which connect to the above type pavements shall provide the same clearance .
All other pavements shall be checked for the vertical clearance under a structure to ensure that a minimum of ft is maintained over the traffic lanes and paved shoulders .
Grade transitions shall be tapered to meet the grade of the pavement under a structure a minimum of ft away from the structure and at a rate not to exceed .. All discrepancies shall be brought to the immediate attention of the Engineer .
Production staking shall include staking for finishing subgrade and placing subsurface drains subbase adjacent curbs or curbs and gutters and all types of pavement including base and surface .
No loads will be allowed on concrete pavement concrete bases or structures before the expiration of the curing period .
This requirement will serve as written notice that hauling or handling of materials on completed or partially completed structures pavement structures or paved shoulders in excess of legal weight limits will not be allowed unless approved in advance of the operation .
Approval shall be obtained from the authority having jurisdiction over the structures pavement structures or paved shoulders . .
The Department may have acquired environmental permits including but not limited to U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Permit IDNR Certificate of Approval of Construction in a Floodway IDEM Section Water Quality Certification or a permit for construction of temporary pavement across a state line .
b Dust and Air Pollution Provision shall be made for prompt removal from traveled roadways of all dirt and other materials that have been deposited thereon by operations concerned with the project whenever the accumulation is sufficient to cause the formation of dust or mud interfere with drainage damage pavements or create a traffic hazard .
c Protection to Traffic The work shall be arranged so that all operations on the pavement will be held to a minimum by using the new grade insofar as possible .
Nonoperating construction equipment workers vehicles materials field offices field laboratories and temporary offices may be stored on the rightofway no less than ft from the edge of pavement lanes open to traffic except storage may be allowed closer to such lanes if traffic is protected by guardrail in good condition or other suitable barrier .
on the pavement sidewalk or shoulder with the road open to traffic .
Temporary pavement markings when required shall be placed in accordance with .
Opening Sections of Project to Traffic Shoulders shall be graded and shaped to assure reasonable safety to traffic before opening any completed pavement to traffic .
Prior to any work which penetrates any existing soil or pavement surface the Contractor shall notify both the Indiana Underground Plant Protection Service IUPPS in accordance with IC requirements and the Engineer in accordance with .
If the plans for a road contract provide for the construction of an interchange interchanges or approaches at bridge locations regardless of the actual date of completion on the bridge contract or contracts the road contractor will be required unless otherwise directed to complete the planned pavement including approaches and interchanges as planned and set out in the road contract .
If temporary roadbed or asphalt pavement materials are used for embankment construction such materials will be classified as excavation and paid for at the contract unit price per cubic yard for the type of excavation shown in the Schedule of Pay Items .
If temporary HMA pavement materials are used in the work for subbase base approaches or for new shoulder construction such materials will be paid for as salvaged road material in accordance with .
Temporary concrete pavement temporary concrete base or temporary concrete widening when no longer required for maintenance of traffic shall be removed and disposed of in accordance with ..
Construction equipment which is used in recreational areas shall not be left parked in existing parking areas or on existing park road pavements except as may be necessary during the time construction work is in progress .
All damage to such roadways or parking lot pavements caused by equipment such as gouge marks or petroleum leakage shall be repaired with no additional payment in accordance with the applicable requirements of .
Temporary pavement marking materials in accordance with .
For these purposes open to traffic will be considered as all pavement lanes open to unrestricted and safe travel .
The Contractor may be required to make temporary repairs to the pavement or structures .
If the contract is not completed or the pavement or structure is not opened to traffic within the stipulated time as set out in the Proposal book the Department may reduce the qualified rating of the Contractor for bidding on future contacts .
Proposed changes in pavement design including materials or pavement type changes in materials required to be installed by a certified installer or changes in rightofway will not be approved .
Such materials shall be limited to structural steel concrete structural members reinforcing bars pavement contraction joints granular base and subbase materials aggregates for HMA and concrete pavements and structural supports for signals signs and luminaires . .
Description This work shall consist of the removal wholly or in part and satisfactory disposal of all buildings fences structures old pavement abandoned pipe lines abandoned tanks and any other obstructions which are not designated or allowed to remain except for the obstructions to be removed and disposed of under other items in the contract .
These miscellaneous items shall include but shall not be limited to concrete and asphalt pavements concrete and asphalt sidewalks and fill within the arches regardless of content .
Removal of PCCP Sidewalks Curbs RCBA and Reinforced Concrete Moment Slabs All unreinforced PCCP sidewalks curbs gutters and other unreinforced concrete elements designated for removal shall be a broken into pieces and used for riprap on the project or b broken into pieces the maximum weight of which shall be lb and incorporated into the work as directed or c otherwise disposed of in accordance with .. RCBA reinforced concrete moment slabs and reinforced concrete elements designated for removal shall be disposed of in accordance with .. Pavement removal shall consist of the removal and satisfactory disposal of RCBA reinforced concrete moment slabs reinforced or unreinforced PCCP PCC resurface with its base or the total of any combination of HMA base intermediate and surface course of any pavement on a PCC RCBA or reinforced concrete moment slab base including the base .
Pavement removal shall include only the removal and disposal of existing public road street and alley pavement as required for the planned construction .
Curb removal shall include curb that is separate from the pavement or removed separately .
Integral curb that is removed with the adjacent pavement shall be paid for as pavement removal .
Prior to performing the work of pavement removal at locations shown on the plans or where directed cement concrete pavement to be removed shall be cut with a power driven concrete saw along designated lines .
Sawing shall be such that any portion of the pavement to remain in place will not be damaged .
Sawing of pavement to be removed will not be paid for directly but shall be included in the cost of pavement removal . .
If there is no pay item for pavement removal and such is encountered payment will be made for each square yard removed .
Such pavement removal shall apply only to portland cement concrete pavement or base .
If portland cement concrete pavement has an asphalt overlay its removal will be considered as incidental for which no direct payment will be made .
The explanation shall show the type of pavement removed .
entrance approaches beyond the rightofway limits necessary for the construction of the roadway in accordance with .. All excavation will be classified as hereinafter described. . Common Excavation Common excavation shall consist of all excavation not included as rock excavation or excavation which is otherwise classified and paid for including asphalt type pavement. . Rock Excavation Rock excavation shall consist of igneous metamorphic and sedimentary rock or other sound mineral matter which can not be readily excavated by the use of a crawler mounted hydraulic excavator of not less than lbs gross operating weight equipped with a general purpose excavator bucket of not less than cu yd capacity in satisfactory running condition and operated in accordance with the manufacturers recommended operating instructions .
Rock excavation shall also include all boulders and other detached stones each having a volume of cu yd or more. . Unclassified Excavation Unclassified excavation shall consist of the excavation and disposal of all materials of whatever character encountered in the work. . Peat Excavation Peat excavation shall consist of the necessary excavation and satisfactory disposal of peat muck marl or any other similar unsuitable material in peat deposits together with any overlaying material except pavement which is not used in embankment construction except as otherwise provided in .. . Waterway Excavation Waterway excavation shall consist of the necessary excavation and satisfactory disposal of all material resulting from excavation for clearing waterways making channel changes or both when such are itemized in the Proposal book but shall not include class Y excavation or excavation made for a structure in accordance with .
Linear Grading Linear grading shall consist of a earth wedging at the outside edge of a shoulder once the pavement has been resurfaced widened or replaced b earth wedging behind guardrail to obtain the required earth backup for the posts c median earth filling required for paving and placement of concrete median barrier .
If proper treatment of a slide has been obtained prior to completion of the remaining pavement the gap may be required to be paved and payment will be at the contract unit price for pavement . .
If proper treatment of a slide has not been obtained prior to completion of the remaining pavement the gap left at the slide location shall become an exception to the contract item for pavement. . Drainage Ditches shall be interpreted to mean open ditches and channel changes parallel to and adjacent to the roadbed .
Unless otherwise directed the holes shall be drilled on the centerline of the proposed pavement at approximately ft intervals and shall extend for a depth of ft below the proposed grade and have a minimum diameter of in .
Where cavities are discovered on centerline additional holes shall be drilled at ft intervals along the edge of the proposed pavement and unless otherwise directed extend for a depth of ft below the proposed grade .
If settlement has not been obtained when paving operations are at the limits of any peat deposit treatment a gap in the pavement shall be left as directed .
Recycled concrete pavement may be used in embankment construction .
The recycled concrete pavement may only be placed below the pavement underdrains and shall be constructed in accordance with ..
The recycled concrete pavement shall not be used within ft of the water table .
If benches are cut the excavation involved will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic yard for the class or classes of excavation encountered. . Embankment Over Existing Roadbeds If embankment for new pavement is to be placed over an area where a rigid pavement or any pavement having a concrete base is in place or in other cases when required the upper surface of which is ft or less below the subgrade elevation of the proposed new pavement the existing old pavement including any concrete base shall be removed .
If embankment for new pavement is to be placed over an area where an existing rigid pavement is in place the upper surface of which is more than ft but less than .
ft below the subgrade elevation of the proposed new pavement or in other cases when required the existing pavement shall be broken .
If embankment for new pavement is to be placed over an area where an asphalt filled bricktype or an asphalttype surface on a concrete base is in place and such existing surface is more than ft but less than ft below the subgrade elevation of the proposed new pavement or in other cases when required the brick and cushion material or the asphalt courses shall be removed and the concrete base broken .
If embankment for new pavement is to be placed over an area where a flexibletype pavement is in place the top of which is at the approximate elevation of or is ft or less below the required subgrade elevation of the proposed new pavement the existing pavement shall be loosened to the depth directed but no less than ft .
If embankment for new pavement is to be placed over an existing macadam the surface of which is more than ft but less than ft below the subgrade elevation of the proposed new pavement the existing macadam shall be loosened to a depth sufficient to prevent possible trapping of water above the existing surface .
Where the existing roadbed is too narrow except as otherwise herein provided new pavement shall not be placed partly on old and partly on new embankment .
If the fill supporting an existing roadbed is ft or more in depth and is too narrow to carry the entire width of the proposed new pavement the existing width of roadbed shall be taken down to include the new roadbed width and rebuilt from the lowest elevation of the disturbed old roadbed to the required new width .
After all sod and other perishable material has been removed the existing shoulders shall be plowed down ft out from the existing pavement .
Breaking pavement will be measured by the square yard in place before breaking .
Where there is insufficient space for a stable construction entrance other measures shall be taken to prevent the tracking of sediment onto the pavement .
The twine shall be placed parallel to and also at to the pavement edge in both directions .
The strand parallel to the pavement shall cross the diagonal strands at their intersections to form equilateral triangles of ft on a side . .
General Requirements The subgrade shall be constructed uniformly transversely across the width of the pavement including shoulders or curbs unless shown otherwise on the plans by one of the following methods a chemical modification in accordance with .
The existing railroad ballast and railroad bed material shall be excavated to the depth specified for subgrade treatment Type V and graded as shown on the plans or as directed by the Engineer in order to provide the subgrade width required for the proposed pavement section including side slopes .
Cuts and fills shall be balanced within sections approximately ft in length along the profile of the pavement .
compacted aggregate as part of the subgrade treatment Type V shall be compacted to prior to the placement of the pavement .
Where divided pavement is constructed each roadway with its shoulders ditches and slopes will be considered a separate roadway .
The inside edges shall be built up slightly above the finished surface of the adjoining pavement and compacted thoroughly with a roller weighing no less than t and with the roller wheel slightly overlapping the pavement .
Rolling shall continue until there is no break between the pavement and shoulders and until the required cross section is obtained .
If rolling is not practicable on shoulders for approach pavement or other miscellaneous areas compaction shall be obtained with mechanical tamps vibrators or other satisfactory means .
Except where permission has been granted to widen shoulders to dispose of surplus excavation the outside edges shall be parallel to the pavement edges .
It may be necessary to finish shoulders after the pavement is opened to traffic .
As a matter of safety to traffic the pavement shall be kept as free as possible from shoulder material and equipment .
The adjacent pavement over which traffic is being routed shall be cleaned at the close of each work day .
The edges shall be parallel to the pavement unless it is necessary to have the gradients different from that of the pavement in order to obtain proper drainage in which case the edges shall be as determined. . Finishing Slopes All cut and fill slopes shall be constructed to the cross sections shown on the plans or to revised sections where cuts are widened to obtain additional material or fills widened to utilize excess .
If the contract is for construction of a new pavement or for grading and structures only on a rightofway acquired for divided highway construction one roadway of which has been constructed and on which the Department has assumed normal maintenance the provisions of this specification shall not apply to the .
Description This work shall consist of placing flowable backfill in trenches for pipe structures culverts utility cuts other work extending under pavement locations cavities beneath slopewalls and other locations in accordance with .. . Flowable backfill will be classified as either removable or nonremovable .
Holes drilled in the pavement will be paid for at the contract unit price per each .
Method of Measurement Geotextile for pavement and subgrade will be measured by the square yard for the type specified .
For measuring the compaction with a DCP three random test locations will be determined in accordance with ITM for each lft of chemically modified soil for each lane pavement section .
will be performed for each lft of chemically modified soil for each lane pavement section .
b A minimum of two passing DCP tests for each lft or less of chemically treated soil for each lane pavement section .
c A minimum of one gradation test shall be performed every lft for each lane pavement section .
Replacement of pavement damaged by the Contractors operations shall be at no additional payment .
Replacement or repair of pavement or shoulders damaged by the Contractors operations shall be at no additional payment .
Description This work shall consist of constructing an HMA base on a prepared surface or preparing an existing asphalt pavement for use as an asphalt base in accordance with .. MATERIALS .
The marked pavement shall be removed to the depth shown on the typical section or as directed .
vertical joint shall be constructed with the pavement that remains in place .
If it is determined that the marked pavement is to be removed full depth the patch depth shall be to the bottom of the existing asphalt material or as directed .
The cost of furnishing storage hauling and placing of all materials pavement removal as required temporary pavement required to carry traffic choke aggregate required to eliminate pickup disposal excavation preparation of subgrade compacting and finishing except as otherwise provided shall be included in the cost of the patching materials .
Replacement of pavement damaged by the Contractors operations shall be at no additional payment .
c Retrofit Load Transfer Retrofit load transfer shall be in accordance with .. d Rubblizing Existing PCCP The existing pavement shall be rubblized with a selfcontained selfpropelled resonant frequency pavement breaking unit capable of producing low amplitude lbf blows at a rate of not less than per second or with a selfcontained self propelled multiple headed impact hammer with the heads directly adjacent to each other and the lift height of each head independently adjustable .
The operating speed of the unit shall be such that the existing pavement is reduced to particles ranging from sand sized to pieces not exceeding in .
Subsurface drains shall be installed along the edges of the pavement prior to the rubblization .
Rubblizing shall begin at the edge of pavement and proceed to the center of the pavement .
Prior to placing HMA mixtures the complete width of the rubblized pavement shall be compacted by means of vibratory steel wheel and pneumatictired rollers in accordance with .d in the following sequence two initial passes with a vibratory roller two passes with a pneumatictired roller and then four final passes with a vibratory roller .
Reinforcement in the rubblized pavement shall be left in place .
Traffic will not be allowed on the rubblized pavement before the HMA base or immediate courses are in place unless otherwise directed .
Rubblized material dislodged by traffic shall be removed from the pavement .
However in the event of rain this time limitation may be waived to allow sufficient time for the rubblized pavement to dry to the satisfaction of the Engineer .
The preceding rubblizing operations shall be scheduled after widening or shoulder work has progressed up to the elevation of the existing pavement grade .
These areas may then be utilized to support the breaking unit while the existing pavement is being rubblized .
Shoulders may then be completed in conjunction with the placement of HMA pavement courses over the compacted rubblized pavement. . A joint shall be saw cut full depth or load transfer devices shall be severed at an existing joint on ramps or mainline where the rubblizing abuts concrete pavement which is to remain in place. . Widening With PCC Base The subgrade shall be prepared in accordance with .
The concrete shall be placed directly against the existing pavement edges which shall be free from all foreign materials .
Transverse joints constructed in the widening shall be aligned with existing transverse joints or cracks c tining is not required d shoulder corrugations are not required e pavement smoothness shall be controlled by a ft straightedge and f utilization of the Department provided spreadsheet is not required .
Rubblized PCCP will be measured by the square yard of rubblized pavement .
Rubblized PCCP will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard for rubblized pavement .
Replacement of pavement damaged by the Contractors operations shall be without additional payment .
The cost of furnishing all labor materials and equipment necessary to rubblize suppress dust cut and remove exposed reinforcement cut and remove joint fillers or similar materials saw cutting of the pavement severing existing joints compacting and maintaining the compacted condition of the rubblized pavement shall be included in the cost of rubblized PCCP .
Description This work shall consist of the milling of asphalt and concrete pavements and the disposal of milled materials in accordance with .. CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS .
a Roadway Milling Machine A milling machine shall be a power operated coldmilling machine equipped with automatic control devices to establish profile grades by referencing from either the existing pavement or from independent grade control .
spacing between the cutting teeth and be capable of producing a surface macrotexture ratio in accordance with ITM equal to or greater than .. b Power Saw Sawing equipment shall be capable of maintaining the specified alignment and depth of cut without damaging the pavement .
The straightedge has a mounted push bar to facilitate propelling the device along or across the pavement .
The milled pavement profile shall have a surface finish that does not vary longitudinally more than in .
The milled pavement profile shall have a surface finish that does not vary longitudinally more than in .
to accommodate the approach pavement .
The approach milling shall be completed to provide a smooth transition from the traveled way pavement to the termini of the approach .
The existing approach pavement shall be cut to provide a vertical face of in .
Milling shall not damage any pavement that is to remain in place .
The milled pavement shall have a surface finish that does not vary longitudinally more than in .
Minor amounts of asphalt pavement material bonded to a concrete base at joints or cracks may remain in place .
Minor amounts of asphalt pavement material bonded to a brick base may remain in place .
The existing pavement shall be cut to provide a nearly vertical face of in .
The existing pavement shall be milled at a rate of or as directed to achieve the specified cut where the pavement transition overlay lifts differ from cut depth .
Cutting shall not damage any pavement that is to remain in place . .
Any portion of the pavement that is damaged or removed outside the milling limits shall be replaced with no additional payment .
Recycled Materials Recycled materials may consist of reclaimed asphalt pavement RAP or reclaimed asphalt shingles RAS or a blend of both .
resulting from the cold milling or crushing of an existing HMA pavement .
Cleaning of equipment and small tools shall not be accomplished on the pavement or shoulder areas .
Milling of an existing pavement surface shall be in accordance with .
Rubblized concrete pavements shall be primed in accordance with .
Joints Longitudinal joints in the surface shall be at the lane lines of the pavement .
Excess joint adhesive shall not be allowed to pool on the top of the previously constructed pavement course or the pavement to be overlaid .
of pavement corrugations when specified in accordance with has been completed .
centered on the joint line and shall be extended when necessary to provide coverage beyond the edge of the pavement corrugation .
gal.sq yd shall be lightly broomed to reduce the effects of excess sealant on the pavement surface .
The sealant temperature at the time of application shall be at least F and shall not exceed F. The ambient air and pavement temperatures at the time of application shall be greater than F. Temporary pavement markings in accordance with .
shall be offset a sufficient distance from the longitudinal joint so as not to obstruct the installation of the pavement corrugations or the application of the liquid asphalt sealant .
The sealant shall be cured a minimum of five days prior to applying the permanent pavement traffic markings in accordance with .
diameter pavement sample .
Acceptance of the pavement for density MSG will be reported to the nearest .. Rounding will be in accordance with .a. . Pavement Corrugations Pavement corrugations shall be in accordance with . . Pavement Smoothness Pavement smoothness will be accepted by means of a profilograph a ft long straightedge or a ft long straightedge as described below .
At locations where the ft straightedge is used the pavement variations shall be corrected to in .
When the ft straightedge is used the pavement variations shall be corrected to in .
If grinding of an intermediate course is used for pavement smoothness corrections the grinding shall not precede the surface placement by more than calendar days if open to traffic. . Pay Factors a Dense Graded Mixture One Lot Pay factors PF are calculated for the air voids at Ndes VMA at Ndes and inplace density Gmm .
the Office of Materials Management will evaluate the pavement .
This adjustment will be applied to all QCQA HMA pay items within the pavement section .
to . . All pavement with a profile index PI .
Corrections for pavement smoothness shall be included in the cost of other pay items within this section .
Cleaning of equipment and tools shall not be accomplished on the pavement or shoulder areas .
A tack coat in accordance with shall be applied on the pavement surface prior to placing the mixture .
Joints Longitudinal joints in the surface shall be at the lane lines of the pavement .
shall be controlled by density determined from MSG of the plate samples and cores cut from the compacted pavement placed during a low temperature period .
diameter pavement sample .
Milled pavement corrugations will be measured in accordance with .. .
Milled pavement corrugations will be paid for in accordance with .. Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit Symbol HMA Transverse Rumble Strips LFT HMA for Temporary Pavement Type TON HMA Wedge and Level Type TON Mixture type .
No payment will be made for coring operations and related traffic control expenditures required in .. Corrections for pavement smoothness including removal and replacement of pavement shall be included in the cost of other pay items in this section .
Weather Limitations CMA pavements shall not be placed on a wet surface when the ambient temperature is below F or when other unsuitable conditions exist unless approved by the Engineer .
Preparation of Subgrade or Base Mixtures for CMA base may be placed on an earth subgrade on an existing pavement surface to be used as a base or on a previously prepared base or subbase as specified .
Surface Tolerances The smoothness requirements for CMA pavements shall be in accordance with .. .
Method of Measurement CMA pavement will be measured by the ton of the type and size specified in accordance with .b . .
Basis of Payment The accepted quantities of CMA pavement will be paid for at the contract unit price per ton of the type and size specified for the mixture .
Seal coat shall not be placed when the ambient or pavement temperature is below F. Seal coat shall not be applied to travel lanes or auxiliary lanes before May or after October but may be applied to shoulders within the above temperature range. . Equipment A distributor rotary power broom pneumatic tire roller and aggregate spreader in accordance with .
Sealing operations may not commence until the surface is approved. . All castings detector housings and snowplowable raised pavement markers shall be covered prior to applying the asphalt material to prevent coating with seal coat .
Sweeping Operation Excess cover aggregate shall be removed from the pavement surface by brooming no later than the morning after placement of the seal coat .
Description This work shall consist of preparing and treating an existing pavement or concrete surface with asphalt material in accordance with .. MATERIALS .
Description This work shall consist of sealing or filling longitudinal and transverse cracks and joints in existing asphalt pavement in accordance with .. Full lane width transverse cracks and longitudinal joints shall be routed and sealed .
The operation shall be coordinated such that routed materials do not encroach on pavement lanes carrying traffic and all routed materials are disposed of in accordance with .. Cracks and joints shall be sealed with hot poured joint sealant to within in .
All excess asphalt material shall be removed from the pavement .
All excess cover material shall be removed from the pavement within h when directed .
Application of asphalt materials shall be completed without covering existing pavement markings .
Method of Measurement Sealing and filling of cracks and joints in asphalt pavements will be measured by the ton of material used .
Basis of Payment Sealing and filling of cracks and joints in asphalt pavements will be paid for by the ton of material used for the type specified .
Extendable screeds shall be rigid heated and vibrating and be capable of maintaining the cross slope and line and grade of the pavement to produce uniform placement of the materials .
The roller shall be equipped with compaction tires minimum size by exerting a uniform average contact pressure from to psi uniformly over the pavement by adjusting ballast and tire inflation pressures .
The wheels on at least one axle shall be fully oscillating vertically and mounted as to prevent scuffing of the pavements during rolling or turning operations .
Aggregate Spreader A spreader shall be a selfpropelled pneumatic tired motorized unit with a front loading hopper and a transportation system for distributing the aggregates uniformly across the pavement .
The straightedge has a mounted push bar to facilitate propelling the device along or across the pavement .
Samples from each location shall be obtained from each sublot from the pavement in accordance with ITM .
Cleaning of equipment and small tools shall not be accomplished on the pavement or shoulder areas .
Preparation of Surfaces to be Overlaid Milling of an existing pavement surface shall be in accordance with .
Joints Longitudinal joints in the surface shall be at the lane lines of the pavement .
Excess joint adhesive shall not be allowed to pool on the top of the previously constructed pavement course or the pavement to be overlaid .
Density acceptance for all SMA mixtures shall be based on cores cut from the compacted pavement and analysis of pavement samples obtained in accordance with ITM .
diameter pavement sample .
The Contractors plan for refilling core holes shall be outlined in the QCP. . Pavement Corrugations Pavement corrugations shall be in accordance with . . Pavement Smoothness The pavement smoothness will be evaluated and determined in accordance with .. .
The adjustment for mixture properties and density are calculated as follows q . x L x U x PMAF where q quality assurance adjustment quantity L lot quantity U unit price for the material ton P total adjustment points The total quality assurance adjustments is to be calculated as follows Q Qs qm qd where Q total quality assurance adjustment quantity Qs quality assurance adjustment for smoothness as calculated in .c qm lot adjustments for mixtures qd lot adjustments for density If the total adjustment points for a lot are greater than the pavement will be evaluated by the Office of Materials Management .
Coring and refilling of the pavement holes shall be included in the cost of other pay items within this section .
Corrections for pavement smoothness shall be included in the cost of other pay items within this section .
except that raised pavement markers shall be removed .
Any existing durable pavement markings shall be removed in accordance with .
Cracks in the pavement in excess of in .
The pavement surface shall have tack coat applied in accordance with prior to placement of warranted microsurfacing . .
The microsurface shall be cured a minimum of five days prior to applying permanent pavement markings in accordance with . .
Conflict Resolution Team The scope of work for the conflict resolution team includes all issues concerning the warranted pavement relative to the quality control plan material selection warranted pavement evaluations distress indicators remedial action and remediation plans .
The team members will be identified in writing when needed and will be knowledgeable in the terms and conditions of this warranty and the methods used in the measurement and calculation of pavement distress .
Remedial work is performed as a result of pavement distress surveys performed by the Department .
The Contractor will not be responsible for damages to the pavement as a result of coring milling or other destructive procedures conducted by the Department .
Remedial work performed by the Department will not alter the requirements responsibilities or obligations of the warranty. . Pavement Distress Indicators Thresholds and Remedial Work The Department will use the following pavement distress indicators throughout the warranty period a Rutting transverse displacement of the microsurfacing .
The pavement threshold values for the pavement distress indicators will be evaluated for the entire length of the project for each lane .
The threshold values for the pavement distress indicators are listed below Distress Single Location Multiple Locations Delamination or Raveling sq yd sq ydmi Rut Depth in .
If remedial or elective work performed by the Contractor necessitates repair or replacement of pavement markings adjacent lanes or roadway shoulders the required work shall be the responsibility of the Contractor .
Warranty requirements for elective and remedial work will be limited to the life of the original contract warranty. . Department Maintenance The Department may perform routine maintenance operations during the warranty period including but not limited to plowing applying deicing chemicals repairs to safety appurtenances pavement markings mowing and sign maintenance .
The Department during the warranty period will perform no routine pavement surface maintenance activities . .
Description This work shall consist of applying asphalt emulsion to the pavement surface in accordance with .. MATERIALS .
Weather Limitations Fog seal operations shall not be conducted on a wet pavement when the ambient air or pavement temperature is below F or when other unsuitable conditions .
All castings detector housings and snowplowable raised pavement markers shall be covered to prevent coating with fog seal prior to application of the fog seal .
Asphalt material shall be applied in such a way as to ensure even and uniform coverage to the pavement surface. . Protection of Surface Fine aggregate or other approved blotting material shall be applied to pedestrian crosswalks driveways or other areas as directed by the Engineer .
Application of Pavement Markings The fog seal shall be cured a minimum of five days prior to applying permanent pavement markings in accordance with . .
The screed shall have the ability to crown the pavement at the center . .
except that raised pavement markers shall be removed. . Asphalt Emulsion The asphalt emulsion shall be applied at a temperature recommended by the emulsion supplier .
The asphalt emulsion shall be applied uniformly across the entire width of pavement to be overlaid .
Conflict Resolution Team The scope of work for the conflict resolution team includes all issues concerning the warranted pavement relative to the quality control plan material selection warranted pavement evaluations distress indicators remedial action and remediation plans .
The team members will be identified in writing when needed and will be knowledgeable in the terms and conditions of this warranty and the methods used in the measurement and calculation of pavement distress .
Remedial work is performed as a result of pavement distress surveys performed by the Department .
The Contractor will not be responsible for damages to the pavement as a result of coring milling or other destructive procedures conducted by the Department .
Remedial work performed by the Department will not alter the requirements responsibilities or obligations of the warranty. . Pavement Distress Indicators Thresholds and Remedial Action The Department will use the following pavement distress indicators throughout the warranty period .
d Skid Resistance friction number as measured by ASTM E and E . The pavement threshold values for the pavement distress indicators will be evaluated for the entire length of the project for each lane .
The threshold values for the pavement distress indicators are listed below Distress Single Location Multiple Locations DelaminationRaveling sq yd sq ydmi Rut Depth in .
If remedial or elective work performed by the Contractor necessitates repair or replacement of pavement markings adjacent lanes or roadway shoulders the required work shall be the responsibility of the Contractor .
Warranty requirements for all elective and remedial work will be limited to the life of the original contract warranty. . Department Maintenance The Department may perform routine maintenance operations during the warranty period including but not limited to plowing applying deicing chemicals repairs to safety appurtenances pavement markings mowing and sign maintenance .
The Department during the warranty period will perform no routine pavement surface maintenance activities .
Description This work shall consist of applying asphalt emulsion to the pavement surface in accordance with .. MATERIALS .
Weather Limitations Base sealing operations shall not be conducted on a wet pavement or when the ambient air or pavement temperature is below F. .
Application of Asphalt Material The base seal materials shall be applied to the pavement surface uniformly with a distributor at an application rate of . . gal.sq yd. . Protection of Surface The base seal materials shall cure a minimum of two hours after application before resuming paving operations . .
Description This work shall consist of QCQA portland cement concrete pavement PCCP placed on a prepared subgrade or subbase in accordance with .. . Quality Control The mixture for PCCP shall be produced by an approved plant in accordance with ITM transported and placed according to a Quality Control Plan QCP prepared and submitted by the Contractor in accordance with ITM for PCCP .
The Contractor shall be responsible for the protection of the existing joints from the intrusion of fresh concrete mortar and for any damage to existing pavement caused by the operation of mechanical equipment .
The inspection and all necessary repairs shall be completed prior to opening the pavement to nonconstruction traffic .
The Department may direct that the pavement profile be evaluated within h following placement .
When profile testing is consistently outside pavement surface tolerances the paving operation shall be discontinued until an amended QCP is submitted .
The grinding of the pavement to correct the profile shall be accomplished in either the longitudinal or the transverse direction .
At locations where the ft straightedge is used the pavement variations shall be corrected to in .
At locations where the ft straightedge is used the pavement variations shall be corrected to in .
of the edge of pavement within in .
The width of adjudicated PCCP shall be the width of pavement lane in which the deficiency occurs .
If the Contractor is not required to remove the pavement or take other corrective actions quality assurance adjustments of the lot will be assessed as determined by the Office of Materials Management .
c Thickness When test results for pavement thickness do not meet the specified thickness a pay factor will be assessed as follows SUBLOT PAY FACTORS FOR THICKNESS Average core depth ACD Design depth DD ACD minus DD Pay Factor .
d Smoothness When the pavement smoothness is tested with a profilograph pavement will be based on a zero blanking band on the final profile index .
The quality assurance adjustment for each section will include the total area of each pavement lane measured by the profilograph for .
to . . All pavements with a Profile Index PI .
Two cores shall be taken in each sublot for the full depth of pavement and shall be in .
diameter full depth core shall be taken from the pavement for each sublot appealed .
The area of QCQAPCCP will be the planned width of the pavement multiplied by the length of the pavement or as directed in writing .
The width of the pavement will be as shown on the typical cross section of the plans .
The length of the pavement will be measured parallel to the surface of the pavement along the centerline of the roadway or ramp excluding paving exceptions as shown on the plans .
Milled pavement corrugations will be measured in accordance with .. .
Adjustments to the contract payment with respect to flexural strength thickness air content range and smoothness will be included in a quality assurance adjustment pay item in accordance with Milled pavement corrugations will be paid for in accordance with .. Payment for pavement thickness determinations will be made at the contract lump sum price for coring PCCP .
The cost of corrections for pavement smoothness and retexturing shall be included in the cost of QCQAPCCP .
The cost of coring and refilling of the pavement holes for appeals shall be included in the cost of QCQAPCCP .
Description This work shall consist of portland cement concrete pavement PCCP placed on a prepared subgrade or subbase in accordance with .. MATERIALS .
The Contractor shall be responsible for the protection of the existing joints from the intrusion of fresh concrete mortar and for all damage to existing pavement caused by the operation of mechanical equipment .
The inspection and all necessary repairs shall be completed prior to opening the pavement to nonconstruction traffic .
If a core measurement reveals that the pavement is more than in .
These additional cores shall be on a line which passes through the original core and parallel to the centerline of the pavement .
The width of adjudicated PCCP shall be the width of pavement lane in which the deficiency occurs .
Verification of the required pavement depth on formed drives shall be checked in the presence of the Engineer prior to pouring by making stringline measurements every ft across the width of the drive .
The area of PCCP will be the planned width of the pavement multiplied by the length of the pavement or as directed in writing .
The width of the pavement will be as shown on the typical cross section of the plans .
The length of the pavement will be measured parallel to the surface of the pavement along the centerline of the roadway or ramp excluding paving exceptions as shown on the plans .
Milled pavement corrugations will be measured in accordance with .. .
Milled pavement corrugations will be paid for in accordance with .. Payment will be made for portland cement content of more than lbscu yd when ordered in writing .
Payment for pavement thickness determinations will be made at the contract lump sum price for coring PCCP in accordance with .. A change order in accordance with .
The cost of corrections for pavement smoothness and retexturing shall be included in the cost of PCCP .
The cost of coring and refilling of the pavement holes for appeals shall be included in the cost of PCCP .
Description This work shall consist of the construction of joints in PCC pavements placing dowel bar assemblies and joint sealing operations in accordance with .. MATERIALS .
Transverse joints shall be at right angles to the centerline and be continuous for the full width of the pavement .
a Type D Contraction Joint Type D contraction joints shall be created by sawing slots in the pavement unless alternative methods are approved .
All joints shall be saw cut through the edges of the pavement to the required depth before uncontrolled shrinkage cracking takes place .
The second saw cut shall be made after the concrete has sufficiently cured but before opening the pavement to nonconstruction traffic .
Joint sealing shall be in accordance with .. . b Longitudinal Joint Longitudinal joints shall be created by sawing slots in the pavement unless alternative methods are approved .
The joint filler shall be shaped to the subgrade parallel to the surface and be full width of the pavement .
g Retrofitted Tie Bars Retrofitted tie bars shall be secured at right angles to the pavement with a chemical anchor system in accordance with the manufacturers recommendation .
from the edges of the pavement and spaced at ft on center across the joint. . Sealing Cracks and Joints Cracks and joints in the PCCP shall be cleaned and sealed in accordance with the sealant manufacturers recommendations .
The grooving pattern shall be repeated across the pavement .
When forms are used the edges of the pavement shall be cured immediately upon removal of the forms .
The covers shall be weighted down on each edge and shall be as wide as the full width of the pavement being cured .
After the cure period the straw shall be removed from the pavement and disposed of properly .
Weather Limitations Placement of PCCP patches in continuous reinforced concrete pavement shall be after p.m. when the next days forecasted ambient temperature is F or greater unless otherwise directed .
The PCCP patch shall be inspected in accordance with .. For patches which are not to be overlaid and have a length greater than ft pavement smoothness will be in accordance with .
The cost of corrections for pavement smoothness and retexturing shall be included in the cost of PCCP patching .
The operation shall be coordinated such that routed materials do not encroach on pavement lanes carrying traffic and all routed materials are disposed of in accordance with ..
Application of hot poured joint sealant shall be completed without covering existing pavement markings .
All excess cover material shall be removed from the pavement within h when directed .
Application of asphalt material shall be completed without covering existing pavement markings .
Application of asphalt materials shall be completed without covering existing pavement markings .
Mixtures will be accepted in accordance with .. . Profiling Profiling consists of the diamond grinding of the pavement .
Grinding shall be completed in a longitudinal direction and shall begin and end at lines normal to the pavement centerline in any ground section .
The operation shall be coordinated such that the slurry or residue materials are continuously removed from the pavement .
The slurry shall not encroach into adjacent pavement lanes carrying traffic or flow into gutters or other drainage facilities and shall be immediately and directly deposited into a tanker truck and removed from the jobsite .
The PCC within the slot and the burrs and bumps remaining in the base of the slots after cutting shall be removed with hand or mechanical chipping hammers which shall not exceed a nominal lb in weight and shall be operated at a maximum angle of from the pavement surface .
Dowel bars shall be parallel to the pavement surface .
The cost of all grinding diamond cutting heads and cleaning of the pavement shall be included in the cost of the pay item for profiling .
The bodies shall be examined daily for accumulations of hardened concrete mortar or foreign matter. . Placement Equipment a Slipform The paver shall spread consolidate and shape the freshly placed concrete in one complete pass to provide a dense and homogeneous pavement .
Forms shall have a minimum depth equal to the prescribed edge thickness of the concrete pavement without a horizontal joint and a minimum base width equal to the depth of the forms .
less than the normal width of the pavement and have an adjustable crown section .
The saw shall be capable of maintaining the specified alignment and depth of cut without damaging the PCCP. . Miscellaneous Equipment a Hand Tools Long handled floats used to smooth and fill in open texture areas in the pavement shall have blades no less than ft in length and in .
The handle shall be ft longer than of the width of the pavement being placed .
The pavement surface after cutting shall have a uniform texture but shall not be smooth or polished .
The straightedge has a mounted push bar to facilitate propelling the device along or across the pavement .
Where concrete pavement or concrete shoulder abuts the concrete barrier in .
f Reflectorization All concrete barrier shall be reflectorized with barrier delineators spaced a minimum of ft apart and centered ft above the surface of adjacent pavement or shoulder .
The color of the reflectors shall match the color of the adjacent pavement traffic markings. . Blank .
The bottom edge of curb ramps and the top of curb shall be flush with the edge of the adjacent pavement or the gutter line .
Where a portland cement concrete pavement is to be constructed contiguous to a curbing joints shall be constructed in the curbing directly in line with pavement expansion joints .
The joint in the curbing shall be the same width as the pavement joint and shall be filled with an expansion joint filler of the nominal thickness as the pavement joint .
Where integral curb and gutter is specified that portion of the curb below the upper surface elevation of the adjoining pavement shall be constructed by extending the pavement to the outer vertical plane of the curb at the time the pavement is placed .
The concrete used in this extension shall be the same composition as that of the pavement .
As an option an integral curb and gutter may be placed at the same time as the PCCP pavement by the slip form method .
The reinforcing tie bars or stirrups between the pavement and the curb shall be omitted .
Curbing not constructed integral with adjacent pavement shall be constructed with intermediate joints located at ft intervals .
Concrete Center Curbing The subgrade shall be prepared the same as for the adjoining pavement .
If subbase is provided for the adjoining pavement it shall be carried through for the full width of the curb and at the same thickness as that for the pavement .
When curbing is to be constructed on a cured or aged portland cement concrete base asphalt pavement or asphalt treated base the bed shall be thoroughly swept and cleaned with compressed air .
Description a All Corrugations This work shall consist of placing corrugations in the pavement in accordance with .. Corrugations shall not be constructed within the limits of reinforced concrete bridge approaches or on bridge decks .
The operation shall be coordinated such that milled materials do not encroach on pavement lanes carrying traffic and all milled materials are disposed of in accordance with ..
The corrugations shall be constructed by cutting smooth strips in existing or newly constructed pavement .
Method of Measurement HMA and PCCP pavement corrugations will be measured by the linear foot measured parallel to the center line of the roadway .
Basis of Payment HMA and PCCP pavement corrugations will be paid for at the contact unit price per linear foot when specified. . Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit Symbol Milled HMA Corrugations LFT Milled PCCP Corrugations LFT SECTION PAVED SIDE DITCH OR CONCRETE GUTTER .
General Requirements Unless otherwise designated shoulder drains shall be installed on both sides of the pavement by trenching from the edges of the pavement through the shoulders and backfilling with aggregate at low points in the grade and at other locations when so directed .
Existing Approaches and Crossovers If an existing surface is to be left in place as an approach pavement or crossover the surface shall be patched in accordance with .
The quantities of materials placed on the ft wedge on approaches when placed with the mainline pavement shall be included in the mainline HMA items and paid for in accordance with .
The quantities when placed separately from the mainline pavement shall be included in the quantities for HMA for approaches and paid for in accordance with ..
Description This work shall consist of drilling holes and furnishing and pumping an asphalt material under cement concrete pavement in accordance with .. MATERIALS .
Weather Limitations Undersealing shall not be performed when pavement surface temperatures are below F or when the subgrade or subbase is frozen .
Shoulders All holes low areas or displaced areas in the shoulders immediately adjacent to the pavement edge shall be filled with loam clay or other approved material and compacted to the elevation of the pavement .
Such areas including all other shoulder areas immediately adjacent to the pavement edge shall be compacted with a roller or another approved method. . Drilled Holes Where the existing pavement has transverse joints holes not to exceed in .
in diameter shall be drilled on the centerlines of the pavement lane to be treated .
If the existing pavement does not have transverse joints holes not to exceed in .
in diameter shall unless otherwise specified be located on the centerline of the pavement lane to be treated and be spaced as directed .
An approved method shall be used to prevent the drill from entering the subgrade after penetrating the pavement .
Just prior to pumping operations the surface of the pavement around each hole for an area of at least the width of the lane being treated shall be thoroughly .
sprinkled with water to prevent the undersealing material from adhering to the pavement surface. . Pumping All storage tanks pipes retorts booster tanks and distributors used for storing or handling the materials shall be kept clean and in good operating condition at all times so there is no contamination of the materials .
a Asphalt Material The asphalt shall be pumped through the drilled holes and under the pavement with an approved type of selfpropelled pressure distributor the pressure to be as directed .
The asphalt shall not be heated above F at any time and when pumped under the pavement the temperature shall be no less than F. All material heated beyond F shall be rejected .
larger than the diameter of the drilled hole shall be driven flush with the surface of the pavement .
All material extruded during the pumping operations shall be immediately cleaned from the pavement surface and removed from the limits of the contract within a period of h. .
If the header is adjacent to cement concrete base or pavement the header concrete shall be the same composition as that of the base or pavement header constructed monolithic with the base or pavement .
If the adjacent base or pavement is thickened that portion forming the thickening shall be considered as part of the header .
If the header is adjacent to asphalt pavement the concrete shall be class A in accordance with using class AP coarse aggregate .
Markers shall be set plumb to the depth required on the plans and with the letters facing the pavement .
Setting Monuments If the location of a monument falls within the limits of a cement concrete pavement a steel pin the details of which are shown on the plans shall be set perpendicular to and flush with the top of the finished pavement .
Other monuments shall be of the type shown on the plans depending on the type or surface of the pavement in which they are to be placed or if they are to be placed outside of pavement .
Existing monuments which are not required to be disturbed or reestablished but which are disturbed during construction operations shall be reestablished. . ReEstablished Monuments It may be necessary to reestablish existing monuments in pavements or bases which are disturbed unavoidably or covered by operations embraced in the contract .
If the existing monument is or contains a brass copper or steel pin the pin shall be extended to the surface of the new pavement by attaching a pin of the same metal with at least a in .
The traffic maintenance plan shall include a type of barrier system which shall protect against blasting of vehicles or pedestrians eliminate abrasive materials and debris from falling onto the traveled portion of the pavement and prevent the spreading of abrasive materials and debris in the area which may create a traffic hazard .
The twine shall be placed parallel to and also at with the pavement edge in both directions .
The strand parallel to the pavement shall cross the diagonal strands at their intersections to form equilateral triangles ft on a side . .
Type D contraction joints in the moment slab shall match the locations of the joints in the abutting PCC pavement .
If the abutting pavement is HMA the D contraction joints shall be spaced at ft .
HMA pavement for temporary approaches shall be in accordance with .
Temporary pavement markings in accordance with .
Temporary bituminous HMA pavement when no longer required for maintenance of traffic shall be removed and shall be disposed of in accordance with .. .
HMA mixtures for temporary pavement will be measured by the ton .
Temporary pavement markings will be measured in accordance with .. Seeding and sodding will be measured in accordance with ..
The removal and disposal of temporary HMA pavement will not be measured for payment . .
HMA mixtures for temporary pavement will be paid for as the type of mixture specified in accordance with .
Temporary pavement markings will be paid for in accordance with .. Seeding and sodding will be paid for in accordance with .. .
Spacing Temporary Bridge Approaches LFT Temporary Bridge LS Temporary Bridge and Approaches LS Temporary Pipe and Approaches LS Temporary Pipe LS The cost of excavation embankment backfill removal and disposal of temporary HMA pavement delineators and temporary fence shall be included in the cost of the pay items .
a Type Pipe Type pipe shall be used for culverts under mainline pavement and public road approaches and shall be in accordance with the following Clay Pipe Extra Strength .
and the operations involved in its relaying shall be in accordance with similar operations contained herein for laying new pipe. . Pavement Replacement Where a structure is to be placed under an existing pavement the pavement removal and replacement shall be as shown on the plans .
The pavement replacement areas in asphalt pavements shall be filled with HMA for Structure Installation of the mixture type specified in the pay item in accordance with except OG mixtures shall be in accordance with .. A MAF in accordance with .
The pavement replacement areas in Portland Cement Concrete pavements shall be filled with PCCP in accordance with except utilization of the Department provided spreadsheet is not required for the CMDS .
Structure backfill will be measured in accordance with .. Flowable backfill will be measured in accordance with .. Pavement replacement and subbase necessary due to structure placement under an existing pavement will be measured to the neat lines shown on the plans .
Pavement replacement necessary due to structure installation under an existing pavement will be paid for at the contract unit price per ton of HMA for structure installation of the type specified and per square yard for PCCP for structure installation .
The cost of sawing of pavement excavation above the trench bottom elevation shown on plans backfilling with material other than structure backfill or flowable backfill dewatering shoring timber mats class A concrete required for collar construction or sealing existing pipe joint materials replacing pipe which is damaged during installation or relaying operations sanitary sewer testing required by the local utility and all other necessary incidentals shall be included in the cost of the pay items in this section .
The cost of removal of pavement existing pipe end sections anchors or headwalls concrete collars encasements and the disposal of surplus materials shall be included in the cost of the pay items .
Description This work shall consist of installing pipes underground using construction techniques that eliminate open cutting of the pavement or of the ground in accordance with ..
Pavement or ground surface heave or settlement resulting in damage to pavement existing utilities or structures above the installation will not be allowed .
Underdrain patching for structure installation will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot of underdrain patching and shall be equal to the length of the theoretical pavement replacement as shown on the plans .
If the tile is intercepted by a side ditch prior to crossing proposed pavement it shall be replaced between the rightofway line and the ditch with nonperforated drain tile and a foot long terminal pipe section of drain tile with a rodent screen .
pavement it shall be replaced between the rightofway line and the ditch with pipe in accordance with .a with a rodent screen .
Castings shall be set to the finished pavement elevation so that subsequent adjustments are not necessary .
If a manhole is constructed within the pavement area or within an area that may be paved at some future date the height of the casting used shall be based on the depth of pavement constructed or proposed and a bearing plate for such casting will also be required .
If a manhole is constructed outside the proposed pavement area and outside an area that may be paved at some future date the height of the casting used shall be at least in .
If the completed structure is partially or completely under or at its nearest point is within ft of pavement sidewalks curbs gutters or similar miscellaneous existing or proposed structures the excavated space not occupied by the newly completed structure shall be filled to the required subgrade elevation with material in accordance with .. Placement of this material shall be in accordance with ..
The cost of excavation backfill reinforcing bars structure backfill concrete collar required for pipe connection to structures removal disposal and replacement of pavement or surface material casting removal installation of concrete cap HMA wedge damage repair to pavement and shoulders and necessary incidentals shall be included in the cost of the pay items . .
Subsurface drainage for the pavement section shall be underdrains for MSE walls and shall be as shown on the plans .
Description This work shall consist of furnishing placing and maintaining signs barricades temporary pavement markings and other traffic control devices at construction and maintenance operations in accordance with .. MATERIALS .
The basis for use for traffic paint durable pavement marking materials temporary marking tape type II glass beads barrels barricades construction warning lights steel posts temporary panel signs traffic signs except nonground mounted signs tubular markers and wood sign post used for temporary traffic control will be visual inspection .
All fixed signs shall remain in place until all temporary pavement markings have been removed .
Where twoway traffic is to be maintained on a oneway pavement and where the existing shoulders on such roadway are earth aggregate No .
All type III barricades shall be skid mounted within pavement shoulder or sidewalk areas and on ground mounted posts in all other areas .
Chemical anchor systems with removable bolts or mechanical anchors may be used to anchor type barriers to bridge decks concrete pavement and concrete shoulders .
All damage to the pavement shall be repaired as directed .
The holes remaining in the pavement shall be filled with appropriate material as directed .
The pavement structure for the temporary crossover shall be as shown on the plans .
Traffic control devices including temporary pavement markings shall be as shown on the plans .
Temporary Pavement Marking Temporary pavement markings shall be new materials placed in accordance with .
Where temporary pavement markings are to be placed on a pavement which has existing markings the existing markings which conflict with the temporary markings shall be removed in accordance with ..
When working under traffic the temporary pavement markings shall be placed before opening the lane to traffic .
Temporary pavement markings which are to be in service from December through the following March shall be painted markings .
Such markings shall be placed in the standard pavement marking pattern and applied prior to the suspension of the work or within seven work days after the Contractor is directed to place the markings .
The prismatic reflectors shall be removed from snowplowable raised pavement markers which conflict with the temporary traffic marking pattern .
Snowplowable raised pavement marker castings damaged by the removal of the reflector shall be replaced in accordance with .. New prismatic reflectors shall be mounted on existing castings in accordance with .
Removal of temporary pavement markings shall be in accordance with .. a Temporary Pavement Marking Methods Pavement markings shall be installed in accordance with .
Temporary Pavement Marking Tape Temporary pavement marking tape shall be applied in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
All temporary pavement marking tape shall be removed prior to placing the next pavement course prior to placing an overlay prior to recycling the pavement or prior to placing the final pavement markings except as otherwise described herein .
Type I tape shall be removed without the use of solvents grinding abrasive blasting or other methods which may damage the pavement .
Type II tape placed on HMA pavement shall be removed prior to placing the next pavement course .
All damage to the pavement shall be repaired . .
Temporary Raised Pavement Marker The temporary raised pavement marker shall be grade or grade .
When used it shall be a supplement to other temporary pavement markings .
The color of the reflector shall be in accordance with the other temporary pavement marking .
The color of the shell of the grade marker shall be in accordance with the color of the other temporary pavement marking . .
Temporary raised pavement markers shall be removed before the next layer of pavement is placed and before the final pavement markings are applied .
All damage to the pavement shall be repaired . .
b Quality Assurance Unit A quality assurance unit for longitudinal line shall be lft on marked pavement in any combination or pattern or portion thereof .
A minimum clearance of ft from pavement to the bottom of the PCMS shall be provided .
Although entering into the contract implies permission and authority to install conduit under pavement sidewalks and alleys all damage to underground utilities or interruption of such service shall be the responsibility of the Contractor .
Method of Measurement Construction signs detour route marker assemblies detour route marker assembliesmultiple routes temporary worksite speed limit sign assemblies road closure sign assemblies portable changeable message signs Aries Field Processor for PCMS and temporary raised pavement markers will be measured by the number of units installed maintained and removed .
Removal and subsequent replacement of permanent pavement markings and snowplowable raised pavement markers for temporary crossovers will be measured in accordance with ..
Temporary pavement message markings will be measured by the number of each type placed .
Longitudinal and transverse temporary pavement markings will be measured by the linear foot of material actually placed .
Removal when necessary of any type of nonremovable temporary pavement markings will be measured in accordance with ..
Removal of removable temporary pavement markings will not be measured for payment .
Where temporary pavement markings are to be placed on a pavement which has existing markings removal of existing markings which conflict with the temporary markings will be measured in accordance with ..
The removal and replacement of prismatic reflectors on existing snowplowable raised pavement markers will be measured in accordance with .. Compacted aggregate No .
Basis of Payment The accepted quantities of construction signs detour route marker assemblies detour route marker assembliesmultiple routes temporary worksite speed limit sign assemblies road closure sign assemblies permanent road closure sign assemblies and temporary raised pavement markers will be paid for at the contract unit price per each .
The accepted quantities of HMA for temporary crossovers will be paid for as HMA for temporary pavement at the contract unit price per ton in accordance with ..
Removal and subsequent replacement of permanent pavement markings and snowplowable raised pavement markers for temporary crossovers will be paid for in accordance with ..
Temporary pavement message markings placed will be paid for at the contract unit price per each for the message specified .
Longitudinal and transverse temporary pavement markings and temporary buzz strips will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot of material complete in place .
Removal when necessary of nonremovable temporary pavement lines and message markings will be paid for in accordance with ..
The cost of removal of removable temporary pavement markings shall be included in the cost of the pay item for placement of the markings .
Where temporary pavement markings are to be placed on a pavement which has existing markings removal of the existing markings which conflict with the temporary markings will be paid for in accordance with ..
The removal and replacement of reflectors on existing snowplowable raised pavement markers will be paid for in accordance with ..
Damage done to pavement by removal of temporary traffic barriers and anchors shall be repaired with no additional payment .
The cost of furnishing installing maintaining and subsequent removal of temporary raised pavement marker shall be included in the cost of temporary raised pavement marker .
The cost of placement maintenance and replacement of temporary pavement markings shall be included in the cost of the markings .
The cost of cleaning existing pavement and removal of buzz strips shall be included in the cost of buzz strips .
Damage to the pavement caused by removal of buzz strips and temporary pavement markings shall be repaired as directed with no additional payment .
No payment will be made for temporary pavement markings which are in the standard pavement marking pattern and which are to be in service from December through the following March due to the Contractors failure to complete the work as scheduled .
The cost of the second application of paint and beads for painted temporary markings shall be included in the cost of the first application of painted temporary pavement markings . .
If the Contractor elects to use more than two simultaneous operations during the installation of snowplowable pavement markers or reflectors the cost of required traffic protection devices for additional operations shall be included in the cost of maintaining traffic .
Replacement of snowplowable raised pavement marker castings damaged due to removing reflectors will not be paid for . .
It shall be applied to the back of the sign on the lower corner closest to the nearest edge of pavement and shall not be covered by the signs supports .
If the noload camber is not shown on the plans the Contractor shall furnish this information on the working drawings. . Excavation and Backfill The finished pavement or shoulder section shall not be damaged during excavation .
Although entering into the contract implies permission and authority to cut into and push under pavement sidewalks and alleys any damage to underground utilities or interruption of such service shall be the responsibility of the Contractor .
Signal heads not mounted over a paved roadway on the top or side of a pole shall not be less than ft or more than ft above the sidewalk or if none above the pavement grade at the center of the roadway .
Flasher signal faces that supplement signs shall be mounted with the bottom of the housing at not less than ft or more than ft above the edge of pavement .
All excess joint sealant on the pavement surfaces shall be promptly removed .
Conduit shall be placed under existing pavement by approved jacking or drilling methods .
If specified cuts in pavement areas shall be no greater than in .
All cuts in the pavement and sidewalk areas shall be sawed .
Jacking and drilling pits shall be kept at least ft clear of the edge of any type of pavement or paved shoulder .
Excessive use of water that may cause undermining of the pavement .
A change order may be authorized if the conduit runs can be made on the opposite side of the street to that shown on the plans in order to avoid obstruction and traffic inconvenience or to avoid unnecessary tearing up of existing pavement. . PVC HDPE and Fiberglass Conduit The method of installing PVC HDPE and rigid fiberglass conduit underground shall be the same as for steel conduit where applicable except trenches for the conduit in areas with class X material as described in .
Final CleanUp When the installation is completed all disturbed portions of sidewalk pavement shoulders driveways and sod shall be cleaned and any excess excavation or other materials shall be disposed .
All cutting in the sidewalk and pavement areas shall be done with a saw .
Unless otherwise directed cuts in pavement areas shall be no greater than in .
Saw cut for roadway loop detector and sealant will be measured by the linear foot for the full depth of slot cut in the pavement as shown on the plans or as directed . .
The cost of the slot cut on the pavement backer rod loop sealant and all testing in accordance with .
Conduit installed under pavement shall extend a minimum of ft beyond the edge of the paved surface or improved shoulder .
b Underground Through Conduit The underground distribution circuit shall be protected by galvanized steel conduit when installed under pavement in road shoulders or elsewhere as shown on the plans or as directed. . Cableduct Cableduct shall be pulled through the entire length of galvanized steel conduit if at all possible .
Heavy weave fiberglass reinforced polymer concrete service boxes will be allowed as an acceptable substitute for a street and alley handhole providing that they can be placed at a location which meets both of the following conditions a there is no evidence of vehicles traveling over the area where the handhole is to be located and b it is located a minimum of ft from the edge of pavement unless it is protected by guardrail unmountable curb a structure or an untraversable ditch .
The pattern of light delivered to the pavement by roadway and high mast luminaires will be inspected at night .
Description This work shall consist of furnishing and installing or removing pavement traffic markings and snowplowable raised pavement markers in accordance with the MUTCD these specifications and as shown on the plans .
General Requirements Permanent pavement markings shall be placed on the surface course in a standard pavement marking pattern .
The pavement shall be cleaned of all dirt oil grease excess sealing material excess pavement marking material and all other foreign material prior to applying new pavement traffic markings .
New paint pavement markings may be placed over sound existing markings of the same color .
Removal of pavement marking material shall be in accordance with ..
The pavement surface shall be dry prior to applying pavement traffic markings .
Control points required as a guide for pavement traffic markings shall be spotted with paint for the full length of the road to be marked .
Control points along tangent sections shall be spaced at a maximum interval of ft. Control points along curve sections shall be spaced so as to ensure the accurate location of the pavement traffic markings .
The location of control points shall be approved prior to the pavement traffic marking application. . Longitudinal Markings All longitudinal lines shall be clearly and sharply delineated straight and true on tangent and form a smooth curve where required .
to the right of longitudinal pavement joints or divisions between traffic lanes .
c Edge Lines Edge lines shall be used to outline and separate the edge of pavement from the shoulder .
in width and shall be placed such that the edge of the marking nearest the edge of the pavement shall be offset in .
from the edge of the pavement except as otherwise directed .
b Pavement Message Markings Pavement message markings shall be used as specified or directed for railroad crossing approaches intersection approaches crosswalk approaches ADA accessible parking space symbols and other messages applied to the pavement with pavement marking material .
The pavement markings shall have a minimum resistance to wear of in accordance with ASTM D . . Retroreflectivity .
Contracts with lft or more of longitudinal paint line or lft or more for each type of longitudinal durable marking line applied shall have retroreflectivity measured except markings placed on seal coat pavements placed in accordance with .
Application Traffic paint shall be applied only when the ambient air and pavement temperature is F or higher and will remain F or higher for h after application .
Only standard or modified standard beads shall be used for paint markings. . Equipment Traffic paint shall be applied with a spray type machine capable of applying the traffic paint under pressure through a nozzle directly onto the pavement .
The truck mounted machine shall be equipped with the following a. air blast device for cleaning the pavement ahead of the application b. guide pointer to keep the machine on an accurate line c. spray guns which can be operated individually or simultaneously d. agitator or recirculation system as appropriate e. control device to maintain uniform flow and application f. capability of heating the material to application temperatures g. automatic device which will provide a line of the required pattern and h. automatic bead dispenser which is synchronized with the marking application. . A hand propelled machine may be used to apply markings .
The alignment of all restriped pavement markings shall be placed within in .
b Durable Pavement Marking Material Durable pavement marking material consists of thermoplastic preformed plastic or multicomponent markings .
Durable pavement marking materials used for center lines lane lines or edge lines shall be installed within a groove in the pavement unless otherwise shown on the plans .
Durable pavement marking materials used for barrier lines pavement message and transverse markings shall be surface applied unless otherwise indicated on the plans. . Grooving for Durable Pavement Markings a .
Application The pavement shall be grooved prior to the placement of longitudinal durable pavement markings excluding bridge decks and approach slabs .
The groove or recess shall be installed in a single pass using dry cut equipment that utilizes diamond cutting blades and that is approved by the pavement marking manufacturer .
If there are no markings on the pavement a guide line shall be placed using paint without glass beads as a template for the grooving operation .
wider than the pavement marking to be placed .
The surface shall be clean and dry prior to pavement marking installation .
Application Thermoplastic marking shall be applied in molten form by conventional extrusion when the pavement and ambient air temperatures are a minimum of F and rising or by ribbon type extrusion or spray when the pavement and ambient air temperatures are F and rising .
A truckmounted machine shall be equipped with the following an air blast device for cleaning the pavement ahead of the marking operation a guide pointer to keep the machine on an accurate line at least two spray guns which can be operated individually or simultaneously agitators a control device to maintain uniform flow and application an automatic device which will provide a broken line of the required length and an automatic bead dispenser which is synchronized with the marking application .
An open flame shall not come into direct contact with the pavement. . c. Performance Requirements When the initial average retroreflectivity measurement is below the required minimum the segment of line shall be removed and replaced with no additional payment .
A primer is required if the ambient air temperature is below F. The pavement surface shall be primed with a binder material in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
Application This material shall be applied only when the pavement and ambient air temperatures are F and rising .
Marking Protection and Maintenance of Traffic Protection of the traveling public of the pavement marking crews and of the pavement markings shall be provided during the marking operation through the use of proper equipment traffic control devices safety devices and proper procedures .
This front escort vehicle shall be equipped with a forward facing paint crew sign a rear facing slow moving vehicle emblem and a red flag mounted at least ft above the pavement. . e Marking Application Vehicles Marking application vehicles such as edgeliner or centerliner trucks shall have a rear facing type A or type C flashing arrow sign an amber flashing warning light mounted near the center of the truck bed and an amber strobe light mounted on each rear corner of the truck bed .
The amber flashing warning light and the amber strobe lights shall be mounted on retractable supports and shall be operated at a height of ft above the pavement unless otherwise directed .
The supply truck may be used as a rear escort vehicle providing it is empty and is equipped with the required traffic control devices. . Warranty for Durable Pavement Marking Material Durable pavement marking material shall be warranted against failure resulting from material defects or method of application or the result of snowplowing and deicing activities .
The material shall be warranted to retain its color adherence to the pavement and shall be free of other obvious defects or failures .
Grooved durable pavement markings shall also be warranted to retain retroreflectivity as specified below .
All pavement traffic markings which have failed to meet the warranted conditions shall be replaced with no additional payment .
but not prior to November of the calendar year in which the last pavement markings were installed .
If more than of a unit or of the total of any one intersection or set of transverse markings fails the failed portion shall be replaced. . All pavement markings required to be replaced under the terms of this warranty shall be replaced within days of the notification of failure .
but not prior to November of the calendar year in which the last pavement markings were installed .
All pavement markings required to be replaced under the terms of this warranty shall be replaced within days of the notification of failure . .
Removal of pavement markings shall be to the fullest extent possible without materially damaging the pavement surface .
Grinding will only be allowed under the following conditions a when removing durable pavement markings or b when removing nondurable markings where another course of material is to be placed on the existing course .
Painting over existing pavement markings to obliterate them will not be allowed .
When a blast method is used to remove pavement markings the residue including sand dust and marking material shall be vacuumed concurrently with the blasting operation or removed by other approved methods .
Accumulation of sand dust or other residual material which might interfere with drainage or constitute a traffic hazard will not be allowed. . All damage to the pavement caused by pavement marking removal shall be repaired by approved methods with no additional payment. . Snowplowable Raised Pavement Markers Snowplowable raised pavement markers shall be used as supplemental delineation at the locations shown on the plans or as directed .
a Surface Preparation The pavement or bridge deck surface shall be cleaned of dirt dust oil grease moisture curing compound and loose or unsound layers of all materials which would interfere with the proper bonding of the marker to the pavement or bridge deck .
The pavement surface temperature and the ambient air temperature shall be at least F. The pavement surface shall be dry at the time of marker installation .
The slot shall be filled with sufficient adhesive to provide a water tight seal between the marker base and the pavement and to fill all voids between the marker base and the surfaces of the slot .
The marker shall be placed in the slot so that the tips of the snowplow deflecting surfaces are below the pavement surface .
If the pavement surface is newly placed HMA the pavement shall be allowed to cure for two days prior to installing the markers .
Installation of markers on new concrete pavement or bridge decks or on newly overlaid bridge decks shall not be done until after the pavement or bridge deck is ready to be opened to traffic as specified elsewhere herein . .
If the pavement surface or bridge deck surface is to be removed the markers shall be removed prior to any surface removal operation .
The area of the pavement or bridge deck disturbed by the marker removal shall not exceed in .
The marker removal operation shall stop if it is determined that excessive damage is occurring to the pavement or bridge deck .
Concrete pavement which is to be overlaid as part of the contract and HMA pavement shall be patched with HMA intermediate materials .
Concrete pavement which is not to be overlaid as part of the contract and concrete bridge decks shall be patched with concrete patching material from the Departments approved list for Rapid Setting Patch Materials .
Grooving for pavement markings will be measured as the total distance of grooving for each pavement marking line in linear feet .
A railroad crossing pavement message marking shall include the two Rs the X and the three stop lines per traffic lane .
Railroad crossing pavement message markings will be measured by the total number of each marking place .
Lane indication arrow pavement message markings will be measured by the number of lane indication arrowheads placed .
Removal of pavement message markings will be measured in square yards using areas shown in the following table .
The material will not be considered when measuring such markings for pavement .
SYS Snowplowable raised pavement markers will be measured by the number placed or removed .
No measurement will be made of the adhesive or the hole patching material used in the placement or removal of snowplowable raised pavement markers . .
Grooving for pavement markings will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot .
Snowplowable raised pavement markers furnished and installed or removed will be paid for at the contract unit price per each .
Adjustments to the contract payment with respect to retroreflectivity of performance based pavement markings will be included in a quality adjustment in accordance with The Engineer may waive retroreflectivity testing due to weather limitations .
Beads binder material for thermoplastic and preformed plastic adhesive for snowplowable markers patching material for snowplowable marker removal guide lines for grooving operations pavement cleaning and surface preparation and all necessary incidentals shall be included in the cost of the pay items .
PCC sealerhealers shall be two part systems capable of sealing and healing cracks in PC pavement. . PCC sealerhealers shall be capable of restoring the original integrity of a PCC beam broken in flexure .
Cutback asphalts may also contain an additive as an aid in uniformly coating wet damp or dry aggregates used in patching mixtures or HMA pavements .
The fine aggregate angularity value of the total blended aggregate material from the fine and coarse aggregates and recycled materials shall meet or exceed the minimum values for the appropriate ESAL category and position within the pavement structure as follows FINE AGGREGATE ANGULARITY TRAFFIC ESAL DEPTH FROM SURFACE in .
Determination of crushed particles shall be made from the weight mass of material retained on the No. . mm sieve in accordance with ASTM D . b Coarse Aggregate Angularity for HMA and SMA The coarse aggregate angularity CAA of the total blended aggregate including recycled materials shall meet or exceed the minimum values for the appropriate ESAL category and position within the pavement structure as follows .
a Dumped Riprap Dumped riprap shall be broken concrete masonry or stone removed from an old structure broken pieces removed from concrete pavement base or monolithic brick pavement or broken rock from class X class Y unclassified excavation or solid rock excavation .
Joint fillers shall be in accordance with AASHTO M . . Joint Sealing Materials a Joint Sealers Joint sealers shall consist of materials which are intended to be used in sealing joints and cracks in pavements and structures. . Silicone Joint Sealants a .
After a joint has been sealed all surplus joint sealer on the pavement surfaces shall be promptly removed .
Hot Poured Joint Adhesive Joint adhesive is a hot applied asphalt material that is used to seal the longitudinal construction joint formed between the adjacent HMA pavement courses .
Additional bituminous material shall be applied in the bottom section to form a smooth pavement .
Except where the upper edges intersect the corrugations the pavement shall have a minimum thickness of in .
The pavement shall be applied to the lower quarter of the circumference . .
White and yellow traffic paint shall be used on pavements for centerlines lane lines or as otherwise specified .
on clean dry pavement with the material being heated at a maintained temperature from ambient air temperature to a maximum of F at the atomized spray gun at a minimum ambient temperature of F. The material shall be capable of being applied under these conditions at speeds of to mph .
Specific Requirements The paint shall dry to a no tracking condition in no more than s. The no tracking condition shall be determined by actual application on the pavement at a wet film thickness of mils with white or yellow paint covered with glass beads at a rate of lbgal .
This maximum no tracking time shall not be exceeded when the pavement temperature varies from to F and under all humidity conditions providing that the pavement is dry .
A line showing no visual deposition of the paint to the pavement surface when viewed from a distance of approximately ft from the point where the test vehicle has crossed the line shall be considered as showing no tracking and conforming to the requirement for field drying conditions .
The paint shall dry to a notracking condition in less than s. The no tracking condition shall be determined by actual application of the paint on the pavement at a wet film thickness of mils with glass beads at a rate of lbgal .
This maximum no tracking time shall not be exceeded when the pavement temperature varies from to F and with all relative humidity conditions providing that the pavement is dry .
A paint line with no visual deposition of the paint to the pavement surface when viewed from a distance of approximately ft from the point where the vehicle crossed the paint line shall be considered as showing a condition of no tracking and being in accordance with the requirement . .
wide and no less than ft longer than the width of the pavement being cured .
to to Light standards shall be constructed to provide a nominal luminaire mounting height above the roadway pavement as shown on the drawings .
The elevations of foundations above or below the edge of the pavement shall be controlled by existing roadside conditions .
Durable Marking Material Durable marking material shall be thermoplastic preformed plastic or multi component pavement markings .
table when tested in accordance with EPA TCLP or contain any other material which will require characterization as a hazardous waste when removed from the pavement surface .
The material shall be capable of fusing to itself and previously applied thermoplastic pavement markings when heated .
The adhesive shall allow the preformed plastic material to be repositioned on the pavement surface to which it is applied before permanently fixing it in its final position with downward pressure .
The material shall be capable of being affixed to either HMA or PCCP by means of the precoated adhesive and following the initial application of pressure shall mold itself to pavement contours breaks and faults by traffic action at normal pavement temperatures .
A type C certification in accordance with shall be furnished for the marking materials except materials used for temporary pavement markings. . Packaging Each package shall be marked to indicate the color of the material specific symbol or word message the batch number the manufacturers name address and the date of manufacture . .
Basis For Use A type C certification in accordance with shall be furnished for the preformed plastic material except materials used for temporary pavement markings .
c MultiComponent The material shall be for use on both HMA and PCC pavements .
The multicomponent pavement markings shall be ultraviolet light resistant and shall not darken during the heating conditions of application chalk crack show appreciable degradation or discoloration due to sunlight exposure and aging of the markings .
The cured multi component pavement markings shall be impervious to salts grease oil fuels acids alkalies and other common chemicals that may be found in or on HMA and PCC pavements .
Multicomponent pavement marking material furnished under this specification shall be covered by a type C certification in accordance with .
d Snowplowable Raised Pavement Marker and Cast Metal Base Snowplowable raised pavement marker shall consist of a cast metal base to which is attached a replaceable prismatic reflector for reflecting light longitudinally along the pavement from a single or from opposite directions .
The prismatic reflectors and cast metal bases shall be in accordance with ASTM D . Only prismatic reflectors and cast metal bases from the Departments list of approved snowplowable pavement markers shall be used .
Temporary Pavement Marking Tape Temporary pavement marking tape shall be furnished in two colors and two types .
wide and is designed for marking either asphalt or concrete pavements .
The temporary pavement marking tape shall be in accordance with ASTM D . Type I tape shall be selected from the Departments list of approved Temporary Pavement Marking Tape Type I .
Temporary pavement marking tape type I will be placed and maintained on the Departments approved list in accordance with ITM Procedure H. Type I tape furnished under this specification shall be covered by a type C certification in accordance with . .
Temporary Raised Pavement Marker Temporary pavement markers shall be designed to be affixed with adhesive to the pavement surface and shall be in accordance with ASTM D . Adhesive shall be in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
Temporary raised pavement markers will be placed and maintained on the approved list in accordance with ITM . . Construction Warning Lights Construction warning lights shall be selfilluminated by means of an electric lamp behind the lens .
Surface Mounted Flexible Delineator Post Surfacemounted post shall have either a surfacemounted base capable of bolting or adhering to the pavement or an anchor cup embedded in the pavement .
Materials used to attach the base or inpavement anchor cup to the roadway surface shall be in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
