The subbase is one or more layers of specified material thickness placed on a subgrade to support a base course or in the case of rigid pavement the Portland cement concrete slab .
If the Contract involves the placement of Material on or the use of a previously constructed subgrade base course pavement or Structure maintain the previously constructed Work during construction operations .
When a unit or portion of the Project such as a Structure interchange or section of road or pavement is Substantially Completed the Contractor may request a Final Inspection of that unit or portion of the Work .
C. These requirements also apply to excess Materials generated from bituminous pavement removal incidental concrete removal and all construction Materials that are suitable for fill Material .
Break up Portland cement concrete into pieces with a maximum surface area of square yard with a pavement breaker or other approved Equipment. . Scarify to a depth of inches and recompact bituminous surface treated roadways lying beneath Embankment .
Within these plan view limits the upper limit will be finished grades minus depth of riprap or pavement .
Raze remove dispose of or salvage buildings foundations fences Structures guardrail abandoned pipelines or utilities existing Portland cement concrete pavement curb and sidewalk and other obstructions designated for removal except for Items removed and disposed of under other Sections of these Specifications .
When backfilling cavities within the proposed roadway box utilize Borrow Type C. When backfilling cavities outside of the proposed roadway box utilize Borrow Type F. Saw cut concrete pavement sidewalks curbs gutters and similar Structures that will be left in place to a true vertical line or remove to an existing joint in accordance with Section .
Removal of existing Portland cement concrete pavement curb and sidewalk .
Remove all existing Portland cement concrete pavement curb and sidewalk necessary to complete the Work .
REMOVAL OF STRUCTURES AND OBSTRUCTIONS SECTION The quantity of removed existing Portland cement concrete pavement curb and sidewalk will be measured in square yards along the top surface of the Materials to be removed as projected on the horizontal plane . .
The Department will pay for accepted quantities at the Contract Unit Price as follows ITEM DESCRIPTION UNIT REMOVAL OF STRUCTURES AND OBSTRUCTIONS LS REMOVAL OF PORTLAND CEMENT CONCRETE PAVEMENT CURB AND SIDEWALK SY Price and payment will constitute full compensation for furnishing all Materials Equipment labor and incidentals to removing and disposing of Structures and obstructions existing Portland cement concrete pavement curb and sidewalk and other obstructions designated for removal .
Construct one or more courses of bituminous pavement on either a prepared foundation or an existing surface course .
Construct butt joints by saw cutting and removing the existing hotlaid bituminous concrete or Portland cement concrete pavement to provide an area to butt the new hotlaid bituminous concrete pavement against the existing pavement. . Materials .
Selfpropelled unit with automated screed or strikeoff assembly that automatically controls grade leveling and slope heated and capable of spreading and finishing bituminous pavement Materials in lane widths specified .
Equip with an attachment that confines the Material at the end of the gate and extrudes the asphalt Material in such a way results in a compacted wedge shape pavement edge safety edge of degrees degrees .
Place bituminous pavement Materials only when the surface is dry unfrozen and the weather is not foggy or rainy .
Repair damaged areas of the tacked surface and restore the existing pavement or base to a uniform grade and cross section before placing the mix .
Place mixture in a continuous operation by paving machine methods of spreading and screeding to the thickness shown in the Contract Documents and conform to the grade and surface contour required. . Outside edges of pavement are to be in true alignment parallel to the centerline of the roadway with the longitudinal joint in the surface course at the lane line . .
Compact by rolling after the bituminous pavement mixture has been spread struck off and surface irregularities adjusted .
Perform Quality Control of pavement compaction by testing inplace pavement density .
Seal all newly created pavement joints that will not be overlaid with the exception of those created from placement of newly laid adjacent passes with an approved joint sealant Material of appropriate dimensions in accordance with the Contract Documents .
The Engineer will measure the bituminous pavement Materials acceptably placed as specified in Section ..
Payment will be for the accepted quantity of bituminous pavement Materials at the Contract Unit Price per ton for furnishing preparing hauling and placing all Materials including tack coat and safety edge for removing Material from around manholes drainage inlets valves and similar features for removing and replacing excess asphalt cement and for all labor Equipment tools and incidentals required to complete the Work .
Patch Portland cement concrete and bituminous pavement with bituminous pavement Materials. . Materials .
Saw cut pavement using a cutting machine capable of cutting a groove in a straight line to the required depth to allow removal of Material without damage to adjacent pavement .
The quantity will be measured at the actual square yard per inch thickness of bituminous pavement patching Materials placed and accepted .
Width will be measured from outside of the completed patches as constructed length will be the actual length measured along the centerline of pavement depth will be measured from patch surface to top of subgrade .
Payment for bituminous pavement patching Materials is at the Contract Unit Price per square yard per inch of thickness and constitutes full compensation for removal and disposal of existing materials for preparing the sub grade and for all labor Equipment tools and incidentals required to complete the Work .
Furnishing hauling and placing bituminous pavement Materials and graded aggregate base course will be paid under Sections and respectively .
Saw cutting Portland cement and bituminous concrete pavement will be paid in accordance with Section .
Furnish and place bituminous pavement Materials as temporary roadway Material TRM. . Materials .
Coordinate repair of the existing pavement and the placement of TRM with all other Work and operations necessary to maintain traffic safely . .
Construct a Portland cement concrete pavement PCCP on a prepared subgrade or base course. . Materials .
Slipform or conventionally form the pavement unless otherwise specified .
These areas may be handfinished but must still meet all Performance Measures Section No portions of pavement shall be formed to produce a point .
Proposed width of paving pulls C. Installation methods for all embedded hardware PORTLAND CEMENT CONCRETE PAVEMENT PCCP SECTION D. Typical locations of longitudinal sawed and construction joints E. Method of transverse construction joint installation F. Joint locations if different than shown on the plans G. Procedure including the finishing screed for forming and constructing small or irregular shaped portions of pavement H. Safety edge construction method I .
Procedure for final texturing the pavement surface K. Location of the concrete delivery trucks in relation to the paving area and the proposed haul route from the concrete plant L. Hand finishing procedures and tools including a misting or fogging device M. Contingency plan and protective covering for rain events N. Proposed subcontractors O .
Adjust to produce the specified cross slope and pavement width .
Place a minimum width pavement of feet in one pull .
Provide a vertical pavement edge with slump off not exceeding inch exclusive of edge rounding when checked under a foot straightedge .
The Contractor shall determine the number of saws needed based on weather temperature and amount of pavement PORTLAND CEMENT CONCRETE PAVEMENT PCCP SECTION placed .
The work bridges shall not come in direct contact with the pavement surface .
E. Texturing Provide independently powered selfpropelled texturing Equipment capable of adjusting the depth of tine penetration to produce the specified pavement surface texture .
For formed pavement the texturing Equipment shall ride on the forms or rails .
F. Curing Provide mechanically powered Equipment to place curing compound at the specified rate to the pavement surface and all exposed edges .
G. Diamond Grinding Provide selfpropelled machines equipped with gang mounted diamond blades having a minimum cutting head width of feet capable of producing a corduroy type pavement surface texture consisting of parallel grooves between inch and inch wide and inch deep .
Clearly mark on both sides of the pavement the center of each assembly using paint stakes or other agreed upon method so that the transverse sawed joints can be properly located .
Locate dowels at a pavement depth of T T pavement thickness .
C. Furnish Hook Bolts or WBolts for use when lanes will longitudinally abut the pavement being placed and standard rebars for tie bars used under longitudinal sawed joints or for tying into concrete lanes placed under previous contracts .
Maintain a vertical pavement edge .
Maintain a uniform level of concrete feeding the paver screed allowing sufficient concrete to completely fill the void under the screed for the entire width of pavement placed .
The application rate should not cause any pooling of water on the grade. . As the concrete is being placed install tie bars under longitudinal sawed joints and Hook or WBolts along longitudinal pavement edges requiring abutting pavement to be placed in the future .
When placing concrete in lanes adjoining previously constructed pavement locate the full width of the paver tracks over the pavement with no overhang across the edge in order to prevent breaking .
Use rubber facing wood or other approved protection if the paver tracks will be in contact with the existing pavement surface .
Concrete in the completed lane must have achieved a compressive strength of at least pounds per square inch prior to placing any adjoining pavement. . For small irregular sections or areas of pavement inaccessible to the paver a .
Depth of the forms must be at least that of the required pavement thickness .
Forms at these joints must be removed when required in order to complete the saw cut through the entire pavement surface .
The safety edge is required longitudinally along the outermost pavement edge generally a shoulder on all mainline and ramp paving unless otherwise approved by the Engineer .
Produce a smooth uniform concrete surface with the paver screed conforming to the specified pavement cross slope and width. . Hand finishing is limited to sealing any surface tears supporting any nonvertical pavement edges and to assist in the surface finish of small irregular or other areas inaccessible to the paver .
Finish all longitudinal pavement edges with a inch rounded edging tool. . Do not add surface water as an aid to finishing .
Finish the final pavement surface prior to texturing by pulling a wet burlap drag in the longitudinal direction .
Keep the burlap in a moist condition throughout the paving operation in order to prevent surface tearing. . Texture and cure the pavement per Sections .. and ..
Do not use buildup forms except where the total area of pavement of any specified thickness on the project is less than square yards .
Remove forms carefully to avoid damage to the pavement .
Adjust to produce the specified cross slope and pavement width .
Place a minimum width pavement of feet in one pull .
E. If during the operation of paving Equipment it is necessary to operate one or both sets of wheels or tracks on previously placed concrete adjust or alter the wheels or tracks so that the bearing on the concrete will not be closer than inches from the pavement edge .
When operating with one side of the machine on pavement and the other side on forms the wheels operating on the forms may be double flanged .
Use flangeless rubber faced wheels on the pavement .
When operating over the edge of concrete less than months old support the ends of the finishing machine screeds with an approved device to provide from to inch clearance between the screed and previously placed pavement .
No hardware may be placed on the grade in contact with the concrete pavement until the Engineer has given approval to do so .
Locate dowels at a pavement depth of T T pavement thickness .
C. Furnish Hook Bolts or WBolts for use when lanes will longitudinally abut the pavement being placed and standard rebars for tie bars used under longitudinal sawed joints or for tying into concrete lanes placed under previous contracts .
Maintain a uniform level of concrete feeding the paver screed allowing sufficient concrete to completely fill the void under the screed for the entire width of pavement placed .
The application rate should not cause any pooling of water on the grade. . As the concrete is being placed install tie bars under longitudinal sawed joints and Hook or WBolts along longitudinal pavement edges requiring abutting pavement to be placed in the future . .
When placing concrete in lanes adjoining previously constructed pavement the paver tracks must be fully in contact with the completed pavement surface to prevent breaking of the edge .
Use rubber facing wood or other approved protection if the paver tracks will be in contact with the existing pavement surface .
Concrete in the completed lane must have achieved a compressive strength of at least pounds per square inch prior to placing any adjoining pavement. . For small irregular sections or areas of pavement inaccessible to the paver a .
Depth of the forms must be at least that of the required pavement thickness .
Forms at these joints must be removed when required in order to complete the saw cut through the entire pavement surface .
The safety edge is required longitudinally along the outermost pavement edge generally a shoulder on all mainline and ramp paving unless otherwise approved by the Safety Program Manager or Designee .
The paver screed shall produce a smooth uniform concrete surface conforming to the specified pavement cross slope and width. . Limit hand finishing to sealing any surface tears supporting any nonvertical pavement edges and to assist in the surface finish of small irregular or other areas inaccessible to the paver .
Finish all longitudinal pavement edges with a inch rounded edging tool. . Do not add surface water as an aid to finishing .
Create a final pavement surface prior to texturing by pulling a wet burlap drag in the longitudinal direction .
Keep the burlap in a moist condition throughout the paving operation in order to prevent surface tearing. . Texture and cure the pavement per Sections .. and .. Texturing .
A. Texture the finished pavement for the entire placement width with an approved tining device .
Do not texture portions of the pavement that will receive permanent pavement markings .
In these areas maintain a inch wide flat surface to accommodate the striping andor raised pavement markers .
The Contractor may elect to diamond grind all surfaces of concrete pavement to create a final texture .
C. Pull the tining in the longitudinal direction parallel to the centerline of the pavement in one pass without dragging or tearing the mortar .
The tining should not pull excessive mortar or aggregate from the pavement too early or fail to penetrate the surface by the minimum inch too late .
Spray the curing Material on the pavement surface and all exposed edges immediately following the texturing operation . .
If necessary use hand sprayers for pavement edges or small and irregular areas inaccessible to the larger mechanical applicator .
The rate of application remains no more than square feet per gallon per each of the applications. . No Equipment or traffic other than joint saws and foot traffic is permitted on the pavement until the compressive strength has reached at least pounds per square inch .
Extend the polyethylene beyond the slab edges by at least twice the pavement thickness and add weight to secure the material against wind and weather . .
Maintain temperatures of not less than degrees Fahrenheit surrounding the concrete pavement for a curing period of five Calendar Days following placement of the concrete .
Should the pavement surface dry out to the extent that it can not be sealed without the application of surface water paving shall be suspended. . No concrete may be placed when the temperature of the plastic concrete exceeds degrees Fahrenheit at the production facility . .
Begin joint sawing as soon as the concrete can support the saw and operator with no damage to the pavement surface. . Time the sawing so that the concrete does not ravel behind the blade and so that random cracking does not occur . .
Following transverse saw cutting provide crackfree pavement except for the cracks under the designed saw cut joints .
Following the transverse joint saw cutting perform longitudinal saw cutting on pavement placed in multilane or lane and shoulder pulls .
Following longitudinal saw cutting provide crackfree pavement except for the cracks under the designed saw cut joints .
The resulting joint must create a vertical face perpendicular to the pavement conforming to the designed cross slope having load transfer dowels spaced the same as the load transfer devices .
When placing concrete pavement abutting the transverse construction joint use a inch rounded edging tool to finish the top edge of the concrete in contact with the previously constructed joint .
If tying into a nonrounded edge of existing pavement saw cut a inch bevel on the existing pavement edge prior to placing the new adjoining concrete pavement .
Construct these joints directly over Hook Bolts or WBolts installed in a previously placed run of pavement .
If tying into concrete placed under a previous contract drill and grout tiebars rebars into the existing concrete pavement if so noted in the Contract Documents. . Form the joint by finishing the concrete abutting the existing concrete with a inch rounded edging tool .
If tying into a nonrounded edge of existing pavement saw cut a inch bevel on the existing pavement edge prior to placing the new adjoining concrete pavement .
Acceptance and final payment for this Item will be based on the Contractors ability to acceptably construct a concrete pavement meeting the following criteria A. Alignment and crossslope .
Maintain a pavement edge within .
Consolidation as verified by visual observation of pavement edges pavement cores andor other non destructive testing as determined by the Engineer .
F. Provide a vertical pavement edge having no more than inch edge slump exclusive of rounding of the finishing tool when measured under a foot straight edge .
For the purpose of establishing an adjusted Unit Price for pavement lanes the following is considered A .
The Engineer will divide the PCC Pavement for the entire Contract into square yard lots determine the random core locations drill the cores determine pavement thickness according to AASHTO T and patch the resulting holes in the PCC Pavement .
B. Uneven lots less than square yards may occur due to the pavement geometry .
If this is the case these irregular lots will be considered a complete lot when evaluating the pavement thickness regardless of their actual size .
inch when compared to the Plan pavement thickness additional randomly selected cores will be taken within the same lot .
inch or more in excess of the Plan pavement thickness will be considered to measure exactly .
The average thickness of the cores will be considered the pavement thickness for the lot being evaluated .
This lot thickness will be used to determine payment for the entire lot in accordance with Table Remove and replace the entire lot represented by the short cores when any average lot thickness is deficient by more than inch when compared to the Plan pavement thickness .
Test finished surfaces of concrete pavements Bridge decks approach slabs and transition slabs in accordance with the Contract Documents using an Inertial Profiler unless otherwise stated .
Finished concrete pavement andor Bridge surfaces will be tested by the Contractor and witnessed by the Engineer for trueness in each wheel lane at the completion of the required curing or protection period .
Test the surface with a rolling foot straight edge or a foot straight edge placed parallel to the center line of the pavement parallel to the grade line and touching the surface .
Surface variations of the pavement measured by the foot rolling straight edge or measured from the base of the straight edge to the surface of the pavement shall not exceed .
Longitudinal dimension measured along the centerline of pavement .
Payment includes furnishing all Equipment Materials and incidentals placing finishing texturing and curing concrete pavement meeting the performance measures outlined in Section Incidental to the Item are the following but not limited to A .
F. Sawing drilling grouting and constructing all pavement joints .
G. Sealing sawed joints along the completed pavement edge prior to placing adjoining pavement .
No additional payment over the Contract Unit Price will be made for any pavement with an average thickness in excess of that shown on the Plans .
The maximum pavement thickness value used in this chart for a square yard lot will be the Plan pavement thickness .
Make prorated payment in accordance with Section .. M. Concrete having compressive strength of pounds per square inch or more below the designed fc of the pavement shall be removed and replaced at no cost to the Department .
Remove and dispose of existing Portland cement concrete pavement and replace it with new Portland cement concrete pavement .
This Work is not intended for repairing newly constructed Portland cement concrete pavement or for repairing continuously reinforced concrete pavement .
Patching limits will be painted on the existing pavement by the Engineer .
Construct pavement replacement greater than feet in length under Section Portland Cement Concrete Pavement .
Patch limits in the direction of traffic shall either match or be offset by at least feet from the existing concrete pavement joints any cracks or patch ends in the immediate adjacent lanes .
Improper actions such as dropping the removed slab on adjacent concrete pavement damaging the pavement edge due to the Contractors methods or other actions deemed damaging by the Engineer leading to slab damage shall be repaired by the Contractor by an approved method at no cost to the Department .
PATCHING PORTLAND CEMENT CONCRETE PAVEMENT SECTION When the liftout technique is not feasible break and remove the concrete in the patch area using an approved mechanical pavement breaker or jackhammer .
Repair in kind any portion of the shoulder pavement structure removed or disturbed by the patching operation if the shoulder is not designated for replacement .
Saw cutting the joint between the concrete pavement and shoulder may assist in maintaining a clean uniform shoulder edge .
In areas of composite pavements bituminous concrete over P.C.C .
pavement and if the Contractor elects to pour the concrete patch flush with existing bituminous concrete pavement to eliminate grade differential the additional depth not to exceed inches shall be placed as directed by the Engineer .
Just prior to concrete patch placement spray a light coating of waxbased curing compound bond breaker on the longitudinal and transverse vertical faces of existing concrete pavement adjacent to the patch .
If unacceptable spalling cracking or other damage to the remaining concrete pavement is caused by the drilling operation then the Contractor must saw out the damaged portion of pavement full lane width and redrill the holes with proper Equipment .
Drill the dowel holes parallel to the profile and centerline of the pavement to an embedment depth of half the dowel bar length .
Except when a bituminous surface patch over the concrete is required or when an overlay will be placed strike off the concrete surface flush with the existing pavement .
Match the adjacent pavement surface cross slope and profile .
When the concrete patch will be the final roadway surface match the texture of the adjacent pavement .
The patch surface cross section shall also match the preceding and following pavement surfaces .
If the pavement is to be overlaid then the transverse joints at the ends of the patch need only be tooled .
If bituminous pavement is required over the patch area only and a complete pavement overlay will not be placed a inch wide x inch reservoir shall be formed in the bituminous Material around the patch perimeter when the Material is placed .
The length will be the actual length measured parallel to the centerline of the pavement along the center of the patch .
Undercut Excavation Patching Cubic Yard for material removed below the bottom of the original concrete pavement being patched refer to Section Excavation and Embankment .
Patching Concrete Square YardInch for concrete placed in undercut areas below the bottom of the original pavement requiring the patch andor additional thickness above in order to eliminate grade differential in finished pavements .
Patching Concrete Item Square YardInch payment includes furnishing and placing concrete to depths not to exceed inches resulting from the Undercut Excavation Patching item andor in order to eliminate grade differential of finished pavements .
Clean and seal existing transverse joints longitudinal joints andor pavement cracks in existing pavement existing patches or around new patch perimeters in accordance with the Contract Documents and as directed by the Engineer. . Materials .
During all operations do not damage the subbase curbs shoulders load transfer devices or pavement .
Seal the joints uniformly so that upon completion of the Work the surface of the sealant Material is inch inch below the adjacent pavement surface .
Remove any excess material on the surface of the pavement so that it is left in a clean condition .
No traffic is permitted on the pavement in the area of the joints during the curing period .
Perform partial depth patching of spalls potholes corner breaks or other surface distress in Portland cement concrete pavements .
Maintain joints in the existing concrete pavement transverse and longitudinal .
Price and payment constitutes full compensation for saw cutting and sealing the patch perimeter removal of existing deteriorated concrete cleaning and preparing the patch area forming and maintaining existing pavement joints and furnishing and placing patch Material .
Saw cut existing bituminous concrete or Portland Cement Concrete pavement a minimum feet from face of drainage inlet .
Dispose of waste materials in accordance with Section .. c. Prepare subgrade for patching to match existing pavement section .
Saw cut existing bituminous concrete or Portland Cement Concrete pavement a minimum feet from face of drainage inlet. . Excavate and remove existing castings .
After the concrete is placed and consolidated finish pavement surfaces using approved powerdriven finishing machines .
No construction Equipment or Materials except for compaction Equipment will be permitted to pass over or be placed on the precast units until the fill height has reached the bottom of the pavement subbase .
Place polyurethanebonded recycled rubber Type IV expansion joints full depth of curb a. at foot intervals b. the beginning and end of radii c. both sides of all Structures or obstructions when butted up against rigid structures or pavement E. Finishing . .
When curb is constructed adjacent to concrete pavement align joints with joints in the pavement .
c. When curb is placed adjacent to Portland Cement Concrete pavement the curb or pavement form or tool to allow sealing as shown in the Standard Construction Details C and P. H. Removal of Forms and backfilling .
Saw cut existing bituminous concrete pavement or P.C.C .
pavement if applicable a .
For bituminous concrete pavements saw cut inches minimum from the proposed face of curb of the island to allow enough room to achieve compaction for bituminous patching b .
pavement saw cut at the proposed face of curb . .
Remove bituminous concrete pavement or P.C.C .
pavement and dispose of in accordance with Subsection .
patching in accordance with Section if applicable as shown on Plans or otherwise match existing pavement structure .
Price and payment constitutes full compensation for saw cutting bituminous pavement saw cutting concrete full depth removal and disposal of existing Materials foundation preparation furnishing and placing all Materials including GABC concrete for curb and sidewalk expansion joint Material construction of curb ramps within the limits of the island bituminous andor P.C.C .
pavement patching furnishing and installing delineators and for all labor tools and incidentals necessary to complete the Work .
Price and payment constitutes full compensation for excavation within the template of this Item grading and compacting including the curb and pavement areas within the limits of the ramp furnishing and placing all Materials including graded aggregate base course curb concrete bituminous or concrete for patching along the curb line expansion material saw cutting removal and disposal of the existing curb gutter sidewalk and pavement and for all equipment labor tools and incidentals necessary to complete the Work .
When specified in the Plans to replace individual components price and payment will constitute full compensation for furnishing and installing the applicable components for burring of bolts for excavating backfilling compacting and disposing of surplus material for patching bituminous pavement around posts and for all labor Equipment tools and incidentals required to complete the Work .
Price and payment will constitute full compensation for furnishing and placing all Materials including reflectorized washers for burring of bolts excavating backfilling compacting and disposing of surplus Materials for patching bituminous pavement around posts for repairing any damage to the concrete barrier that resulted from the process of attaching the guardrail to the barrier for filling any existing holes in the barrier with nonshrink grout and for all labor Equipment tools and incidentals required to complete the Work .
If a bituminous pavement maintenance strip is required complete final paving prior to excavationdrilling for post foundations .
Grade the area between the edge of pavement and the back of the impact attenuator in accordance with the manufacturers requirements .
Mill or plane bituminous concrete and Portland cement concrete pavement in accordance with the Contract Documents .
Cut rumble strips in bituminous concrete pavement or Portland Cement Concrete P.C.C .
pavement in accordance with the Contract Documents and as directed by the Engineer. . Materials .
Use a pavement milling machine suitable for use on bituminous concrete pavement or P.C.C .
pavement .
An entrance driveway and intersecting street pavement surcharge as a separate pay item will only be considered for areas adjacent to the roadway milling that can not be completed as part of the mainline or auxiliary operations as determined by the Engineer .
The quantity of pavement milling will be measured as the number of square yards per inch of depth or as the number of square yards as indicated on the Contract Documents .
The entrance driveway and intersecting street pavement milling surcharge will be measured as the actual number of square yards of milling performed and accepted .
Price and payment will constitute full compensation for milling or planning the pavement for the cleanup of the bituminous concrete or PCC pavement residue wedge left from the milling operation including but not limited to along the curb line adjacent to speed humps across intersecting street around manholes and at the beginning and ending points of the milling operation for removing and disposing of the milled material and for all labor tools Equipment and incidentals to complete the Work .
Mechanically saw cut patch edges or tiein joints into existing pavement .
Construct butt joints by saw cutting and removing the existing bituminous concrete or Portland cement concrete pavement to provide an area to butt the new bituminous concrete pavement against the existing pavement in accordance with the Contract Documents and as directed by the Engineer. . Materials .
Use a suitable walk behind motor driven wet type diamond blade circular cutter with control devices mounted on a sturdy frame designed to cut Portland cement concrete and hotlaid bituminous concrete pavements .
Cut a groove in a straight line to sufficient depth to produce an even neat joint to allow for removal of Material without damage to adjacent pavement . .
Saw cut the full depth of the pavement .
D. Continuously remove waste Material created by saw cutting and pavement removed in order to construct the butt joint in accordance with Sections .
The quantity of saw cutting Portland cement concrete and hotlaid bituminous concrete will be measured as the actual number of linear feet of pavement saw cut and accepted measured along the cut end to end .
Should composite pavement box exceed inches in depth the quantity of a second saw cut will be measured as the actual number of linear feet of pavement saw cut and accepted measured along the second saw cut end to end .
Overcuts saw cutting of bituminous concrete shoulders additional saw cuts resulting from damage caused during patch removal relief cuts internal to the patch to assist in pavement removal and transverse saw cuts for crack control except for the two end joints at the patch perimeter in Type B patches will not be measured for payment .
The quantity of butt joints will be measured as the number of square yards on the surface of the pavement as defined in the Contract Documents . .
Price and payment will constitute full compensation for saw cutting removing and disposing of existing pavement for sealing overcuts and for all labor Materials Equipment tools and incidentals required to complete the Work .
When a lane adjacent to an open lane is closed set temporary traffic control devices on the work zone side of the pavement marking if possible. . Do not close lanes unless a construction activity requiring a lane closure is taking place or will take place within one hour except for buffer lanes on high volume andor high speed roadways .
Correct all pavement edge dropoffs in accordance with the DE MUTCD at the end of each Day. . Use Temporary Roadway Material TRM to accomplish this Work unless an alternate method is specified in the Plans .
Apply temporary pavement markings to all locations that require permanent pavement markings at the end of each Days operation and before traffic is returned to unrestricted roadway use .
Match temporary pavement markings to permanent pavement markings as shown in the Contract Documents or as directed by the Engineer . .
Refresh temporary pavement markings as required or as directed by the Engineer . .
When the temporary markings layout is not provided in the Contract Documents apply temporary pavement markings in accordance with the requirements of Section the DE MUTCD and DelDOTs Temporary Pavement Markings Policy of the DE MUTCD .
Remove all conflicting pavement markings as directed by the Engineer in accordance with Section . . Painting over the conflicting pavement markings is not permitted unless specifically stated in the Contract Documents .
C. When pavement marking information is not provided in the Contract Documents prior to beginning construction .
Submit for approval detailed drawings that depict the existing pavement markings for each Project location .
The Engineer may require changes to the final pavement markings .
Metal straps anchored to the toe of the barrier and the pavement are not approved unless part of the crash tested system . .
As pins or anchors are removed fill the remaining holes in the pavement with approved epoxy material .
Cutting of pins or anchors flush with the pavement surface is not permitted .
Remove anchor pins completely from pavement and fill remaining holes with approved epoxy material .
Cutting of pins flush with pavement is not permitted .
Cutting of anchor pins flush with pavement is not permitted .
Place barricades for road closures such that the barricades cover the entire width of the roadway to be closed from edgeofpavement to edgeofpavement .
Supply install and remove temporary or permanent pavement markings on the individual lifts of pavement material and the final surface of the roadway and install and remove raisedrecessed pavement markers as shown in the Contract Documents or as directed by the Engineer .
Temporary Markings Temporary markings are those markings that replace markings removed by milling or placing of pavement and are placed on individual sublifts of paving materials or on final travel surfaces and are kept in service for less than thirty days .
Use Equipment meeting the following minimum requirements to apply latex paint pavement markings .
Capability to apply paint and glass beads to pavement at same time leaving no more than inches of painted line without glass beads at the beginning or end of a line .
Use only application Equipment approved by the Engineer prior to the start of Work for the placement of epoxy reflectorized pavement markings. . At any time throughout the duration of the Project provide free access to the epoxy application Equipment for inspection by the Engineer. . Use a truckmounted and selfcontained pavement marking machine specifically designed to apply epoxy resin materials and reflective glass spheres in continuous and skip line patterns .
The Engineer may approve the use of a portable applicator in lieu of truckmounted accessories for use in applying special markings only provided such Equipment can demonstrate satisfactory application of reflectorized epoxy markings in accordance with these Specifications. . For long line applications use applicators that are capable of installing up to linear feet of epoxy reflectorized pavement markings in an hour day and include the following features a .
c. Gravity drop glass spheres onto mils of epoxy pavement markings to produce a wetnight reflective pavement marking .
TTB Type IV at a rate of pounds per gallon of epoxy pavement marking material immediately followed by a second drop of AASHTO M Type glass spheres applied rate of pounds per gallon of epoxy pavement marking material .
e. Use an applicator with all the necessary spray Equipment mixers compressors and other appurtenances to allow for the placement of epoxy reflectorized pavement markings in a simultaneous sequence of operations as described in Section D. C. Alkyd Type Thermoplastic Equipment a .
Place all pavement marking and patterns as shown in the Contract Documents as specified in the DE MUTCD and as directed by the Engineer .
Before starting any pavement markings Work submit a schedule of operations for the approval of the Engineer .
C. Protect all pavement markings until track free using a method approved by the Engineer .
In the event any vehicle crosses wet pavement markings remove the damaged markings by sand blasting heat or other methods approved by the Engineer and replace marking .
E. Offset longitudinal lines at least inches from construction joints and inches to the inside of shoulder breaks of pavement .
F. Perform the application of pavement markings in the general direction of traffic .
Do not apply pavement markings against the direction of traffic flow .
G. After satisfactory completion of all pavement marking Work and written notification from the Contractor the Department will test the markings to ensure the minimum retroreflectivity and film thickness values have been met as defined in Section for the type of marking being tested .
On the pavement marking Equipment furnish a suitable measuring device capable of determining the total number of linear feet of materials actually applied within a tolerance of percent .
Include instructions regarding but not be limited to mixing ratios application temperatures and recommendations for use of water spray. . To the satisfaction of the Engineer remove tracking marks spilled epoxy or errantly applied epoxy markings. . Do not use the hot water spray in conjunction with markings applications on any pavement surface or on any existing durable type marking unless specifically recommended by the manufacturer of the epoxy material .
Apply epoxy pavement markings only during conditions of dry weather and on substantially dry pavement surfaces .
At the time of installation ensure the pavement surface temperature be a minimum of degrees Fahrenheit and the ambient temperature be a minimum of degrees Fahrenheit and rising .
The Engineer will determine when atmospheric conditions and pavement surface conditions are appropriate to produce satisfactory results .
Clean the pavement or existing durable markings to the satisfaction of the Engineer . .
Perform surface cleaning and preparation Work only in the area of the epoxy markings application. . At the time of application ensure all pavement surfaces and existing durable markings are free of oil dirt dust grease and similar foreign materials .
Place whiteyellow epoxy reflectorized pavement markings at the widths and patterns designated in the Contract Documents. . Do not begin markings operations until applicable surface preparation Work is completed and approved by the Engineer . .
Apply whiteyellow epoxy pavement markings at a minimum uniform thickness of mils on all portland cement concrete and bituminous concrete pavement including Stone Matrix Asphalt . .
TTB Type IV at the rate of pounds per gallon of epoxy pavement marking material immediately followed by a second drop of AASHTO M Type glass spheres applied at a rate of pounds per gallon of epoxy pavement marking material .
Uniformly cover the length and width of the pavement marking with the glass spheres .
Place black epoxy contrast pavement markings at the widths designated in the Contract Documents. . Do not begin markings operations until applicable surface preparation Work is completed and approved by the Engineer . .
Apply black epoxy contrast pavement markings at a minimum uniform thickness of mils on all Portland cement concrete surfaces followed by a single drop of graded black aggregate .
F. Repair epoxy reflectorized pavement markings which after application and curing are determined by the Engineer to be defective and not in conformance with this Section .
c. Make the repair by restriping over the cleaned surface in accordance with the requirements of this Section and at a full mils minimum line thickness as required. . Uncured or discolored epoxy brown patches insufficient bond to pavement surface or existing durable marking .
Completely remove and clean the defective epoxy marking to the underlying pavement surface to the satisfaction of the Engineer .
Remove the defective area plus any adjacent epoxy pavement marking Material extending one foot in any direction .
After surface preparation Work is complete reapply the epoxy over the cleaned pavement surface in accordance with the requirements of this Section. . Repair or replace to the satisfaction of the Engineer other defects not noted above but determined by the Engineer to need repair . .
Perform all Work in conjunction with the repair or replacement of defective epoxy reflectorized pavement markings at no additional cost to the State .
The Department will test the retroreflectivity of epoxy pavement markings in accordance with Section Provide minimum retroreflectivity values for epoxy pavement markings conforming to Section Pavement Markings .
Remove and replace at the Contractors expense any pavement marking installed that does not meet the average minimum initial reflectivity numbers specified in Section Pavement Markings .
Do not apply thermoplastic pavement markings on Portland cement concrete. . For optimum adhesion install the thermoplastic material in a molten state at a temperature between to degrees Fahrenheit on a clean dry and solvent free surface .
Clean off pavement surface dirt and grease where necessary by approved removal methods .
Do not apply thermoplastic pavement marking materials when pavement temperatures are below degrees Fahrenheit or when the surface of the pavement shows evident moisture . .
If recommended by the Manufacturer of the thermoplastic material and if required by the Department apply a primer sealer prior to the installation of thermoplastic material on the pavement .
Readily apply the material to the pavement from either manual or selfpropelled application Equipment by the screedextrusion method wherein one side of the shaping die is the pavement and the other three sides are contained by a part of suitable Equipment for heating and controlling the flow of material . .
The material when formed into traffic stripes must be readily renewable by placing an overlay of new material directly upon any type of old thermoplastic line provided that the initial material was properly bonded or on worn paint line showing considerable pavement exposure .
c. Offset longitudinal lines in accordance with Section Provide openings inches in length at foot intervals in edge lines placed on the inside of super elevated curves to prevent ponding of water on the pavement surface .
The Department will test in accordance with Section .. A. the retroreflectivity of thermoplastic pavement markings for minimum requirements as specified in the Section Pavement Markings .
For thermoplastic markings with retroreflectivity readings below the minimums specified in Section Pavement Markings and above millicandellas payment for the markings will be reduced as described under .. c. Remove and replace at the Contractors expense any pavement marking installed that has an average minimum initial reflectivity below millicandellas . .
Provide warranty for the thermoplastic markings Material furnished and installed under this Contract against failure due to blistering excessive cracking bleeding staining discoloration oil content of the pavement Materials smearing and spreading under heat deterioration due to contact with grease deposits oil diesel fuel or gasoline drippings chipping spalling poor adhesion to the pavement materials vehicular damage and wear for a period of days of observation period .
d. Perform marking replacements in accordance with the requirements specified in this Section including but not limited to possible surface cleaning pavement marking removal seasonal and PAVEMENT MARKINGS SECTION weather limitations etc .
Apply the markings in accordance with the Manufacturers recommendations on clean and dry surfaces. . Use preformed retroreflective thermoplastic Material that is fusible to the pavement by means of a propane torch in accordance with the marking Manufacturers requirements .
C. Extend warranty to the Department that the installed retroreflective preformed thermoplastic pavement markings are free of defects as hereafter defined for a period of one winter season beginning at the initial acceptance of the marking installation by the Department . .
Warrant against failure due to blistering excessive cracking bleeding staining discoloration oil content of the pavement Materials smearing and spreading under heat deterioration due to contact with grease deposits oil diesel fuel or gasoline drippings chipping spalling poor adhesion to the pavement Materials vehicular damage and wear from maintenance activities including snow plowing .
Place temporary pavement marking tape in Work zones at the locations depicted in the Contract Documents and as required by the Engineer. . Configure pavement marking configurations in accordance with the DE MUTCD .
Apply pavement markings to clean dry surfaces in accordance with the Manufacturers installation instructions or a method approved by the Engineer . .
Maintain and replace temporary pavement marking tape without additional compensation until the markings are no longer required. . Reflectivity Tests a .
The Department will test in accordance with Section The retoreflectivity of temporary pavement marking tape for minimum requirements as specified in the Section Pavement Markings .
Certify the Contractor by the Manufacturer in the installation of the pavement marking Material prior to the start of the markings . .
Install the pavement marking Material in accordance with the Manufacturers published recommendations . .
Perform installation of the pavement markings in a neat and workmanlike manner .
Premark the pavement to ensure correct location of markings and such layout Work is incidental to the price bid for the pavement marking Items .
Take care to ensure that the leading edges of the markings are secured to the pavement. . General application rules a .
Apply tape on a clean and dry pavement surface after hours of dry weather and no rain is expected for the day .
f. Do not apply tape on deteriorating pavement surfaces .
b. Inlay the pavement markings in the fresh pavement surface during final rolling of the mat in accordance with the marking Manufacturers recommendations .
c. Inform the Engineer how the pavement mats will be placed to avoid applying the tape on longitudinal joints or cracks and maintain correct marking location .
PAVEMENT MARKINGS SECTION d. Premark the pavement and install the markings such that all markings are inlaid into the hot pavement prior to the finish rolling .
pavement surfaces apply the marking taper after the concrete has adequately cured as determined by the Engineer and prior to opening to traffic .
c. Use only the primersolvent specified by the Manufacturer for the pavement surface .
Ensure that the pavement surface is free of any existing markings when the tape is specified in the Contract to be placed on an existing pavement .
c. Use only the primersolvent specified by the Manufacturer for the pavement surface .
The Department will test in accordance with Section The retoreflectivity of permanent pavement marking tape for minimum requirements as specified in the Section Pavement Markings .
Remove and replace at the Contractors expense any preformed pavement marking tape installed that has an average minimum initial reflectivity below the values defined in Section Pavement Markings .
Use blackout tape to completely cover the existing pavement markings .
Use tape that is inches wider than the existing pavement marking to ensure complete coverage .
Prepare pavement surface apply tape and remove tape as per the Manufacturers recommendations .
Correct at the Contractors expense any failure of the tape to remain in place or adequately mask the existing pavement markings .
If any of the existing pavement markings are damaged or removed due to the removal of blackout tape restore the existing markings as directed by the Engineer at the Contractors expense .
Install raisedrecessed pavement markers as specified below .
Saw cut the pavement to match the bottom contour of the marker housing using a saw and blade suitable for the pavement Material being sawed .
The depth of the cut slot must allow the housing to be set in epoxy with leveling lugs resting on the pavement surface so that the front edge of marker is at or below the surface of the pavement .
Install the epoxy and pavement marker in the prepared contour slot in the pavement per the Manufacturers recommendations .
Replace existing raisedrecessed pavement marker lenses as specified below .
Remove the existing reflective pavement marker lenses from the metal housing. . Clean the metal casing as recommended by the Manufacturer prior to the replacement of the new lenses . .
C. Remove existing raisedrecessed pavement marker lens or housing assembly as specified below .
If the entire housing is required to be removed remove the entire housing from the pavement surface using a method that is approved by the Engineer .
Fill the void in the pavement surface with pavement patching material as required by the Engineer .
Removal of pavement marking paint or tape A .
General pavement marking removal requirements .
Perform the removal operation in a manner that will not damage the pavement surface . .
Collect and dispose of all shotabrasive grit and pavement marking Materials removed from the pavement surface .
Use shotabrasive grit blasting or water blasting Equipment to remove pavement marking paint and epoxy resins .
The quantity of pavement markings of the type specified in the Contract Documents will be measured as the number of linear foot of pavement marking line installed and accepted and as the number of square feet of pavement marking symbols or legend installed and accepted . .
D. The quantity of raisedrecessed pavement markers installed or removed will be measured as the actual number of each pavement marker installed or removed complete in place and accepted .
E. The quantity of raisedrecessed pavement marker lenses replaced or removed will be measured as the actual number of each lens removed installed complete in place and accepted .
PAVEMENT MARKINGS SECTION F. The quantity of pavement marking removal will be measured as the number of square feet of pavement marking removed and accepted .
The quantity of pavement marking paint and pavement marking tape of the type specified in the Contract Documents will be paid at the Contract Unit Price per linear foot for pavement marking lines and the Contract Unit Price per square foot for symbols and legend .
Price and payment constitute full compensation for the technical representative furnishing and installing all Materials for preparation of the pavement including any required sandblasting sweeping and cleaning or removal of curing compound on P.C.C .
pavement for removal and repair of markings damaged by vehicles crossing wet markings and for all labor tools Equipment and incidentals required to complete the Work as specified and as directed by the Engineer .
For alkyd thermoplastic pavement markings with reflectivity readings of millicandellas or above but below millicandellas for white or millicandellas for yellow payment will be prorated based on the following formula    Where .
Item Bid Price not Material cost C. The quantity of raisedrecessed pavement markers installed replaced or removed will be paid at the Contract Unit Price per each for the Pay Items listed below .
Price and payment constitute full compensation for furnishing all Materials installation sawcutting cleaning disposal of discarded Materials removal and replacement of existing lenses removal of the lens housing restoration of the existing pavement and for all labor tools Equipment and necessary incidentals required to complete the Work as specified and as directed by the Engineer .
ITEM DESCRIPTION UNIT RAISEDRECESSED PAVEMENT MARKER EACH REPLACEMENT OF RAISEDRECESSED PAVEMENT MARKER LENS EACH REMOVAL OF RAISEDRECESSED PAVEMENT MARKER LENS EACH REMOVAL OF RAISEDRECESSED PAVEMENT MARKER HOUSING EACH D. The quantity of pavement marking removal will be paid at the Contract Unit Price per square foot for the Pay Items listed below .
Price and payment constitute full compensation for furnishing all Materials removing the pavement markings disposing of the removed marking Material covering the exposed aggregate with an approved flat black paint or asphalt sealer and for all labor Equipment tools and incidentals required to complete the Work as specified and as directed by the Engineer .
Install sign panels to the height specified in the Contract Documents the height is to be measured from the bottom of the sign panel to top of the pavement wearing course . .
Install the sign a minimum height of feet above the ground measured from the pavement to the bottom of the sign. . Take care to prevent any damage to the sign panel or mast arm during installation .
Install the sign a minimum height of feet above the ground measured from the pavement to the bottom of the sign. . Take care to prevent any damage to the sign panel span wire or any electrical cable attached to the span wire during installation process .
B. Anchor the tubular marker to the pavement using a method that is approved by the product manufacturer . .
Set cast iron frame and lid or polymer concrete box cover level with the surrounding surface when constructed within pavement sidewalks etc .
Use the directional bore method when specified in the Plans for installation of conduits with a diameter no less than inches under existing pavement .
Use the open cut installation method when specified in the Plans for installation of conduits with a diameter no less than inches under existing pavement .
The Contractor is responsible for the removal of all cut pavement and the replacement and repair of any damaged pavement once the conduit is installed .
Saw cut pavement in accordance with Section and remove and dispose of cut pavement in accordance with Section or Section for bituminous or rigid pavements respectively .
Remove pavement to a width no less than inches and no more than inches .
Patch open trench in accordance with Section for bituminous pavements or Section for rigid pavements .
Conduits all types The quantity of galvanized steel HDPE PVC or flexible metallic liquid tight conduit and nonmetallic pole riser shield will be measured as the number of linear feet of conduit and nonmetallic pole riser shield furnished installed as specified complete in place and accepted. . Measure length of conduit installed under existing pavement by directional bore along the path of the bore from the point that can not be trenched to a point that trenching can resume. . Measure length of conduit installed in open cut pavement unpaved trench on wood pole and on a Structure along the conduit .
Restoration of pavement will be paid under the appropriate Sections of the Standard Specification .
Where a cabinet base is to be placed in existing concrete pavement or sidewalk saw cut the concrete in a square pattern or remove the concrete to the nearest joint .
Repair any damage to the existing pavement at the Contractors expense and meeting the approval of the Engineer .
Removal or replacement of any type of pavement under this Item is incidental to the cost of the Item .
Where a pole base is to be placed in existing concrete pavement such as a sidewalk saw cut the concrete in a square pattern or remove the concrete to the nearest joint . .
Saw cut a groove into the pavement that is inch wide and up to inches deep .
Install a minimum of inch of sealer on top of the loop detector wire and finish flush with the pavement .
Seal any drilled holes in the pavement .
Where the junction well is directly behind the edgeofpavement curb or sidewalk bore a inch rotary drill hole between the edgeof pavement curb or sidewalk and the junction well as shown in the Contract Documents .
Where the junction well is set farther away from the edge of pavement usually on the backside of a grass buffer install a length of inch galvanized rigid metal conduit and weatherproof fitting between the rotary drill hole and junction well in accordance with the Contract Documents .
The quantity of inch galvanized rigid metal conduit detector sleeve with loop wire furnished installed complete in place and accepted will be paid at the Contract Unit Price as follows ITEM DESCRIPTION UNIT FURNISH INSTALL A INCH GALVANIZED RIGID METAL CONDUIT DETECTOR SLEEVE WITH LOOP WIRE LF Price and payment constitute full compensation for furnishing and installing the galvanized rigid metal conduit drilling required for installation concrete andor pavement patching sealing the conduit ends internal bushings shown in the Contract Documents and all hardware labor tools Equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the Item as specified and as directed by the Engineer .
Topsoil friable loam soil of uniform quality and free from heavy clay frozen clods lumps exceeding inches in diameter plants roots sticks and foreign materials harmful to plant growth such as fragments of bituminous concrete pavement and surface treatment. . Topsoil reasonably free of noxious perennial weeds or wood vegetation and completely void of Johnsongrass Sorghum halapense Canada Thistle Cirsium arvense Burcucumber Sicyos angulatus Giant Ragweed Ambrosia trifida and Texas Amaranth Amaranthus palmeri. . Topsoil can not be delivered until the source of supply has been approved by the Engineer .
percent passing the sieve when tested according to AASHTO T. Do not use crushed concrete or recycled asphalt pavement RAP for this purpose. . Use geotextile fabric meeting the requirements in Section of DelDOTs Standard Specifications .
When placing base course aggregate in areas to be paved with pervious pavement asphalt or concrete construct the surface of the aggregate to compacted grade within the range of .
Table Design ESALS Millions Coarse Aggregate Angularity AASHTO T minimum Flat and Elongated ASTM with a aspect ratio Maximum LA Abrasion AASHTO T Sodium Sulfate AASHTO T Deleterious Materials AASHTO T mm mm Maximum Loss . . to to XXYY denotes that XX of the coarse aggregate has one fractured face and YY has two or more fractured faces ASPHALT MATERIALS PRODUCTION SECTION .. RAP RAS The percent of recycled materials RAP RAS allowed in the pavement mixture is controlled through the Materials Research recycled mixture program available through the Materials Research Section .
Use Materials for partial depth patching of Portland Cement Concrete Structures and pavements to meet the Project requirements and needs and as specified herein .
.. Asphalt pavements per Contract Documents A .
ASTM D Type II .. Portland Cement Concrete pavements per Contract Documents A .
Use an epoxy resin composition specifically formulated for use as a pavement marking Material and for hotspray application at elevated temperatures .
D. Ship the epoxy pavement marking Materials to the job site in strong substantial containers .
Use preformed retroreflective markings that are fusible to bituminous asphalt pavement by means of the normal heat of a propane type of torch .
Adhesives primers or sealers are not necessary prior to the preformed retroreflective markings application on bituminous asphalt pavement . .
Conform to pavement contours breaks and faults through the action of traffic at normal pavement temperatures .
Use markings that have resealing characteristics and are capable of fusing to itself and previously applied worn hydrocarbon andor alkyd thermoplastic pavement markings. . Use markings capable of application on bituminous asphalt pavement wearing courses during the paving operation in accordance with the manufacturers instructions and are immediately ready for traffic after application .
inches for all transverse lines and symbolslegends. . Use markings that once applied are resistant to deterioration due to exposure to sunlight water oil diesel fuels gasoline pavement oil content salt and adverse weather conditions . .
Apply the preformed retroreflective pavement markings in accordance with manufacturers instructions so that they are neat and durable .
Supply removable retroreflective pavement marking tape that can be readily removed when the markings are no longer applicable. . Supply markings white or yellow retroreflective pavement marking that remain wet and dry reflective throughout its useful life on flexible backing . .
The markings shall be suitable for application on new or existing Portland cement concrete or bituminous pavements with a precoated pressure sensitive adhesive .
Observation Angle . . Retroreflected Luminance Millicandelas Millicandelas c. Use a pavement marking Material capable of use for patching worn areas of the same type in accordance with manufacturers instructions. . RaisedRecessed Pavement Markers .
Use reflectors that meet the requirements of ASTM D . C. Provide pavement marker color combinations in accordance with the DE MUTCD .
