One or more layers of a pavement structure designed to accommodate the traffic load the top layer of which resists skidding traffic abrasion and the disintegrating effects of climate .
The graded portion of a highway within top and side slopes prepared as a foundation for the pavement structure and shoulders .
The portion of the roadway defined as the prism of embankment situated beneath the shoulders and pavement structure and inside the lines projected downward and outward on a one to one slope from the outside edges of the roadway shoulders to their intersection with the base of the embankment .
The top surface of a roadbed upon which the pavement structure shoulders and curbs are constructed .
The cost savings and other benefits generated by the Proposal must be sufficient to warrant review and processing as determined by the Engineer. . A proposal changing the type or thickness of the pavement structure will be rejected. . No VECP proposal can be used to alter incentive and disincentive rates and maximums on Cost plus Time bid AB projects . .
The design shall match corridor future development plans and architectural aesthetic and pavement requirements if applicable .
except HMA that is used for patching and temporary pavement .
The Contractor shall take retroreflectivity readings on all modified epoxy pavement marking lines for each mile of roadway striping on the project. . A test section is defined as each continuous line type lane lines centerlines edge lines channelizing lines and others no greater than one mile in length which has been completed in a single day .
Initial minimum retroreflectivity reading mcdmlux in a one mile line section of pavement marking paint shall be for white and for yellow .
Conformity to the Contract of all Hot Mix Asphalt Item except Hot Mix Asphalt Patching and temporary pavement will be determined by tests and evaluations of elements that include asphalt content gradation inplace density and joint density in accordance with the followingAll work performed and all materials furnished shall conform to the lines grades cross sections dimensions and material requirements including tolerances shown in the Contract .
For joint density a new process will be established for each new layer of pavement or for changes in joint construction .
The PF and QL will be made based on test results for the elements of compressive strength and pavement thickness compressive strength criteria or the elements of flexural strength and pavement thickness flexural strength criteria .
Incentive or Disincentive payment will not be made for thickness of concrete pavement furnished by the Contractor and placed by others .
When compressive strength criteria is indicated then the QL will be calculated for the elements of compressive strength and pavement thickness on a process basis .
When flexural strength criteria is indicated then the QL will be calculated for the elements of flexural strength and pavement thickness on a process basis .
Changes in mix design material source design pavement thickness or the method being utilized to place the pavement are considered changes in process .
Construction of mainline pavement including the shoulders if placed with the mainline is a single process providing there are no changes in process as described above. . Construction of ramps acceleration and deceleration lanes shoulders placed separately and areas requiring hand work are considered separate processes. . A change in the mix design is a process change for the compressive strength element or the flexural strength element but is not a process change for the pavement thickness element. . b When it is necessary to represent material by one or two tests each individual test shall have a PF computed in accordance with the following If the value of the test is at or above the lower tolerance limit then PF ..
For compressive strength and pavement thickness When Pn If QL then PF .
The Contractor shall perform process control PC testing for the pavement surface texture depth in accordance with CP Method B .
The start of PC testing for texturing depth shall be completed within hours after the first linear feet of textured pavement is placed for each lane .
The Contractor shall correct surface texture deficiencies prior to pavement smoothness testing and pavement thickness determinations .
The pavement smoothness category shall be MRI Category II unless shown otherwise on the plans .
At least weeks prior to the Prepaving Conference the Contractor may request a change to the pavement smoothness category based on the CDOTs Design Bulletin guidelines for assigning pavement smoothness categories which can be found at httpswww.codot.govbusinessdesignsupportbulletins_manualsdesign bulletins . .
The Contractor shall not assume a change to the pavement smoothness category will be granted and shall be prepared to build the pavement according to the assigned smoothness category .
The finished transverse and longitudinal surface elevation of the pavement shall be measured using a foot straightedge .
The Contractor shall furnish an approved foot straightedge depth gauge and operator to aid the Engineer in testing the pavement surface .
The longitudinal surface smoothness of the final pavement surface shall be tested by the Contractor in accordance with CP using the Contractors highspeed profiler HSP .
The distance calibration site shall be feet long and shall be on a relatively flat straight section of pavement as approved by the Engineer .
The profile shall include transverse joints when pavement is placed by the project on both sides of the joint .
When pavement is placed on only one side of the joint the profile shall start and stop at project paving limits .
The profile of the section of pavement feet outside the paving limits to feet inside paving limits will be evaluated in accordance with subsection .a .
When both new pavement and a new bridge or new bridge pavement are being constructed in a project the profile of the area feet each side of the bridge deck shall be deleted from the profile before the MRI is determined .
The Contractor shall not perform any corrective work that will affect the pavement smoothness for ten working days after completion of the SA testing or as approved by the Engineer .
The Contractor shall use traffic cones with reflective tape or reflective tape on the pavement at the beginning and end of each lane for triggering the start and stop locations on the profiler and at any other location where portions of the profile are being excluded .
mile section or fraction thereof of completed pavement .
Acceptance and incentive adjustments for pavement smoothness will be made on a square yard basis in accordance with the following .
The pavement requiring corrective work shall be removed full width of the lane and the full thickness of the layer in accordance with subsection ..
The overlay shall cover the full width of the pavement including shoulders .
Grinding shall not reduce planned pavement thickness by more than .
The entire ground area of the final pavement surface shall be covered with a Tack Coat conforming to Section when grinding is complete .
The grinding process shall produce a pavement surface that is true to grade and uniform in appearance .
The pavement surface after grinding shall have no depressions or misalignment of slope in the longitudinal direction exceeding ⅛ inch in feet when measured with a foot straightedge placed parallel to the centerline .
The slurry and residue resulting from the grinding operation shall not be allowed to flow across lanes occupied by the traffic and shall be continuously removed during the grinding operation leaving the pavement in a clean condition .
Cores shall be taken to verify that minimum pavement thicknesses have been maintained .
After the Contractor has completed the required corrective work the Contractor shall retest the pavement in accordance with subsection .b .
Final acceptance and incentive adjustments for pavement smoothness will be made on a square yard basis in accordance with the following Incentive payments will be based on the MRI for each .
For MRI Category IV pavements the following shall be used for acceptance An MRI for each .
mile section shall be determined on the original pavement surface prior to beginning the work .
mile section shall be determined on the pavement surface after the work is complete .
The pavement smoothness for HMA Recycling Treatments and Thin Lifts that will be overlaid with a final riding surface will not be evaluated by the Department for Smoothness acceptance .
The pavement smoothness category shall be MRI Category II unless shown on the plans .
At least weeks prior to the Prepaving Conference the Contractor may request a change to the pavement smoothness category based on the CDOTs Design Bulletin guidelines for assigning pavement smoothness categories which can be found at httpswww.codot.govbusinessdesignsupportbulletins_manualsdesign bulletins .
The Contractor shall not assume a change to the pavement smoothness category will be granted and shall be prepared to build the pavement according to the assigned smoothness category .
The finished transverse and longitudinal surface elevation of the pavement shall be measured using a foot straightedge .
The Contractor shall furnish an approved foot straightedge depth gauge and operator to aid the Engineer in testing the pavement surface .
The longitudinal surface smoothness of the final pavement surface will be tested by the Department in accordance with CP using the Departments highspeed profiler HSP .
The distance calibration site shall be feet long and shall be on a relatively flat straight section of pavement as approved by the Engineer . .
The profile will include transverse joints when pavement is placed by the project on both sides of the joint .
When pavement is placed on only one side of the joint the profile will start and stop at project paving limits .
The profile of the section of pavement feet outside the paving limits to feet inside paving limits will be evaluated in accordance with subsection .a .
When both new pavement and a new bridge or new bridge pavement are being constructed in a project the profile of the area feet each side of the bridge deck will be deleted from the profile before the MRI is .
The Department will use traffic cones with reflective tape or reflective tape on the pavement at the beginning and end of each lane for triggering the start and stop locations on the profiler and at any other location where portions of the profile are being excluded .
mile section or fraction thereof of completed pavement .
Acceptance and incentive adjustments for pavement smoothness will be made on a square yard basis in accordance with the following Incentive adjustments will be based on the MRI for each .
Grinding shall not reduce planned pavement thickness by more than .
When any grinding on concrete pavement occurs where a core for determining pavement thickness has been previously taken another core shall be taken after the grinding has been completed and shall replace the original core in the calculation of pavement thickness incentive and disincentive .
Joint sealant that has been damaged by grinding on concrete pavement shall be repaired or replaced at the Contractors expense in accordance with Standard Plan M and .
subsection .. Cores shall be taken to verify that minimum pavement thicknesses have been maintained .
The grinding process shall produce a pavement surface that is true to grade and uniform in appearance .
The pavement surface after grinding shall have no depressions or misalignment of slope in the longitudinal direction exceeding ⅛ inch in feet when measured with a foot straightedge placed parallel to the centerline .
The slurry and residue resulting from the grinding operation shall not be allowed to flow across lanes occupied by the traffic and shall be continuously removed during the grinding operation leaving the pavement in a clean condition .
After the Contractor has completed the required corrective work the Department will retest the pavement in accordance with subsection .b .
Final acceptance and incentive adjustments for pavement smoothness will be made on a square yard basis in accordance with the following Incentive payments will be based on the MRI for each .
Hauling of materials over the base course or surface course under construction shall be limited by the Contractor to methods and equipment that will prevent damage to the pavement structure .
Loads will not be permitted on a concrete pavement or structure before the expiration of the curing period .
If the Contract involves the placement of material on or utilization of a previously constructed subgrade pavement structure or structure the Contractor shall maintain the previously constructed work during all construction operations .
If during the prosecution of the project the Contractor satisfactorily completes a unit or portion of the project such as a structure an interchange or a section of road or pavement that can be used advantageously for traffic the Engineer may make final inspection of that unit .
All HMA Item except HMA Patching and temporary pavement shall be tested in accordance with the following program of process control testing and acceptance testing .
Prior to or in conjunction with placing the first tons of asphalt pavement under the direction of the Engineer a CTP will be conducted between acceptance testing and process control testing programs .
At the Engineers discretion additional random inplace density tests may be taken in order to meet scheduled minimums provided the applicable pavement layer is available for testing under safe conditions .
The Contractor and the Engineer shall conduct a check testing program CTP prior to the placement of any concrete pavement .
Check testing shall be completed before any portland cement concrete pavement is placed .
All postconsumer and industrial glass beads for pavement marking shall have been manufactured from North American glass waste streams in the United States of America .
The Contractor shall provide erect and maintain barricades suitable and sufficient lights pavement markings signs and other traffic control devices and shall protect the work and safety of the public in accordance with the Contract .
For example for square yards of inch concrete pavement Q should be .
SECTION REMOVAL OF STRUCTURES AND OBSTRUCTIONS DESCRIPTION This work consists of the removal and disposal of trees slope and ditch protection abandoned utility services curb gutter pipes sidewalk structures bridges or parts of bridges railroad appurtenances traffic control devices impact attenuators guardrail fences foundations detours pavements pavement markings and all other obstructions that are not designated or permitted to remain .
Pavement markings shall be removed from the pavement to the maximum extent possible by methods that do not materially alter or damage the surface or texture of the pavement to the satisfaction of the Engineer .
The proposed method of pavement marking removal shall be designated by the Contractor at the Preconstruction Conference and approved by the Engineer .
Operations that do not produce the desired result damage the pavement or may constitute a hazard to the traveling public will not be permitted .
Materials deposited on the pavement as a result of removal of pavement markings shall be promptly removed so as not to interfere with traffic or roadway drainage .
Temporary marking tape sections longer than one foot shall be removed before placement of the final pavement course .
Temporary pavement marking paint on the approved final alignment shall be removed completely from the roadway surface at locations of permanent pavement markings as shown on the plans .
The removal location shall be clean dry and free of laitance oil dirt grease paint and other foreign contaminants prior to application of final pavement marking .
The Contractor shall not remove more pavement marking paint than what can be replaced with permanent pavement marking during the same working day or working period .
If a storm or other event prevents the Contractor from completing the placement of permanent marking the Contractor shall halt the removal operation and place raised flexible pavement markers where temporary pavement markings have been removed but the permanent markings have not been placed .
Raised flexible pavement markers shall be installed with one marker at foot centers .
Raised flexible pavement markers shall remain in place while the pavement is drying prior to the permanent marking application .
Permanent marking application shall resume when the pavement is dry and has had no moisture for a minimum of hours .
Removal of pavement marking paint on temporary transitional alignments shall be performed by grinding or waterblasting .
The removal shall result in percent removal of the paint and a wide swath of ground pavement surrounding the former location of the temporary paint .
All concrete pavement sidewalks structures curbs gutters etc .
Concrete pavement to be broken and left in place shall be broken so the largest fragment does not exceed square yard in surface .
All required pavement markings removed by the planing shall be restored before the roadway is opened to traffic .
Removal of pavement marking will be measured in square feet completed and accepted .
Sandblasting of pavement that is to be covered with pavement marking material will be measured as the same area as measured for the pavement marking for which the sandblasting is required .
Removal of temporary pavement marking on transitions will be measured by the actual square feet of the swath that is removed for the required width .
Removal of pavement marking for the permanent alignment will be measured as the actual in square feet of pavement marking that is removed .
Temporary raised flexible pavement markers used in accordance with subsection .a will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the work . .
Upon approval of the proof rolling the sub base base course or initial pavement course shall be placed within hours .
If the Contractor fails to place the sub base base course or initial pavement course within hours or the condition of the subgrade changes due to weather or other conditions proof rolling and correction shall be performed again at the Contractors expense .
All other related work including removal of existing pavement backfilling shoring and labor will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
Proof rolling will be measured and paid for only once for each test strip required during construction for final verification of subgrade prior to placement of subbase base coarse or pavement or for each incident where the Engineer directs it through the course of construction .
Additional proof rolling that is required due to failure of embankment fill due to the Contractors failure to place sub base base course or initial pavement course within hours of the initial proof roll or due to the condition of the subgrade changing due to weather or additional proof rolls deemed necessary due to the Contractors choice to deviate from minimum equipment and compaction efforts specified herein shall be at the Contractors expense .
Structure backfill placed at bridge piers in waterways and water channels that does not support embankments pavements or slope protection will not require compaction .
Material from pavement saw cutting operations shall be cleaned from the roadway surface during operations using a vacuum .
Prior to installation the Contractor shall sweep the surface of the area in which the storm drain inlet protection devices are to be installed such that the pavement is free of sediment and debris .
The Contractor shall protect storm drain facilities adjacent to locations where pavement cutting operations involving wheel cutting saw cutting sand blasting or abrasive water jet blasting are to take place .
Aggregate bags shall be placed on a stable surface consisting of pavement grass or gravel .
The Contractor shall inspect equipment vehicles and repair areas daily to ensure petroleum oils and lubricants POL are not leaking onto the soil or pavement .
Absorbent material or containers approved by the Engineer shall be used to prevent leaking POL from reaching the soil or pavement .
Shrubs shall not be planted closer than feet from the edge of pavement .
Compaction of each reclaimed asphalt pavement aggregate layer shall continue until a wet density of at least percent of the maximum wet density when determined in accordance with a one point AASHTO T Method D test has been achieved .
The surface shall be tested prior to the application of any primer or pavement .
All proof rolling will be measured and paid for in accordance with Section . . DIVISION PAVEMENTS SECTION PLANT MIX PAVEMENTSGENERAL DESCRIPTION These specifications include general requirements that are applicable to all types of hot mix asphalts irrespective of gradation of aggregate kind and quantity of asphalt cement or pavement use .
If one or more samples fail to meet the requirements of Table material from the area represented by the failing sample will be evaluated as follows If the area represented by the failing sample contains tons of the new pavement or less then the result for the failing sample shall be considered a lot of one and will be evaluated according to the formulas and procedures in subsection ..
If the area represented by the failing sample contains more than tons of the new pavement then the material from the area represented by the failing sample will be sampled and tested according to the following method Pavement samples for possible moisture susceptibility testing will be taken at a minimum frequency of once every tons throughout the project .
The hot mix asphalt shall be placed only when both the air and surface temperatures equal or exceed the temperatures specified in Table and the Engineer determines that the weather conditions permit the pavement to be properly placed and compacted .
Surface is defined as the existing base on which the new pavement is to be placed .
All applicable pavement markings shall be applied to the temporary layer surface .
The system shall provide a sloped safety edge equal to degrees plus or minus degrees measured from the pavement surface cross slope extended .
The finished shape of the safety edge shall extend for the full depth of the asphalt pavement or for the top inches whichever is less .
When ordered by the Engineer or specified in the Contract a tack coat shall be applied between pavement courses and paid for in accordance with Section .
Irregularities in the existing pavement or base shall be brought to uniform grade and cross section .
Asphalt plant mix shall be placed only on properly constructed surfaces that are free from substances that would adversely affect the pavement quality .
The longitudinal joint in both a new pavement and an overlay pavement layer shall offset the joint in the layer immediately below by inches .
In every pavement layer the longitudinal joints shall not be constructed in the wheel paths .
The Contractor shall submit a longitudinal joint and pavement marking plan three days prior to the PrePaving Conference .
The plan shall show the location and configuration of the proposed longitudinal joints and pavement markings and shall detail the methods to be used to field establish a control line .
The joints in the top layer of pavement shall be located as follows unless otherwise approved in writing by the Engineer For lane roadways offset to inches from the center of pavement and from the outside edge of travel lanes .
With the approval of the Engineer the Contractor may leave an exposed longitudinal joint conforming to the following When the thickness of the pavement course being placed is .
When the thickness of the pavement course being placed is greater than .
If more than square feet of segregated pavement is ordered removed and replaced in any continuous linear feet of paver width laydown operations shall be discontinued until the source of the segregation has been found and corrected .
If at any time the Engineer observes segregated areas of pavement he will notify the Contractor immediately. . After rolling segregated areas will be delineated by the Engineer and evaluated as follows The Engineer will delineate the segregated areas to be evaluated and inform the Contractor of the location and extent of these areas within two calendar days excluding weekends and holidays of placement .
In accordance with CP the Contractor shall also take five inch cores at random locations designated by the Engineer in nonsegregated pavement adjacent to the segregated area .
These cores shall be within feet of the boundary of the segregated area and in the newly placed pavement .
Longitudinal joint coring applies to all pavement layers .
If a layer of pavement has joints constructed on both sides incentive or disincentive payment for each of those joints will apply to one half of the pavement between the joints .
The Contractor shall construct a compaction pavement test section CTS for each job mix for which or more tons are required for the project .
If inplace densities of the CTS as determined by nuclear density equipment prior to determining density of the cores meet the CTS density requirements the Contractor may begin production paving and continue to place hot mix asphalt pavement under the following conditions The period during which the Contractor continues to pave without test results from cores shall not exceed one working day .
If correlation with the cores reveals that the densities do not meet the CTS requirements the hot mix asphalt pavement placed subsequently will be subject to price reduction or removal and replacement .
The Engineer may take samples of the compacted pavement at random locations on the project for testing .
The tonnage shall be the weight used in the accepted pavement .
When asphalt cement is a separate pay item the amount of asphalt cement contained in reclaimed asphalt pavement RAP material will not be measured or paid for but shall be included in the work .
maintenance and removal of the temporary pavement layer temporary pavement marking and traffic control will not be paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
The asphalt pavement shall be composed of a mixture of aggregate filler if required and asphalt cement .
Hot Mix Asphalt Patching consists of those quantities required for the replacement of unstable corrugated areas in the existing pavement pipe trenches areas removed for curb gutter forms areas between the curb gutter or sidewalk and the existing paved parking lots and areas designated on the plans .
Prior to placement of the patch the exposed sides of the existing pavement shall be thoroughly coated with emulsified asphalt slowsetting .
SECTION HEATING AND SCARIFYING TREATMENT DESCRIPTION This work consists of recycling the top portion of the existing asphalt pavement as shown in the Contract by cleaning heating scarifying redistributing releveling compacting and rejuvenating the existing asphaltic material .
Prior to commencing heating and scarifying operations the pavement shall be cleaned of all loose material .
A minimum of hours shall elapse before an asphalt pavement overlay is applied to the scarified pavement .
Cold recycled pavement damaged by precipitation shall be reprocessed or repaired by methods approved by the Engineer at the Contractors expense .
The construction of cold recycled pavement will not be allowed from September through May unless otherwise approved .
existing pavement which will be removed by a subsequent overlapping milling operation need not be removed .
The exact application rate of the recycling agent will be determined and may be varied as required by existing pavement conditions .
Rolling shall be accomplished so that starting and stopping will be on previously compacted cold recycled pavement or existing pavement. . Any type of rolling that results in cracking movement or other types of pavement distress shall be discontinued until the problem is resolved .
After the recycled material has been compacted traffic including the Contractors equipment shall not be permitted on the cold recycled pavement for at least two hours unless otherwise approved .
Before placing the sealing emulsion or hot mix asphalt overlay the cold recycled pavement shall be allowed to cure until the free moisture is reduced to percent free moisture or less by total weight of mix .
After the free moisture content of the cold recycled pavement has reached the acceptable level the hot mix asphalt overlay or sealing emulsion if required shall be placed .
However unless otherwise approved by the Engineer the cold recycled pavement shall be covered with a minimum thickness of inches of hot mix asphalt within ten calendar days after it is laid and compacted .
Damage caused by the Contractor to the cold recycled pavement shall be repaired at Contractors expense as directed prior to placing any hot asphalt surfacing .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT Inplace cold recycled pavement will be measured by the square yard of paved surface actually recycled complete in place and accepted .
Repair of cold recycled pavement will be measured by the square yard of paved surface repaired and accepted .
BASIS OF PAYMENT The accepted quantity of inplace cold recycled pavement will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard .
Repair of cold recycled pavement damaged by the Contractor or by weather will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
The edges of existing pavements which are to be adjacent to new pavement shall be cleaned to permit the adhesion of asphalt materials .
SECTION JOINT AND CRACK SEALANT DESCRIPTION This work consists of furnishing and placing an approved hot poured joint and crack sealant in properly prepared cracks in asphalt pavements .
These Cracks shall be filled with hot poured joint and crack sealant flush with the pavement surface .
The face of the crack shall be surface dry and the air and pavement temperatures shall both be at least F and rising at the time of sealant application .
Asphalt emulsion shall not be applied on a damp surface when either the air or pavement surface temperature is below F or when weather conditions would prevent the proper construction of the chip seal .
SECTION PORTLAND CEMENT CONCRETE PAVEMENT DESCRIPTION This work consists of constructing a pavement composed of portland cement concrete on a prepared subgrade or base course in accordance with these specifications and in conformity with the lines grades thicknesses and typical cross sections shown on the plans or established .
Concrete shall conform to the requirements for Class P concrete as specified in Section unless it is fast track concrete pavement which shall conform to the requirements for Class E concrete as specified in Section .
The Contractor shall provide a Process Control Plan PCP to minimize voids in the concrete pavement such as clay balls mud balls and other deleterious materials .
The system shall provide a sloped safety edge equal to degrees plus or minus degrees measured from the pavement surface cross slope extended .
The finished shape of the safety edge shall extend for the full depth of the concrete pavement or for the top inches whichever is less .
An electronic monitoring device displaying the operating frequency of each individual internal vibrator shall be required for mainline pavement exceeding feet in length .
The depth of penetration into the concrete pavement slab of internal vibrators shall be between the surface and mid slab and passing above any reinforcing steel .
The trimmed subgrade shall extend at least feet beyond each edge of the proposed concrete pavement when forms are used and at least foot outside the track width of finishing curing and tining equipment for slip form operations .
Low areas in untreated bases may be filled and compacted to a condition similar to that of the surrounding grade or filled with concrete integral with the pavement .
Low areas in treated bases shall be filled with concrete integral with the pavement .
The finished grade shall be maintained in a smooth and compacted condition until the pavement is placed. . Untreated subgrade or base course shall be uniformly moist during concrete placement .
Where concrete is placed adjacent to a newly constructed lane of pavement with the concrete paving equipment operating on the newly constructed pavement the concrete shall have attained a minimum compressive strength of psi prior to commencing paving .
Determination that the concrete has reached psi shall not relieve the Contractor of the responsibility for protecting the pavement .
Following placement the concrete shall be struck off to conform to the cross section shown on the plans and to an elevation such that when the concrete is properly consolidated and finished the surface of the pavement will be at the elevation shown on the plans or established .
The Contractor shall provide a Process Control Plan PCP to ensure that proper hand finishing is accomplished in accordance with current Industry standards for concrete pavement placement .
The PCP shall identify and address issues affecting the quality of finished concrete pavement including but not limited to Timing of hand finishing operations Methodology to place and transport concrete Equipment and tools to be utilized Qualifications and training of finishers and supervisors When the Engineer determines that any element of the approved PCP is not being implemented or that hand finished concrete is unacceptable work shall be suspended .
The final surface of the pavement shall be uniformly textured with a broom burlap drag artificial turf or diamond ground in order to obtain the specified texture depth .
Broom burlap drag or artificial turf texture shall be installed within minutes after strikeoff or as pavement conditions allow Diamond grinding shall be performed using diamond blades mounted on a selfpropelled machine designed for diamond grinding and texturing concrete pavement .
The equipment shall have a positive means of vacuuming the grinding residue from the pavement surface leaving the surface in a clean neardry condition .
The diamond grinding process shall produce a pavement surface that is true to grade and uniform in appearance .
The pavement surface after diamond grinding shall have no depressions or misalignment of slope in the longitudinal direction exceeding inch in feet when measured with a foot straightedge placed parallel to the centerline .
Stationing shall be stamped into the outside edge of the pavement as shown on the plans .
When a joint is saw cut more than inches from the designated location the pavement shall be removed and replaced to the nearest correct joints .
When portions of concrete pavement are removed and replaced the portion removed shall be the full width of the lane and length of the affected slabs .
Immediately after sawing the sawed joints shall be flushed with water to remove any saw residue and the saw residue shall be completely removed from the surface of the pavement .
All equipment other than saws shall be kept off the pavement until the sawing is complete .
When adjacent lanes of pavement are constructed separately tie bars may be bent at right angles against the edge of the first lane constructed and straightened into final position before the concrete of the adjacent lane is placed .
The center of the dowel assembly or the insertion location shall be marked on both sides of the pavement slab for reference in sawing the joint .
Assembly shall be securely fastened to the subbase and constructed to firmly hold all the dowel bars at T depth parallel to each other and to the pavement grade and alignment .
Depth Any bar within the top inches of the pavement or at a depth less than the sawcut depth .
Any bar within the bottom inches of the pavement .
When rigid assemblies are used to install dowel bars and the bars are rejected for depth the Contractor may core the pavement to verify the MIT Scan depth results .
If the Project has less than linear feet of pavement the test section will not be required .
If a Project does not have sections of continuous pavement greater than linear feet the test section will not be required .
Sections of continuous pavement constructed by the project less than linear feet will not require Dowel Bar Placement Testing .
Preformed joint filler expansion joints shall be constructed at all existing or proposed structures and features projecting through into or against the pavement and at other locations specified in the Contract .
Failure to cover the surface of the concrete within minutes shall be cause for immediate suspension of the paving operations. . An initial application of curing compound shall be applied under pressure by mechanical sprayers at the rate of at least gallon per square feet of pavement surface .
The second application rate shall be at least gallon per square feet of pavement surface .
Additional curing compound shall be applied as needed to ensure that percent of the pavement is covered .
The sides of pavement slabs shall be immediately sprayed with curing compound when the forms are removed .
Maturity meters to monitor and record time and pavement temperature shall be installed at the time of placement when the air temperature is expected to fall below F during the next three days or as requested by the Engineer when the air temperature is expected to fall below F during the next three days .
The Contractor shall maintain the temperature of the pavement at or above F until the pavement has attained a compressive strength of at least psi .
Each maturity meter shall be capable of recording the time and temperature at three depths ½ inch below the surface mid slab and ½ inch above the bottom of the pavement .
Locations where the maturity meters are placed shall be protected in the same manner as the rest of the concrete pavement .
The following procedures shall be followed if the temperature of the concrete pavement falls below F before the concrete reaches psi The Contractor will take cores at locations designated by the Engineer .
Defective concrete pavement shall be repaired or replaced at the Contractors expense .
Defective concrete pavement replaced after smoothness measurement shall be retested for localized roughness .
Pavement slabs containing more than one void greater in depth than half the pavement thickness. . Pavement slabs containing a cumulative surface area of moderate and severe voids as defined below greater than one percent of the slabs total area .
The defect will be considered an extreme void when the largest dimension either height width or length is greater than the thickness of the pavement .
When portions of concrete pavement are removed and replaced the portion removed shall be the full width of the lane and length of the affected slab .
Slabs with cracks penetrating the full depth of pavement shall be removed as required above .
If the spalled area to be repaired abuts a working joint or a working crack which penetrates the full depth of the pavement an insert or other bondbreaking medium .
The plan shall detail at a minimum changes in paving procedures materials and equipment required to construct concrete pavement that meets the specifications .
Before installation of the backer rod or sealant the following shall be completed Repair of defective pavement slabs and repair and proper curing of cracks or spalls in accordance with subsection .. Corrective work for texturing .
Corrective work for pavement smoothness in accordance with subsection .. A copy of the manufacturers recommendations pertaining to the storage heating and application of the sealant shall be submitted to the Engineer prior to commencing work .
The residue from sawing shall be removed from the pavement by the Contractor .
Any damage to the concrete pavement such as spalling or fracturing shall be repaired by the Contractor as directed by the Engineer at no cost to the project .
The Contractor shall thoroughly clean the joint and adjacent pavement for a width of at least inch on each side of the joint of all scale dirt dust residue and other foreign material that will prevent bonding of the joint sealant .
Sealant shall not be placed unless the surfaces of the joint and the pavement are dry and the weather is dry .
Sealant shall not be placed prior to expiration of the sealant manufacturers recommended concrete pavement curing period if any .
The Contractor shall prevent smearing of the joint sealant material onto the concrete pavement driving surface .
Smeared joint sealant shall be removed from the pavement before it is opened to traffic .
Sealing shall be completed before opening the pavement to traffic unless otherwise specified or approved .
Builtup forms shall not be used except where the total area of the pavement of any specified thickness on the project is less than square yards .
Forms for bridge approach slabs or for pavement areas with irregular dimensions shall be made of metal or straight sound timber .
The paver shall be capable of providing a dense and homogeneous pavement with an even texture and no porous areas and to the slope and elevation specified .
The Contractor shall furnish a machine to develop and establish a profile grade for the new pavement .
The Contractor shall perform the process control PC testing for pavement thickness .
This PC testing plan shall include determining the thickness of freshly finished concrete pavement at a minimum frequency of one measurement per linear feet of each traffic lane .
Areas such as sections of mainline pavement that are less than linear feet long intersections entrances crossovers ramps etc .
Approval and inspection of the Contractors PC plan and operations does not constitute acceptance of the pavement thickness and does not relieve the Contractor of the responsibility for providing the required hardened pavement cores for project acceptance testing .
PA testing consists of determining pavement thickness by measuring the length of cores taken by the Contractor from the hardened pavement as outlined below .
Acceptance of the pavement thickness and price adjustment for deficient thickness will be based on project acceptance tests .
The Contractor shall obtain inch or inch nominal diameter cores from the hardened pavement that are suitable for measuring in accordance with AASHTO T . When the cores are removed from the pavement the Engineer will take possession and determine their length in accordance with AASHTO T . The lower tolerance limit TL for pavement thickness shall be Plan Thickness PT minus .
Any pavement thickness test value that exceeds the PT by more than .
One core will be taken at each location. . Where the new portland cement concrete pavement overlays an existing roadway cores for measuring pavement thickness shall be determined by a stratified random procedure in the longitudinal direction and by the point of minimum required thickness in the lateral direction as shown in the plans .
The Engineer may exclude this area from pavement thickness measurements for incentive and disincentive payments .
The actual thickness of the pavement in this area will be determined by taking exploratory cores .
Exploratory cores taken at the Contractors expense will be used to determine the extent of deficient pavement for pavement removal .
The pavement shall not be opened to traffic until the concrete has achieved a compressive strength of psi .
Prior to opening the pavement to traffic the roadway shall be cleaned as approved .
For placements with multiple maturity meters the lowest compressive strength shall determine when the pavement may be opened to traffic .
If a maturity meter fails is tampered with is destroyed or was not placed the section of pavement represented by the maturity meter shall remain closed to traffic for a period of days .
The Contractor may choose at his own expense to core the section of pavement represented by the maturity meter .
To open the section of pavement the average compressive strength of the cores shall be a minimum of psi .
The width for measurement will be the width of the pavement shown on the typical cross section of the plans including additional widening where called for or as otherwise directed by the Engineer in writing .
Furnishing installing and monitoring vibrators and vibrator monitoring device will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the work for concrete pavement .
IDP will be made when the concrete pavement or a major phase of the concrete pavement has been completed and all the data for computing the IDP is available .
Furnishing calibrating and use of maturity meters wire and other appurtenances including the molding curing and breaking of cylinders for calibration and placement of calibration slabs will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the work. . b Where the pavement thickness is more than Plan Thickness PT minus .
inch IDP for the element of pavement thickness will be applied to the contract unit price in accordance with subsections .
The pavement surface shall be broomed clean immediately prior to beginning the crack reduction geotextile treatment using a selfpropelled power broom .
The asphalt cement binder shall be applied to the pavement surface at the rate of approximately .
As shown on the plans facing panels directly exposed to spray from deiced pavements and indirect windborne spray shall have three coats of water resistant or repellant concrete sealer applied to the front face of the wall before the wall is opened to traffic .
The mixture used shall conform to the requirements for the asphalt pavement used on the project .
The entire deck and the sides of the curbs for a height of inches above the plan thickness of the hot mix asphalt shall be free of all foreign material such as dirt grease old pavement and primer .
The accepted quantity of Elastomeric Concrete End Dam will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic foot and shall include all work and materials necessary to complete the item including saw cutting existing asphalt pavement removing asphalt pavement light sandblasting of existing concrete and any existing steel and all miscellaneous work required .
Class E concrete is used for fast track pavements needing early strength in order to open a pavement to service soon after placement .
Class P concrete is used in pavements .
The Contractor shall provide protection against sulfate attack on concrete structures and pavements by providing concrete manufactured according to the requirements of Table .
to remove all overlying bituminous pavement bridge deck membrane and the upper ¼ inch of the deck concrete .
Test slabs that are placed as acceptable work in segments of concrete pavement or as approach slabs or other locations acceptable to the Engineer will be paid for as the pay item for that element of the Contract .
The dimensions of the drags shall be such that a strip of material at least feet wide is in contact with the full width of pavement surface while each drag is used .
Trenches in existing streets except streets which are to be closed or abandoned shall be resurfaced as soon as practicable with the type and thickness of bases and pavement shown in the Contract or as designated .
When a manhole is located in the pavement area it shall not be constructed to final grade until the pavement has been completed .
Excavations in existing streets except streets which are to be closed or abandoned shall be resurfaced as soon as practicable with the type and thickness of bases and pavement shown on the plans or as designated .
The trench for geocomposite underdrain and geocomposite edge drain for subsurface drainage at pavement edge and elsewhere as specified on the plans shall be excavated to the dimensions and grade shown on the plans .
The geocomposite drain material shall then be placed along the downhill side or the pavement side of the trench and secured to the trench side .
The inch minimum deep keyway cut or formed in the pavement surface for the barrier base shall be cleaned and approved before placing concrete .
Bituminous curb shall be constructed of the same gradation of aggregate and the same grade of bituminous material as the top layer or top course of bituminous pavement used on the project .
When the curb is constructed adjacent to or on concrete pavement expansion joints shall be located opposite the expansion joints in the pavement .
The post shall be of such length to provide a height of inches above the edge of the pavement and to provide the required anchoring depth .
When specified conduit shall be installed under existing pavement by jacking or drilling operations .
Where plans show that existing pavement is to be removed jacking the conduit is not required .
Jacking or drilling pits shall be kept a minimum of feet clear of the edge of pavement .
When trenching is specified to place conduit under existing pavement that is not to be removed the trench width shall be inches or less .
The following items will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the work Soil testing for foundations Junction boxes splice boxes pull boxes pull wire weatherheads adaptors and expansion joints for conduit Additional pull or splice boxes installed at the Contractors option Saw cutting trenching excavation backfill jacking drilling pits underground electrical warning tape removal of pavement sidewalks gutters and curbs and their replacement in kind to match existing grade and all other work necessary to complete conduit installation Electrical conductor tagging Direct burial cable in conduit Testing of the lighting installation including temporary power and all required cable connections The lump sum price bid for wiring will be full compensation for all electrical circuitry necessary to complete the lighting installation as shown on the plans .
Excavation and backfilling shall be performed in accordance with the requirements of Section and to the following All excavation and backfilling shall be made before other improvements are completed so as to not require the repair or replacement of new sidewalks pavement or landscaping .
Improvements such as sidewalks curbs gutters portland cement concrete and asphalt concrete pavement underlying material lawns and plants and any other improvements removed broken or damaged by the Contractors operations shall be replaced or reconstructed at the Contractors expense with the same kind of material as found on the work or with materials of equal quality .
Bottom of conduit shall be placed inches below top of pavement .
Loop detector wire will be measured by the linear foot and shall include loop wire pavement sawing slot sealant leadin conduit as shown on the plans excavation backfill and all other work necessary to complete the item .
SECTION PAVEMENT MARKING DESCRIPTION This work consists of furnishing and applying pavement marking and furnishing installing and removing temporary pavement marking in accordance with these specifications the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways MUTCD the Colorado supplement thereto and in conformity to the lines dimensions patterns locations and details shown on the plans or established .
All pavement markings shall be placed in accordance with the following requirements .
When the term full compliance is used it means the pavement markings shall meet the requirements of Standard Plan S. a Pavement Marking Plan .
When pavement marking location details are not provided in the Contract the Contractor shall submit a layout of existing conditions to the Engineer for approval or modification .
This layout is to be used as the final pavement marking plan .
Full compliance final pavement markings shall be placed within two weeks after final surfacing is completed. . Full compliance pavement markings shall also be placed on any roadways opened to traffic when the project pavement work is discontinued for more than two weeks .
Temporary pavement markings and control points for the installation of those pavement markings for roadways that are being constructed under traffic shall be installed as follows .
When one roadway of a normally physically divided highway is closed and a crossover is constructed fullcompliance pavement markings shall be placed along the tapers and through the median crossovers to the two way traffic section .
Temporary pavement stencils SCHOOL RR xing etc are not required unless specified in the plans .
Temporary pavement markings shall be installed according to the manufacturers recommendations in such a way that the markings adequately follow the desired alignment. . Control Points consisting of inch by foot marks at foot intervals may be placed as guide markers for the installation of temporary or final pavement markings .
Raised flexible pavement markers may be substituted for these marks .
e Pavement Marking for Seal Coats Section . . Raised flexible pavement markers suitable for use on seal coats shall be installed as follows Nopassing zones shall be marked with two markers placed sidebyside at foot intervals throughout the zone . .
Raised flexible pavement markers installed on foot centers may also be used to mark lane lines through multilane roadway sections .
Auxiliary lanes and shoulder lines may be marked with flexible markers on foot centers or as appropriate. . Fullcompliance final pavement markings shall be placed within one week of completion of the seal coat project .
Striping shall be applied on asphalt or portland cement concrete pavements when the air and pavement temperatures are as follows for highbuild waterborne paint at least F and expected to remain F or above for at least hours for low temperature waterborne paint at least F and expected to remain F or above for at least hours .
The pavement surface shall be dry and clean and free of all latent materials in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
The modified epoxy pavement marking compound shall be applied with equipment that will precisely meter the two components in the ratio given in subsection .a .
Both pavement and air temperatures shall be at least F at the time of modified epoxy pavement marking application .
The surface areas of new portland cement concrete pavement and decks that are to receive markings shall be waterblasted prior to placement of the modified epoxy pavement marking .
The surface areas of new asphalt pavement existing asphalt pavement and existing concrete pavement that are to receive markings shall be cleaned with a high pressure air blast to remove loose material prior to placement of the modified epoxy pavement marking .
Should any pavement become dirty from tracked mud etc .
as determined by the Engineer it shall be cleaned prior to the placement of the modified epoxy pavement marking .
When recommended by the modified epoxy manufacturer a high pressure water blast integrated into the gun carriage shall be used to clean the pavement surface prior to modified epoxy pavement marking application .
Modified epoxy pavement marking shall be applied to the road surface according to the modified epoxy manufacturers recommended methods at the application rate or coverage shown below .
Glass beads shall be applied into the modified epoxy pavement marking by means of a low pressure gravity drop bead applicator .
Modified epoxy pavement marking and beads shall be applied within the following limits Application Rate or Coverage Per Gallon of Modified Epoxy Pavement Marking Minimum Maximum mil Marking sq .
The material shall be applied to the pavement by an extrusion method wherein one side of the shaping die is the pavement and the other three sides are contained by or are part of suitable equipment for heating mixing and controlling the flow of the material .
The equipment shall be so equipped as to permit preheating of the pavement immediately prior to application of the material .
The stripe shall be applied to the pavement either to the right or left of the application unit dependent upon roadway lane being used .
At the time of installation of thermoplastic materials the pavement shall be clean dry and free of laitance oil dirt grease paint or other foreign contaminants .
shall be applied to all pavement surfaces prior to the application of the thermoplastic pavement marking .
Glass beads shall be applied to the thermoplastic pavement marking by means of a low pressure gravity drop bead applicator at a rate of pounds per square feet minimum .
Methyl methacrylate pavement marking shall be installed in accordance with manufacturers recommendations .
Methyl methacrylate pavement markings shall be applied to the road surface according to the manufacturers recommended methods at mil minimum thickness .
Methyl methacrylate pavement marking and beads shall be applied within the following limits .
This retroreflective preformed plastic strip shall be suitable for application on asphaltic or portland cement concrete pavement .
shall be applied to all pavement surfaces prior to the application of the preformed plastic pavement marking .
The surface of the pavement shall be clean free of loose foreign material dry and have no moisture for a minimum of hours prior to application of the markings .
The preformed plastic pavement marking shall be Type I Type II or Type III as shown on the plans .
Prior to beginning installation operations the Contractor shall submit to the Engineer instructions from the performed plastic pavement manufacturer detailing surface preparation grooving requirements and material application .
Unless otherwise shown on the plans typical pavement markings shall conform to the shapes and sizes as shown on Standard Plan S. The Contractor shall make all arrangements to have a manufacturertrained installer of the manufacturers products onsite during the placement of preformed plastic pavement marking to ensure proper installation .
A minimum of two weeks prior to the placement of the preformed plastic pavement marking the Contractor shall submit written documentation of the installers qualifications and training in the installation of preformed plastic pavement marking .
The preformed plastic pavement marking shall be inlaid on new and existing pavements as shown in the Contract .
The Contractor shall not perform wet cutting of pavement unless otherwise directed .
Application and removal of temporary pavement marking associated with wetcutting of pavement shall be at the Contractors expense .
The preformed plastic pavement marking shall conform to pavement contours by the action of traffic and shall be appliable on new dense and open graded asphalt wearing courses during the paving operations according to the manufacturers recommendations .
The grooved width for inlaid preformed plastic pavement marking is called for in the Contract .
The grooved width shall be the pavement marking width plus inch with a tolerance of ¼ inch .
Groove position shall be a minimum of inches from the edge of the pavement marking to the longitudinal pavement joint .
grooves and reclean grooves as necessary prior to application of the preformed plastic pavement markings .
Legends and symbols shall be capable of being affixed to bituminous pavements by heating .
The markings shall conform to pavement contours breaks and faults through the action of traffic at normal pavement temperatures .
The pavement and air temperature shall be as recommended by the manufacturer at the time of application .
The pavement shall be clean dry and free from debris .
The preformed thermoplastic markings shall not be installed on top of existing preformed plastic pavement markings without first removing the existing markings to a depth that insures removal of the adhesive backing of the preformed plastic .
It shall not be installed on top of pavement marking paint without first removing the paint .
Retroreflective tape shall be suitable for temporary use on asphaltic or portland cement concrete pavements .
Temporary marking tape sections longer than foot shall be removed before placement of the final pavement course .
Raised pavement markers temporary shall be installed on center lines edge lines and lane lines where specified in the Contract .
Raised pavement markers temporary shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations and shall be maintained throughout the required construction phase at the Contractors expense .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT The types of pavement marking described herein will be measured by the following units complete in place and accepted .
Modified epoxy pavement marking polyurea and methyl methacrylate pavement marking will be measured by the total number of gallons of components A and B used including glass beads .
Thermoplastic pavement marking preformed thermoplastic pavement marking and preformed plastic pavement marking will be measured by the square foot .
The amount of pavement marking tape to be measured will be the linear feet of the specified width tape applied .
Raised pavement marker temporary will be measured as a unit in place and shall include all adhesive necessary for installation .
Removal of the raised pavement marker shall be included in the work .
Each authorized application of temporary pavement marking will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price for the type of material used. . Control points and Contractor pavement marking plans will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
SECTION CONSTRUCTION ZONE TRAFFIC CONTROL DESCRIPTION This work consists of furnishing installing moving maintaining and removing temporary traffic signs advance warning arrow panels flashing beacon portable barricades channelizing devices delineators temporary traffic signals temporary portable rumble strips mobile pavement marking zones temporary emergency pulloff areas masking and unmasking existing signs in construction zones and concrete barriers as required by the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways and the Colorado Supplement thereto in accordance with the Contract .
These devices shall be manufactured of flexible highimpact resistant material shall be physically attached to the pavement and shall be capable of returning to a vertical position after impact by a vehicle .
When required by the Contract the Contractors Method of Handling Traffic MHT shall include details of a mobile pavement marking zone .
The mobile pavement marking zone shall include as a minimum three operations groups as follows i The application group composed of the pavement marking application truck and at least one cone installation truck .
Group shall place HIGHWAYPAINTINGAHEAD signs on intersecting crossroads and interchange entrance ramps as the pavement marking operation approaches .
Channelizing Device Fixed shall be attached to the pavement in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
Anchoring methods or devices which penetrate the surface of the permanent pavement will not be permitted .
Temporary pavement material for the pulloff area shall be a minimum of inches thick unless otherwise shown on the plans and may be either PCCP or HMA .
Traffic Control Management vehicles traffic control devices and all other work materials and equipment necessary for the mobile pavement marking zone will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
Flagging required for the mobile pavement marking zone will be measured and paid for separately .
Payment for Emergency Pulloff Area Temporary will be full compensation for all work materials and equipment necessary to construct maintain and remove the emergency pulloff area including HMA or PCCP required for constructing the temporary pulloff area temporary concrete barriers impact attenuators and other traffic control devices construction signing and maintaining the temporary pavement .
When approved by the Engineer Emulsified Asphalt HFMSsP with a residual penetration greater than dmm may be used with Cold Bituminous Pavement Recycle to address problems with cool weather or extremely aged existing pavement .
ARAP shall meet the requirements below Emulsified Polymer Modified Asphalt Rejuvenating Agent ARAP for use in hotinplace recycling of bituminous pavements shall be modified with a minimum of .
Aggregate Base Course RAP shall be percent crushed recycled asphalt pavement material .
Aggregate Base Coarse RAP shall be percent reclaimed asphalt pavement material conforming to the requirements of Table .
All pavement marking materials shall be selected from the Departments Approved Products List APL .
Prior to start of work a Certificate of Compliance COC for all pavement marking materials shall be submitted in accordance with subsection .. a Color .
The pavement marking paint without dropon beads shall meet the following requirements White Federal Standard No .
Yellow Materials for pavement markings shall meet the initial daytime chromaticity that falls within the box created by the following corner points .
The type and application rate of epoxy resin primer shall be as recommended by the thermoplastic or preformed plastic pavement marking manufacturer. . A primer application rate of zero will not be accepted except for thermoplastic marking and inlaid preformed plastic pavement marking placed on new asphalt surfaces as recommended by the manufacturer and approved in writing by the Engineer .
However if the Engineer determines that a new asphalt surface has become soiled prior to placement of the pavement markings pavement primer will be required and shall be applied as approved .
Glass beads for pavement marking shall conform to AASHTO M except for the following Gradation U.S .
For modified epoxy pavement parking a minimum of percent of the total weight shall be manufactured using a molten kiln direct melt method .
Glass beads used for any type of pavement marking shall not contain more than parts per million ppm arsenic ppm antimony and ppm lead as tested in accordance with EPA methods and C or other approved testing method Glass beads shall be furnished in fully identified containers and shall be free of extraneous material or clumps .
Glass beads for thermoplastic pavement marking shall conform to AASHTO M Type .
inch strip of preformed plastic pavement marking .
inch strip of pavement marking tape .
square foot of preformed thermoplastic pavement marking material .
Preformed plastic pavement marking material shall conform to ASTM D for one of the following requirements Class tape will not be permitted .
Preformed plastic pavement marking color shall conform to the requirements of ASTM D. Preformed plastic pavement markings shall meet the dimensional requirements of ASTM D. Skid resistance will not be considered a factor for acceptance .
The edges of the preformed plastic pavement marking shall be straight and uniform and consistently adhere to the pavement .
Unless otherwise stated in the Contract preformed plastic pavement marking shall conform to the following material requirements for the Type shown on the plans .
Surface pattern Minimum of mils and in accordance with ASTM D Minimum of mils and in accordance with ASTM D NA Contrast pavement marking to be used for skip lines lane lines and gore markings .
Only preformed thermoplastic pavement marking material listed on the Departments approved products list may be used .
Once applied the tape shall adhere to the pavement at subfreezing temperatures. . Conformability .
Following application the tape shall remain conformed to the texture of the pavement surface .
Only modified epoxy pavement marking material that is on the Departments Approved Products List may be used .
Modified epoxy pavement marking material shall be a two component percent solids material formulated to provide simple volumetric mixing ratio of two volumes of component A and one volume of component B unless otherwise recommended by the material manufacturer .
Yellow Materials for pavement markings shall meet the initial daytime chromaticity that fall within the box created by the following corner points .
The modified epoxy pavement marking material shall have a setting time to a notracking condition of not more than minutes at a temperature of F and above .
The catalyzed modified epoxy pavement marking material when tested according to ACI Method shall have such a high degree of adhesion to the specified psi minimum concrete surface that there shall be a percent concrete failure in the performance of this test j Hardness .
The modified epoxy pavement marking materials when tested according to ASTM D shall have a minimum Shore D Hardness value of .
When tested according to ASTM D the modified epoxy pavement marking materials shall have a tensile strength of at least psi .
When tested according to ASTM D the catalyzed modified epoxy pavement marking materials shall have a compressive strength of at least psi .
Raised pavement marker shall not be less than .
The color of the marker and the retroreflective element shall match the color of the pavement marking line .
The marker shall be ceramic or plastic and shall be secured to old or new pavement using an adhesive approved by the marker manufacturer .
