The graded portion of a highway within top and side slopes prepared as a foundation for the pavement structure and shoulders .
The top surface of a roadbed upon which the pavement structure and shoulders including curbs are constructed .
One or more layers of a pavement structure designed to accommodate the traffic load the top layer of which resists skidding traffic abrasion and the disintegrating effects of climate .
Gross construction vehicle weight in excess of legally permitted highway loads will not be allowed on any portion of the cement treated base roadbed modified base Portland cement concrete pavement cold milled bituminous surface or any new or existing base or surface which may become damaged . .
Proposed changes in the basic design of a bridge or pavement type traffic control plan or changes which require different right of way limits will not normally be considered as an acceptable VEP .
Do not permit traffic on any part of the completed prime coat plantmix bituminous surface plantmix bituminous opengraded surface seal coat cement treated base or Portland cement concrete pavement until authorized .
During nonworking hours park vehicles and equipment a minimum of m ft from the pavement edge of the traveled way over which public traffic is directed unless separated by guardrail or concrete barrier rail .
Locate employee parking within cleared right of way and a minimum of m ft from the pavement edge of the traveled way over which public traffic is directed unless separated by guardrail or concrete barrier rail .
In the case of Portland cement concrete pavement the unit price will be converted to square meter per metric ton square yards per ton .
Not more than of the unit bid price of roadmix bituminous surface aggregate in the processed windrow on the roadway before adding bituminous material may be allowed. . Not more than of the unit bid price of screenings in the stockpile may be allowed. . Not more than of the unit bid price of selected material base conforming to all the requirements in windrow may be allowed. . Not more than of the unit bid price of Portland cement concrete pavement aggregates in the stockpile may be allowed .
The stockpiled quantity shall be converted to square meters square yards of Portland cement concrete pavement for pay purposes. . Not more than of the unit bid price of graffiti coating may be allowed once the coating has been stockpiled and expiration dates of the product have been provided. . Not more than of the unit bid price of living or perishable plant material may be allowed once the plants are delivered to the project .
This work consists of the removal wholly or in part and satisfactory disposal of all buildings fences guardrail structures pavements culverts curbs sidewalks pole bases foundations and any other obstructions which are not designated or permitted to remain except for the obstructions to be removed and disposed of under other items in the contract .
Raze remove and dispose of all buildings and foundations fences guardrail structures pavements culverts curbs sidewalks and other obstructions any portions of which are on the right of way except utilities and those for which other provisions have been made for removal .
In removing concrete pavement curb curb and gutter sidewalk and similar structures where portions of the existing structures are to be left in the surface of the finished work remove the structure to an existing joint or cut and chip to a true line with a face perpendicular to the surface of the existing structure .
Exercise care to prevent damage to pavement surfaces joint material and bridge joints .
REMOVAL OF STRUCTURES AND OBSTRUCTIONS Remove temporary pavement striping immediately after traffic has been rerouted and the temporary pavement striping is no longer required .
Remove bituminous pavement by the cold milling process using a machine designed to remove profile and texture the remaining surface of the pavement in one operation .
by referencing from the existing pavement or concrete bridge decks or from an independent grade control and having a positive means for controlling cross slope elevations .
When referencing from the existing pavement or concrete surface on bridge decks use a m ft minimum averaging ski .
Do not allow vehicle traffic or placing of pavement surfaces thereon until a penetration resistance of .
Prevent water from wetting vehicles pedestrians and pavement .
Place live mains and wiring located under pavement in separate PVC sleeves placed adjacent and parallel .
Perform boring operations in an approved manner and run conduit at a depth below the pavement as specified .
Install conduit under existing pavement by approved boring or drilling methods .
Do not disturb pavement without approval and only in the event obstructions are encountered .
When permitted small test holes may be cut in the pavement to locate obstructions .
Keep boring or drilling pits at least mm ft from pavement edge wherever possible .
Do not excessively use water that will soften subgrade or undermine the pavement .
Unless otherwise specified prevent sprinkler spray patterns on pavement walks or structures .
When Portland cement concrete pavement is to be placed on cement treated base do not extend the finished surface above the grade established .
Prior to the placement of shouldering material clear and grub all shoulders for a minimum width of m ft from the edge of pavement but no more than needed to place and compact the material .
These specifications include general requirements that are applicable to all types of bituminous pavements of the plantmix type irrespective of gradation of aggregate kind and amount of bituminous material or pavement use .
When picking up grade information from an adjacent compacted pavement course or a concrete surface the external longitudinal reference device shall be a floating beam or a noncontact averaging ski with a minimum of sensors .
of pavement surface .
C F PLANTMIX BITUMINOUS PAVEMENTS GENERAL Place plantmix bituminous surface only when the surface temperature is above C F. Place opengraded plantmix surface only when the atmospheric temperature and the pavement surface temperature are above C F. ..
When the surface of the existing pavement or old base is irregular bring it to a uniform grade and cross section as directed .
Thoroughly and uniformly compact the pavement by rolling .
Thoroughly compact the edges of pavements not accessible to conventional rollers with suitable types of tampers plates trench rollers etc .
Offset longitudinal construction joints of successive courses of bituminous pavement at least mm in .. Place bituminous pavement so that any longitudinal joints constructed are within mm in .
Surface tolerances will be specified under the respective sections of bituminous pavement .
Deliver and store pavement reinforcing fabric according to the manufacturers recommendations .
Prior to placing the fabric assure that pavement is clean enough to provide significant adhesion to the fabric as approved by the Engineer and the manufacturers representative .
If necessary clean the pavement with a mechanical device by sweeping or vacuuming .
If recommended by the manufacturers representative apply a tack coat to the pavement surface prior to fabric placement at the application rate specified by the representative .
Prior to commencement of fabric placement select an area on the shoulder of the pavement and conduct a pull test according to the fabric manufacturers recommendation to assure adequate fabric adhesion to the pavement .
Place the fabric when the pavement surface temperature is within the range as recommended by the fabric manufacturers representative .
Ensure adequate adhesion of the fabric to the pavement prior to allowing construction traffic on the installed fabric .
The accepted quantities of pavement reinforcing fabric measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract price per unit of measurement for the pay item listed below that is shown in the proposal .
This work consists of constructing one or more courses of densegraded bituminous pavement on a prepared base .
Recycled asphalt pavement RAP may replace to by mass of the total aggregate in Type or Type C plantmix bituminous mixtures .
Furnish and operate a pavement core drilling machine for coring samples of compacted bituminous mixtures for density testing .
Bring the pavement core drilling machine on the jobsite working days before paving operations .
Mark the pavement surface with paint at least every .
Do not measure pavement on horizontal curves having centerline radius less than m ft. Do not measure pavement within m ft of a concrete bridge deck including approach slabs unless the bridge deck also is to be overlayed with plantmix bituminous surface .
Complete initial runs of the profilograph before opening the new pavement to public traffic whenever practical .
Nev. T. PLANTMIX BITUMINOUS SURFACE The pavement smoothness type Type A B or C will be specified in the Special Provisions .
mi section for the specified pavement type shall be as follows PROFILE INDEX Pavement Smoothness Type mmkm in.mi mm .
Type C . Pavement on horizontal curves having a centerline radius of m ft or more but less than m ft and within the superelevation transition of such curves will be evaluated as pavement smoothness Type C. Grind areas exceeding the profile index requirements and areas representing high points on the profiles having deviations in excess of .
Perform additional grinding as necessary to extend the ground area laterally to the nearest lane line or edge of pavement and longitudinally to lines normal to the pavement centerline .
The grinding machine for correcting pavement exceeding the profile requirements shall be power driven selfpropelled and specifically designed to remove profile smooth and texture hot mix asphalt .
Do not cause strain or damage to the underlying surface of the pavement with the grinding machine .
The surface of the ground pavement shall have parallel corduroytype texture consisting of grooves between .
This work also consists of constructing milled rumble strips in the plantmix bituminous opengraded surface and other pavement surfaces .
The pavement smoothness type Type A B or C will be specified in the Special Provisions .
Include m ft of the existing pavement on each end of the project in the profile determination .
Make construction joints with the existing pavement meet the requirements of this Subsection .
The grinder and grinding operation shall conform to Subsection Perform additional grinding as necessary to extend the ground area laterally to the nearest lane line or edge of pavement and longitudinally to lines normal to the pavement centerline .
Demonstrate on an initial m ft test section that the equipment and method will provide the desired milled rumble strip and surface inside each depression without tearing or snagging the asphalt pavement .
Compose the recycled bituminous mixture of reclaimed asphalt pavement a recycling agent and lime slurry as specified .
The recycled asphalt mixture shall consist of milled material from the existing pavement recycling agent and lime slurry combined in the proportions specified herein or as directed .
Adjust the recycling agent application rate with concurrence from the Engineer as pavement conditions change .
m ft cutter capable of removing the existing pavement to the depths shown in the plans .
The use of a heating device to soften the pavement will not be permitted .
Do not compact outside the edge of the existing pavement width limits to prevent roadway spread .
Do not begin inplace recycling until pavement surface temperature is C F and rising and the atmospheric temperature in the shade is C F and rising .
Repair failed pavement subgrade areas encountered during the recycling operations as directed .
If the designated areas are not repaired before the areas increase in size make repairs to the expanded failed pavement subgrade areas at no cost to the Department .
Repair the failed pavement subgrade areas by excavating to a depth of mm in .
Except for unavoidable delay or breakdown recycle and place recycled pavement with a paving machine meeting the requirements of Subsection .. at a rate sufficient to provide continuous operation of the paving machine .
Prevent excessive edge sloughing by compacting the longitudinal joint first followed by initial passes that shall begin on the low side and progress to the high side by overlapping longitudinal passes parallel to the pavement centerline .
Do not perform rolling when the surface temperature is below C F. Recompact the entire recycled pavement area with at least one steel wheeled roller weighing at least .
Compaction of the recycled pavement will be evaluated in accordance with Subsection .. c Control Strip Method C. If procedures are no longer achieving acceptable results a change in the compaction equipment andor methods will be required .
The top surface of the completed recycled pavement will be tested with a . m ft straightedge parallel to and perpendicular to the centerline and shall not vary by more than mm in .
When tests show the recycled surface is not within the specified tolerance take immediate action to correct equipment or procedures in the paving operation to eliminate the unacceptable pavement roughness .
Clean the edges of existing pavements which are to be adjacent to new pavement .
Do not spread bituminous material when weather conditions are unsuitable when rain is imminent when the pavement surface is wet when excessive wind causes problems or when the humidity is higher than .
Do not spread bituminous material when the atmospheric temperature is below C F when the pavement temperature is below C F or when the pavement temperature is more than C F. Do not place screenings if there is a forecast of the atmospheric temperature falling below C F within hours of placement .
See Section for removal of pavement markings .
Remove and dispose of all vegetation that will interfere with the uniform application of bituminous material and screenings onto the existing pavement surface .
The application rate of bituminous material to be applied to the existing pavement surface may vary within the project limits due to differing surface conditions to obtain the required embedment depth of to or to achieve acceptable surface treatment application .
The brooms shall be capable of removing loose screenings adjacent to barriers including curbs gutters and railings that prevent screenings from being swept off the pavement .
This work consists of constructing Portland cement concrete pavement on a prepared surface .
PORTLAND CEMENT CONCRETE PAVEMENT Equipment that will be operating entirely or partially on any existing pavement shall have rubbertired wheels in contact with the pavement .
Hard tracked equipment will not be allowed to run on the pavement regardless of the pavement age or strength .
Provide lightweight concrete saws early entry saws specifically designed for sawing fresh concrete without the use of water for constructing weakened plane joints in the concrete pavement .
Do not rest vibrators on new pavements or side forms .
Furnish side forms of sufficient rigidity both in the form and in the interlocking connection with the adjoining forms so that springing will not occur under the mass of the grading and paving equipment or from the pressure of the pavement when placed .
Equip slipform paving equipment with traveling side forms of sufficient dimensions shape and strength to support the concrete laterally for a sufficient length of time during placement to produce pavement of the required cross section .
Do not create abrupt changes in longitudinal alignment of the pavement .
Provide a fogging machine capable of applying water in the form of a fine mist spray over the entire width of the concrete pavement .
Place side forms with full bearing upon the foundation throughout their length and width of base and place to the required grade and alignment of the edge of the finished pavement .
Immediately in advance of placing pavement and after all subgrade operations are completed true and maintain side forms to the required line and grade for a distance sufficient to prevent delay in placing the pavement .
Keep side forms in place until the day after placing the pavement and in all cases until the edge of the pavement no longer requires the protection of the forms .
Prior to performing concrete pavement placement construct a test strip of at least m ft in length and to a width that will be common to the majority of production placement .
Suspend concrete pavement placement operations for working days .
Remove test strips not conforming to the requirements of the plans and specifications from the roadway and dispose of according to Subsection .. Construct additional test strips until approval is given to begin the production of concrete pavement placement .
Test strips conforming to the plans and specifications will be considered as permanent concrete pavement and will be measured for payment as specified in Subsection Acceptance of the test strip shall not relieve the Contractor of responsibility to complete the remainder of work in accordance with the plans and specifications .
Place concrete pavement in .
Protect freshly placed pavement previously constructed pavement and existing pavements from damage by any cause .
Perform screeding by making at least complete passes over the entire area of the pavement .
Adjust the screed to an elevation slightly above grade so that when properly consolidated and finished the completed surface of the pavement will be at the established grade true to the cross section shown on the plans and free from porous areas .
Keep the tops of the forms or the adjacent pavement and the contact surface of the crawler tracks or wheels clean by effective devices attached to the machine .
During each pass of the machine maintain a roll of concrete ahead of the front screed for the entire width of pavement being placed and except when making an expansion joint do not operate the machine beyond that point where the roll of concrete can be maintained .
The term internal vibration used above shall mean vibration by means of vibrating units located within the specified thickness of pavement section and a minimum distance ahead of the screed equal to the pavement thickness .
At locations inaccessible to slipform paving equipment place concrete pavement according to the requirements for placing concrete in widths less than a traffic lane as specified above for side form construction .
Joints in pavement will be designated as longitudinal and transverse contact joints transverse expansion joints and longitudinal and transverse weakened plane joints .
Construct transverse joints at the angle to the centerline of the pavement shown on the plans .
Construct faces of both transverse and longitudinal joints normal to the surface of the pavement .
Place the dowel bars parallel to the pavement surface and centerline within a tolerance of .
Place and consolidate the pavement to full depth before insertion of the dowel bars .
Concrete pavement containing improper dowel positioning will be subject to the provisions of Subsection .. b Contact Joints .
When the plans require the construction of keyways construct the grooved portion of the keyway as part of the pavement width being placed .
Where the combined width of the Portland cement concrete pavement shoulder and adjacent lane is .
Saw weakened plane joints by cutting the pavement with a power driven early entry saw designed for sawing fresh concrete without the use of water .
Cut joints when sawcutting equipment can be placed on the surface without raveling tearing spalling or causing any other damage to the newly placed concrete pavement .
and to a depth of of the planned pavement thickness .
and to a depth of of the planned pavement thickness .
Repair spalls raveling and tearing at joints before opening the pavement to public traffic .
At the start of each days work mark the edge of the new pavement nearest the outside shoulder at m ft from the beginning joint with an approved stamp .
Do not add water or chemicals to the pavement surface to aid in finishing .
After the preliminary finishing has been completed round the edges of an initial pavement lane to a mm in .
Round transverse contact joints expansion joints and joints adjacent to an existing pavement to a mm in .
In advance of the curing operations or as directed texture the pavement with a drag strip of burlap or other device which will produce scoring parallel to the centerline .
The burlap drag shall consist of one or more pieces of burlap fastened to a cross member riding on the subgrade or side forms by means of wheels or skids to form a continuous strip of burlap the full width of the pavement .
deep in the finished concrete pavement .
Tine the pavement within mm in .
of pavement edges .
Tine the pavement within mm in .
Do not tine pavement which has set whereas the operation is lifting aggregate out of or tearing or causing excessive roughness to the pavement surface .
In such case groove the pavement as directed .
Grind and groove pavement surfaces that do not meet tining requirements .
Demonstrate on an initial m ft test section that the equipment and methods will provide the desired ground rumble strip and surface inside each depression without cracking or spalling the remaining concrete pavement .
Produce finished pavement surfacing which conforms to the surface tolerance requirements specified herein .
Pavement within m ft of a bridge deck or approach slab shall meet the profile requirements set forth in Subsection Complete initial runs of the profilograph before opening the new pavement to public traffic whenever practical .
Perform additional grinding as necessary to extend the ground area laterally to the nearest lane line or edge of pavement and longitudinally to lines normal to the pavement centerline .
Use grinding machines that are power driven selfpropelled and specifically designed to remove profile smooth and texture concrete pavement .
Do not cause strain or damage to the underlying surface of the pavement with the grinding machine .
Cure Portland cement concrete pavement by either method specified in this Subsection .
Cure Portland cement concrete pavement with a white pigmented curing compound applied in approximately equal applications .
Uniformly spray surfaces of the concrete pavement which are exposed to the air so as to obtain total coverage of the concrete surfaces .
After the completion of the curing period remove the waxbased curing compound from the pavement surface by sand blasting in those areas intended to receive permanent pavement marking .
Unless directed do not permit traffic or equipment on the pavement before a period of days after the concrete has been placed nor before the concrete has developed a modulus of rupture of at least .
Nev. T. Motor graders used to shape the shoulder material adjacent to the new pavement may be permitted to ride upon one edge of the previously placed concrete at the end of hours provided that no damage is done on the pavement edge by reason of such operation .
Repair damage to the pavement resulting from such operations .
Request in writing to place the tracks of the paving equipment on the pavement after a period of days after the concrete was placed and the concrete has developed a modulus of rupture of at least .
from the edge of pavement .
Do not exert more than kPa psi pressure on the pavement by the paver track .
In case of visible cracking or other damage to the pavement immediately discontinue operation of the paving equipment on the pavement .
Repair damage to the pavement resulting from such operations .
Concrete pavement will be measured by the square meter square yard .
Portland cement concrete pavement curing compound for the bond breaker and for curing the pavement surface will be measured by the liter gallon .
Construct concrete pavement according to the thickness requirements of the plans and specifications .
The thickness of the pavement will be determined according to ASTM C. The primary unit of pavement will be the area of pavement placed in each days paving operations .
Within each primary unit of pavement there may be an area or areas which have been determined to be a secondary unit or units of pavement as provided in Subsection .. b .
After requirements of Subsection .. have been met thickness measurements will be made in each primary unit of pavement at the rate of not less than one measurement for each m ft or fraction thereof of pavement placed in each traffic lane auxiliary lane or shoulder .
Thickness measurements will be made at approximately uniform intervals throughout each primary unit of pavement .
For each primary unit of pavement which is deficient in average thickness pay to the Department as liquidated damages or at the Departments option have deducted from any money due or to become due from the Department an amount set forth in the following schedule Average Thickness Deficiency Liquidated Damages mm in .
The determination of the limits of said secondary unit area will be made by making secondary thickness measurements in each panel of pavement adjacent to the panel in which the original measurement in the primary unit was made .
Panels are the areas bounded by longitudinal and transverse joints and pavement edges .
Remove and replace the concrete pavement in such panels with concrete pavement meeting the thickness and all other requirements of the contract documents .
Lower subgrade as necessary to meet the full thickness requirements. . Leave such panels of pavement in place without payment .
No additional compensation will be allowed for any pavement constructed in excess of the thickness requirements of the contract documents .
Additional thickness measurements may be requested in secondary unit areas if the numbers are insufficient to fairly indicate the actual thickness of pavement placed .
This work consists of rubblizing and compacting existing Portland cement concrete pavement for full width and full depth .
This work also consists of cracking and seating existing Portland cement concrete pavement for full width and full depth .
Use equipment that is capable of rubblizing the existing concrete pavement into particles conforming to the following sieve requirements Sieve Size Percent Passing by Mass mm in .
Provide an impact hammer of the guillotine type capable of impacting the pavement with a variable force which can be controlled in force and point of impact in order to produce continuous full depth cracking while maintaining aggregate interlock between pieces .
Do not use equipment that will cause extensive surface spalling along the crack that will punch holes in the pavement or cause shattering of the pavement or base .
Rubblize the concrete pavement in the test strip until the material conforms to the specified size requirements for the full depth of the pavement .
Compact the rubblized pavement prior to placing the leveling course using vibratory steel wheel and pneumatic tired rollers in the following sequence .
Accomplish cracking of the existing concrete pavement one lane at a time .
Crack the pavement in the test section to establish the impact energy and the number of transverse passes necessary to crack full width and full depth .
To verify that the procedure is producing full depth and full panel width cracked pavement as specified take at least cores mm in .
or more in diameter in the cracked pavement test section .
If the cracked concrete pavement does not conform to the requirements of this Subsection or the equipment impact energy or cracking pattern is changed crack additional test sections until the equipment and procedure produce cracked pavement as required .
During cracking operations core the cracked pavement at locations designated at intervals of not less than core per lane kilometer cores per lane mile for each machine .
Immediately prior to cracking the concrete pavement in areas where cores are to be taken apply water to the surface in sufficient quantity that existing cracking can readily be determined .
Crack the additional test section until the equipment and procedure produce cracked pavement as required .
Crack existing concrete pavement perpendicular to the centerline to produce individual pavement elements approximately to mm to in .
Do not allow the pavement cracking tool to impact the pavement within mm in .
of another break line or the edge of pavement .
Prior to opening the cracked pavement to traffic sweep the pavement of all loose debris and repair joints cracks and spalls which are greater than mm .
After patching sweep the pavement again and remove all loose debris prior to opening to traffic .
Do not allow traffic on the cracked and seated pavement except for ramp access before the plantmix leveling course and at least one lift of the plantmix bituminous surface is in place .
Do not place plantmix paving joints over longitudinal joints in the concrete pavement .
Rubblize concrete pavement will be measured by the square meter square yard .
Crack and seat concrete pavement will be measured by the square meter square yard .
The spreader box shall have suitable means provided to side shift the box to compensate for variations in the pavement geometry .
Perform removal of pavement markings as provided for in Section .
Adjust the rate of application during the day to suit temperatures surface texture humidity and dryness of the pavement surface .
The mixture shall show no signs of uncoated aggregate streaking or premature breaking of emulsion when applied to the pavement surface .
Specified ruts cuts and depressions in the pavement surface will require an application of the micro surfacing mixture using the rut filling spreader box prior to full width application .
in thickness to restore the existing roadway cross section or level the pavement surface .
Feed sufficient quantities of the microsurfacing mixture into the spreader box so that uniform and complete coverage of the pavement is obtained .
Application rates adjusted for smooth or rough pavement surface textures may be applied outside of the specified range as approved .
Allow areas receiving microsurfacing to cure at least one hour or until the treated pavement will not be damaged by traffic .
Do not apply microsurfacing mixture unless both the pavement and air temperatures are C F and rising .
When waterreducing agents or waterreducing retarders are used do not exceed the dosage of the admixture which will result in an increase in the drying shrinkage of the concrete in excess of when used in precast prestressed concrete when used in castinplace prestressed concrete when used in castin place reinforced concrete or when used in nonreinforced concrete pavements .
PORTLAND CEMENT CONCRETE When centralmixed concrete is furnished and nonagitating hauling equipment is used for transporting concrete to the delivery point for Portland cement concrete pavement complete discharge into the concrete paver within minutes after the addition of the cement to the aggregates .
Do not release falsework for box culverts and other structures with decks lower than the roadway pavement and with span lengths of .
below the finished surface of the concrete pavement .
CONCRETE STRUCTURES Perform grooving using diamond blades mounted on a multiblade arbor on a selfpropelled machine which has been built for grooving concrete pavement .
Provide a machine with a depth control device which will detect variations in the pavement surface and adjust the cutting head height to maintain the depth of groove specified .
from expansion joints or any devices imbedded in the pavement such as metal joints access plates etc .
Instead of the above method for maintaining the barrier rail grade the extrusion machine may be operated on rails or forms set at a uniform depth below the predetermined finished top of the barrier grade or on existing pavement or bridge decks .
Place slotted corrugated metal pipe drains flush with the pavement surface as indicated on the plans .
Saw cut pavement or cut pavement by approved means that will leave a clean true vertical edge .
Do not place base aggregate or plantmix pavement over pipe installations until deflection testing has been performed and is acceptable .
Use this method when removal of the existing pavement by cold milling is not required .
Once all paving is completed locate and adjust the cover to the final finished pavement level .
Use this method when removal of the existing pavement by cold milling is required .
Before cold milling lower the cover sufficiently to accommodate the required pavement removal depth .
Once pavement removal has been completed and the new pavement placed and completed locate and adjust the cover to the final pavement level .
Construct the panels at the construction site and place by the method to be used in placing slope pavement .
The epoxy adhesive used to bond concrete curbs to new or existing pavements shall conform to AASHTO M ASTM C Type I Grade or Class A B or C. Use detectable warnings listed in the QPL .
Where Portland cement concrete pavement is to be placed around or adjacent to manholes drop inlets or catch basins in gutters local depressions or driveway areas do not construct such structures to final grade until after the concrete pavement has been constructed .
Anchor concrete curbs over new or existing pavements with epoxy adhesive conforming to Subsection Cure the new pavement for a minimum of weeks before bonding the curb thereon .
During blast cleaning operations protect pedestrians and vehicles with a barrier system which will protect against direct blasting of vehicles or pedestrians and prevent spreading of falling abrasive materials and debris on the traveled portions of the pavement .
Remove any abrasive material and debris deposited on the pavement shoulders slopes or slope paving in the work area before reopening those areas to traffic .
Replace or reconstruct improvements such as sidewalks curbs gutters Portland cement concrete and asphalt concrete pavement base material lawns and plants and any other improvements removed broken or damaged with the same kind of material as found on the work or with materials of equal quality at own expense .
Saw cut the outline of all areas to be removed in concrete sidewalks driveways and in pavements to a minimum depth of mm .
Fill excavations and restore sidewalks pavement and landscaping at each intersection before excavating at any other intersection unless otherwise permitted .
When trenching in the existing pavement is specifically allowed or required perform trenching and conduit installation according to Standard Plan Sheet T and the following .
Before placing surface material apply tack coat as specified in Section . . Backfill excavated areas in the pavement by the end of each shift . .
In areas where the pavement is to be rehabilitated or additional pavement is to be placed complete conduit installation before performing such work .
m ft from bottom of equipment to the pavement .
below highway pavement grade in road areas and finished grade in all other areas except that conduit may be laid mm in .
below the top of the existing pavement within new curbed medians being constructed on top of said pavement .
If jacking or drilling methods are required do not disturb pavement without permission .
In the event obstructions are encountered upon approval small test holes of approved size may be cut in the pavement to locate or remove obstructions .
Keep jacking or drilling pits m ft clear of the edge of any type of pavement wherever possible .
Do not use excessive water such that pavement might be undermined or subgrade softened .
Adjust loop detector layouts on Portland cement concrete pavement to avoid the transverse weakened plane joints .
Use loop leadin cable to connect the loop installed in the pavement to the loop detector unit installed in the controller cabinet .
In addition the sealant shall have the ability to bond to both concrete and asphalt have a rapid cure rate so that the pavement may be open to traffic within minutes after installation initial fluidity to permit installation in a narrow saw cut down to at least .
C F moisture insensitivity so that it may be applied to damp pavement effectively and resistance to vehicular fluids and road salt .
Saw cut slots in pavement .
Twist lengths of loop wires that are not imbedded in the pavement with at least turns per meter yard between roadway and pullbox .
of the pavement surface .
Anchor the preformed loop detectors to the existing pavement or base course to prevent movement during the paving operation .
Provide fixtures for illumination of roadway pavement between entrances and exit portals with a RLM standard dome reflector .
Support each approximately m ft above the pavement and approximately .
m . ft above the pavement .
For illumination of roadway pavement between entrance and exit portals install a continuous row of W fixtures over center of each lane beneath the falsework structure at intervals of not more than .
Mount the fixtures over the pavement at an approved height .
For roadway pavement and portal face illumination use No .
Place pedestrian passageway lights and roadway pavement lights on a minimum of one circuit and portal flood lights on a minimum of one separate circuit .
Before and after permanently securing detector loops in the pavement use electronic instruments to test the resistance inductance resistance to ground and quality factor for each loop and leadin circuit .
Traffic control devices must be removed from the roadway and stockpiled a minimum of m ft from the pavement edge at an approved staging area .
Stockpile signs and devices a minimum of m ft from the pavement edge at an approved staging area .
remove all traffic control devices daily from the roadway and stockpile a minimum of m ft from the pavement edge at an approved staging area .
Furnish erect and maintain such fences barricades lights signs channelization devices temporary pavement striping arrow boards detours and other devices as are necessary to prevent accidents and avoid damage or injury to the public until all permanent traffic control striping signs and devices are installed and operational and the project is accepted .
Temporary painted striping may only be used on pavement which is to be replaced or overlaid as part of the contract .
Effectively remove at no direct payment any existing lines or markings of paint tape film or pavement markers that conflict with the required temporary lines .
Remove such lines in a manner so as to leave no residue or other trace of the former line that may be misconstrued by a driver to be a traffic line under any condition of daylight darkness or wetness of pavement .
Rent traffic control devices will be measured by the lump sum which includes furnishing a traffic control plan providing flaggers pilot cars traffic control supervisors or constructing maintaining and removing detours furnishing and installing all construction signs traffic cones traffic drums vertical panels removal of striping temporary pavement striping barricades barricade warning lights arrow boards impact attenuators changeable message signs barrier rail or other traffic control and safety devices not listed as separate bid items in the proposal .
This work consists of applying permanent pavement markings on the completed pavement .
Material shall conform to the following Sections Traffic Paint Section Traffic Beads Section Use epoxy waterborne or polyurea traffic paint materials as specified for the pavement striping items shown in the proposal .
Perform stakeout for the location of the pavement striping according to the plans Special Provisions these specifications and as directed .
Protect the pavement striping from public traffic until dry by the use of traffic cones or by any other approved means .
Painted pavement striping shall be mm in .
Application equipment shall have an air nozzle mounted ahead of the spray system to provide highpressure air cleaning of the pavement surface prior to the application of the polyurea material .
Remove existing markings so that at least of the underlying pavement is visible .
Remove the abrasive material from the pavement surface before the pavement is opened to uncontrolled traffic flow .
Any temporary paint applied to delineate traffic lines on new plantmix bituminous opengraded surface which matches the location and type of the permanent paint need not be removed before the final application of the pavement striping .
The pavement surface where the epoxy is to be placed shall have a minimum temperature of C F. The air temperature shall be at least C F during marking operations .
Determine the pavement surface temperature and air temperature before the start of each day of marking operations and at any other time ordered .
Heat the epoxy paint marking material to the manufacturers recommended temperature before application to the pavement .
Do not apply paint when the ambient air temperature or the pavement temperature is below C F. Apply Type I waterborne paint markings to obtain a µm mils minimum wet film thickness and a µm mils minimum dry film thickness measured without dropon glass beads .
The pavement surface where the polyurea is to be placed shall have a minimum temperature of C F. The air temperature shall be at least C F during marking operations .
Determine the pavement surface temperature and air temperature before the start of each day of marking operations and at any other time as directed .
Heat the polyurea paint marking material to the manufacturers recommended temperature before application to the pavement .
If an adequate location does not exist on the project site for applying the test strips supply roofing paper and place on the pavement to construct the test strips .
Each test strip shall consist of approximately m ft of linear pavement striping similar to that required for the project .
Take retroreflective readings one to two weeks after installation of pavement striping .
Nev. T. The locations and number of readings for the type of pavement striping will be determined .
Epoxy waterborne and polyurea pavement striping will be measured by the linear meter linear foot kilometer mile or square meter square foot for the type specified .
This work consists of furnishing and placing pavement markers .
Use pavement markers of an approved color .
Nonreflective pavement markers shall consist of a heatfired vitreous ceramic base and a heatfired opaque glazed surface .
Plastic nonreflective pavement markers may be used in lieu of the ceramic type markers specified above .
The bottom of ABS plastic markers shall be configured to produce a structural bond with the pavement .
Use nonreflective pavement markers listed in the QPL .
Reflective pavement markers shall be of the prismatic reflector type consisting of a methyl methacrylate or suitably compounded acrylonitrile butadiene styrene ABS shell filled with a mixture of an inert thermosetting compound and filler material .
size of the reflective pavement marker shown on Standard Plan Sheet T .. is only a common size and other sizes of markers may be accepted .
Use reflective pavement markers listed in the QPL .
Reflective pavement markers to be placed in pavement recesses shall conform to Subsection .. with the following exceptions .
The pavement markers need not conform to the strength requirements and the specific intensity requirements shall apply after abrading the lens surface by the following Steel Wool Abrasion Procedure Form a mm in .
Use recessed reflective pavement markers listed in the QPL .
Use adhesives for pavement markers listed in the QPL .
Uniformly place the adhesive on the cleaned pavement surface or on the bottom of the marker in a quantity sufficient to result in complete coverage of the area of the contact of the marker with no voids present and with a slight excess after the marker has been pressed in place .
Place the marker in position and apply pressure until firm contact is made with the pavement .
Immediately remove excess adhesive around the edge of the marker on the pavement and on the exposed surfaces of the markers .
Remove adhesive from exposed faces of pavement markers with soft rags moistened with mineral spirits or kerosene .
Do not install pavement markers over longitudinal or transverse joints of the pavement surface .
Locate pavement recesses along the line of new or existing stripes .
Use poweroperated equipment capable of removing the pavement to the dimensions shown on the plans .
Use temporary lane line markers specified in Subsection The patterns and spacing for the temporary pavement markers shall be as follows .
See Subsection .. for limitations on the application of pavement striping and optional placement of temporary markers .
The adhesive used with the temporary lane line markers shall not damage the pavement surface when they are removed .
This work consists of furnishing and placing pavement marking tape and thermoplastic marking material .
Use either hot applied or preformed thermoplastic materials for the thermoplastic pavement marking items shown in the proposal .
The thermoplastic pavement marking materials shall be capable of application on asphaltic surfaces and Portland cement concrete surfaces .
Perform stakeout for the proper location of the pavement marking film .
The pavement marking film shall be mm in .
Apply the pavement marking film to new opengraded plantmix surface before public traffic is allowed on the freshly paved surface .
Inlay tape in the fresh surface during the final rolling of the mat before the opengraded plantmix surface temperature falls below C F. Apply pavement marking tape as per manufacturers recommendations .
Produce thermoplastic markings that are straight and have sharp edges that are the specified color width and thickness that have uniform retroreflectivity and that are properly bonded to the pavement .
Remove and replace any existing pavement markings damaged by the blast cleaning or wire brushing .
Apply the thermoplastic material to dry pavement surfaces and only when the surface temperature is above C F. Apply a primer of the type recommended by the manufacturer of the thermoplastic material to all asphaltic surfaces over months old and to all Portland cement concrete surfaces .
Apply the thermoplastic material to the pavement at a temperature between C and C F and F unless a different temperature is recommended by the manufacturer .
Use stencils when applying thermoplastic material for pavement markings .
Uniformly coat the pavement surface and fill the voids in the pavement surface with the thermoplastic material .
Apply the thermoplastic material to dry pavement at a thickness of .
for pavement markings and a minimum thickness of .
The pavement temperature and ambient air temperature shall be at or above C F at the time of application .
If recommended by the manufacturer of the preformed thermoplastic pavement markings apply a primer sealer on Portland cement concrete surfaces before application of the preformed thermoplastic material .
Manufacturers of preformed thermoplastic pavement marking material are listed in the QPL .
Pavement marking tape and thermoplastic pavement marking will be measured by the linear meter linear foot kilometer mile or square meter square foot .
This work consists of furnishing locating placing maintaining and removing temporary pavement striping tape .
Completely remove tape in such a manner that no residue or any other trace of the tape may be misconstrued by a driver to be a traffic marking under any condition of daylight darkness or wetness of the pavement .
This work consists of the application of temporary pavement striping paint and traffic beads .
Temporary painted pavement markings placed on interstate and full control of access freeways shall be mm in .
Temporary painted pavement markings used on other roads shall be mm in .
Use traffic cones or other approved means to protect the pavement striping from public traffic until dry .
See Subsection .. for limitations on the application of pavement striping and optional application of temporary painted striping .
Furnish and install aggregate base reinforcing steel concrete backfill asphalt pavement anchor bolts miscellaneous hardware epoxy reflectors on the nose sections and any other incidentals required for construction of the attenuators .
Remove all traces of curing compound laitance dust dirt salt oil asphalt traffic stripes pavement markings and other foreign materials .
BITUMINOUS MATERIALS Polymer modified pavements sealants not conforming to the requirements specified herein will be assessed demerits according to the following schedule .
These specifications cover ready mixed traffic marking paint to be applied to either asphaltic or Portland cement concrete pavements .
The epoxy paint pavement marking material when mixed in the proper ratio and applied at μm μm mils .
The catalyzed epoxy paint pavement marking materials when tested according to ACI Method shall have such adhesion to the concrete surface that there shall be a concrete failure in the performance of this test .
The epoxy paint pavement marking materials when tested according to ASTM D shall have a Shore D Hardness greater than .
When tested according to ASTM D the epoxy paint pavement marking materials shall have a tensile strength of not less than MPa psi .
When tested according to ASTM D the catalyzed epoxy paint pavement marking materials shall have a compressive strength of not less than MPa psi .
This specification covers the specific requirements for rapid dry high performance acrylic waterborne white and yellow traffic line marking paint for application on Portland cement concrete and bituminous pavements .
This specification covers the quality requirements of traffic beads and reflective elements for dropping or spraying on pavement markings .
Engineering fabrics shall include pavement reinforcing fabric geotextile geogrid geomembrane and any additional fabric types that may be specified in the Special Provisions .
The pavement reinforcing fabric shall be constructed of a fiberglasspolymer composite and shall conform to the following PROPERTY TEST METHOD REQUIREMENT Tensile Strength Each Direction ASTM D kNm lbin .
This specification covers the quality requirements for pavement marking tape and thermoplastic marking material .
Furnish a Certificate of Compliance for the pavement marking film according to Subsection ..
Use Type pavement marking tape listed in the QPL .
Use Type pavement marking tape listed in the QPL .
Use Type pavement marking tape listed in the QPL .
The preformed thermoplastic pavement markings shall consist of a homogeneous mixture of resins fillers pigments and glass beads .
The applied markings shall be resistant to deterioration due to exposure to sunlight water oil diesel fuel gasoline pavement oil content salt and adverse weather conditions . .
When properly applied the pavement markings shall be neat and durable .
The preformed thermoplastic pavement markings shall be capable of conforming to pavement contours breaks and faults through the action of traffic at normal pavement temperatures .
