RoadbedThe graded portion of a highway within the top and side slopes prepared as a foundation for the pavement structure and shoulders .
BIDDING REQUIREMENTS AND CONDITIONS SubgradeThe top surface of a roadbed upon which the pavement structure shoulders and curbs are constructed .
Surface CourseOne or more layers of a pavement designed to accommodate the traffic load .
Proposed changes in the basic design of a bridge or pavement type or requiring modification to the rightofway limits will not normally be considered as an acceptable VECP .
Existing asphalt pavement milled or otherwise removed .
Existing concrete pavement crushed to be used as aggregate .
Removal of existing pavement under an existing pedestrian bridge to conform to the foot higher requirement will not be required unless specified in the Contract Documents .
This may require grinding the existing pavement prior to placing the resurfacing material .
For all transverse measurements for area of base course and pavements the dimensions to be used in calculating the pay area will be the neat dimensions shown on the Plans or directed in writing by the Engineer .
MAINTENANCE OF TRAFFIC Ensure that at least percent of all reflective barrier markers warning lights and raised pavement markers are operational at any given time .
The TCP will include the design and placement of items such as signing pavement markings delineation channelization barriers crash cushions and other items as required .
Maintain the existing roadway surface and shoulders including crossroads ramps approaches crossovers medians detour roads entrances and pavement markings within the limits of the project throughout the duration of the Contract .
Prior to construction and in the company of the Engineer inventory and note the location type size and color of all existing pavement markings legends and symbols .
For pavement marking dimensions refer to Pavement Marking Dimension Table following f below .
MAINTENANCE OF TRAFFIC Temporary pavement markings are those markings placed upon the roadway to serve an area of work activity or a work phase for a period of time after which they are to be removed .
When approved a less than full complement of pavement markings and reduced dimension markings for dashed center lines and lane lines may be used but for a period of not more than two weeks .
Along multilane roadways having reversible lanes mark the lanes with the full complement of pavement markings as described in the MdMUTCD .
Specific pavement marking and complementary signing details are shown on the Temporary Traffic Control TTC Typical Applications .
Included is the inventory of all existing pavement markings and the treatment of any other traffic control device not included in these Specifications but necessary for the fulfillment of the Contract requirements and implementation of the approved Traffic Control Plan and for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
If the base detaches from the pavement replace the entire tubular marker assembly at no additional cost to the Administration unless damaged by Administration snow removal operations. . ARROW PANEL AP .
MAINTENANCE OF TRAFFIC Signs on portable supports shall be mounted so that the bottom of the sign is at least ft above the roadway pavement elevation .
Furnish install and remove temporary pavement markings .
The initial retroreflectance readings for temporary pavement markings shall be at least millicandelas per lux per square meter for white and for yellow .
The Engineer will monitor the pavement markings in conformance with MSMT during the service life of the material .
Maintain the pavement markings for the applicable service life of the materials .
Replace or repair the pavement markings as necessary within this period and within four hours or as directed at no additional cost to the Administration .
Apply pavement markings in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations and the Contract Documents .
Apply markings prior to allowing traffic on the pavement and in the same direction as the flow of traffic .
The pavement surface shall be clean dry and free of all contaminants including curing compound dirt and loose particles .
Remove all residual loose and poorly constructed pavement markings .
Completely remove all removable pavement markings prior to application of the permanent markings .
On stage construction or final surfaces of portland cement concrete pavements remove any objectionable adhesive residue by water blasting or other approved methods .
Do not use open flame to remove adhesive residue or any pavement markings .
Completely remove or obscure pavement markings within the travel way or adjacent to the travel way that are not applicable .
Completely remove or obscure all nonapplicable pavement markings within the travel way or adjacent to the travel way with removable pavement marking tape as specified in ..
a Replacement of Pavement Marki ngs required beyond the service life per linear foot for the specified pavement marking item .
MAINTENANCE OF TRAFFIC At least percent of the total number of rumble strips in any lane shall be free from signs of failure due to blistering excessive cracking discoloration smearing or spreading under heat chipping spalling or poor adhesion to the pavement .
The pavement surfaces shall be completely dry and free of oil grease sand dirt dust loose aggregate soil salt and other contaminants .
Do not install over pavement seams joints or deteriorating markings and substrates .
Return the pavement surface to its original condition .
When aggregate is part of any base or pavement course used for the construction and maintenance of temporary detours approaches crossings and widenings the item of work will be measured and paid for HOT MIX ASPHALT FOR MAINTENANCE OF TRAFFIC as specified in .
When hot mix asphalt is part of any base or pavement course used for the construction and maintenance of temporary detours approaches crossings and widenings the item of work will be measured and paid for as specified in Section .
Along each form line for cement concrete pavement provide the line and grade with fixed controls not to exceed ft. a Automated Machine Control .
c The removal and disposal of existing pavement sidewalks curb and combination curb and gutter when within the limits of Class or Class excavation .
Existing pavement sidewalks gutter curb and combination curb and gutter within the excavation may be broken and used in embankments provided that the materials conform to If the Engineer determines that the material is unsuitable dispose of it as excess or unsuitable material .
The lower limit of measurement will be the surface upon which roadway materials including base course surfacing or selected capping material is to be placed in either pavement or shoulder areas .
Measurement will be taken to ft outside of the outer edge of the pavement on each side .
Where concrete curb or combination concrete curb and gutter is built contiguous to the pavement measurement for excavation will be the outer limits of the concrete curb or combination curb and gutter .
Removal of existing pavement sidewalk paved ditches curb or combination curb and gutter outside the limits of construction will be measured and paid for as specified in .. ..
Removal of existing pavement sidewalk paved ditches curb and combination curb and gutter within the limits of any Class of Excavation will not be measured but the cost will be incidental to the Contract unit price per cubic yard for the pertinent Class of Excavation in which it occurs .
Thoroughly break up scarify or remove the pavement as specified or as directed .
below the bottom of the pavement structure and then sloping downward and outward under the shoulders at the rate of in .
The payment will be full compensation for the formation sprinkling compacting test rolling shaping scarifying breaking or removing of the existing pavement sloping trimming finishing maintaining embankments and subgrade and for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
Any pavement to be replaced will be measured and paid for as specified in Section .
Remove to full depth and dispose of existing pavement sidewalk paved ditches curb or combination curb and gutter. . MATERIALS .
Saw cut to full depth the existing pavement sidewalk paved ditches curb or combination curb and gutter along the lines specified or as directed .
Removal of existing pavement sidewalk paved ditches curb or combination curb and gutter and full depth saw cuts within the limits of any class of excavation will not be measured but the cost will be incidental to the Contract unit price for the Class of Excavation in which it occurs .
Saw cuts removal of existing pavement sidewalk except as specified in .
Manholes catch basins and inlets shall not be completed to final grade until the grading has been finished and all necessary arrangements have been made to ensure suitable connections and tieins at proper grade and alignment with pavements gutters and curbs .
Cover longitudinal underdrain with the next pavement layer within hours .
Subgrade drains consist of trenches excavated through the shoulder and roadside grading from the edges of the road pavement to a side ditch embankment slope or other approved outlet and filled with aggregate .
Before placing the road pavement and before completion of the shoulder paving or final roadside grading areas cut and shape trenches to a width of in .
The bottom of the trench at the end adjacent to the road pavement shall be at least in .
For drains with support on only one side place the support side away from the pavement edge .
Ensure that the drain is in direct contact with the pavement .
Backfill in two layers with the first layer being placed simultaneously with the drain holding the drain flush against the side of the pavement .
Sheet shore brace and support all excavation contiguous to existing pavements and structures to prevent settlement movement or damage to the pavement or structure .
When pavement breakers are proposed use broad faced chisel blades operated at a slight angle with the horizontal to peel the wearing surface off .
This equipment is permitted with the following restrictions Do not use pavement breakers heavier than nominal lb class .
Do not operate pavement breakers or mechanical chipping tools at an angle greater than degrees measured from the surface of the deck .
Do not grind or chip existing concrete pavement within ft of LMC until the LMC has cured for at least hours .
All roadway joint steel on the outside top and inside surfaces of the parapets and from the parapet to the first pavement marking .
Include a location plan showing the type and location of high volume ambient air monitors if applicable and the procedures that will be followed for visible emissions assessments and inspections of the soil water surrounding property and structures and pavement .
Prevent paint chips abrasives dust and debris from being deposited onto surrounding property vehicles concrete pavement slope protection soil water sediment etc .
Protect the treated pavement against damage from all causes .
Place when the ambient air and surface temperatures are at least F and rising and the pavement is clean and dry .
When paving over existing pavement repair ruts and potholes CHIP SEAL SURFACE TREATMENT to provide a smooth surface for the application of the chip seal surface treatment .
Construct hot mix asphalt HMA pavement. . MATERIALS .
At least days prior to the placement of any HMA pavement submit a Plant Quality Control Plan to the Office of Materials Technology OMT and a Field Quality Control Plan to the District Engineers representative for approval .
The Engineer will perform the following to assure the quality of the HMA pavement a Periodically observe tests performed by the Producer or Contractor b Monitor required control charts c Direct the producer or contractor to take mix samples behind the paver prior to compaction d Direct the producer or contractor to take mix samples at the plant site e Direct the producer or contractor to take core samples from the compacted pavement f Monitor conformance with the approved quality control plans and g Evaluate quality control sampling and testing procedures and quality control sampling and testing equipment by an Independent Assurance IA program .
Protect the pavement against damage from all causes .
Repair or replace damaged pavement .
Be operated in a manner which delivers a homogeneous mixture the full width of the pavement .
Place HMA mixtures used as the final surface when the ambient air and surface temperatures are at least F. Place mixtures used as intermediate and base layers when the ambient air and surface temperatures are at least F and place polymermodified surface mixes when the ambient air and surface temperatures are at least F. The pavement surfaces shall be clean dry and approved by the Engineer before HMA paving begins .
The Engineer reserves the right to perform any testing necessary to ensure the quality of the pavement .
When paving over existing pavement remove all excess crack filling and patch material .
After rolling is completed no traffic of any kind will be permitted on the pavement until the pavement has cooled to less than F. ..
When constructing longitudinal joints adjacent to existing HMA pavements overlap the existing pavement inch to .inches .
When placing a surface course cut back the edge of the existing pavement for its full depth at transverse joints to expose a fresh surface and apply tack coat material as directed .
Where HMA paving is being applied to highways carrying traffic all compacted pavement courses exceeding in .
Where compacted pavement courses of in .
Pave the abutting lane or shoulder prior to weekends and temporary shutdowns regardless of the depth of the compacted pavement course .
When uneven pavement joints exist place advance warning traffic control devices in conformance with the Contract Documents .
of pavement depth .
of pavement depth .
Construct temporary tieins ft or greater using a paver meeting the requirements of section At the final tiein point remove a transverse portion of the existing pavement to a depth so the design thickness of the final surface course is maintained .
Pay reduction or incentive for the pavement compaction lot will be calculated in conformance with The process for determining statistical outliers will be in conformance with MSMT .
After final compaction of each course the surface of each pavement course shall be true to the established line and grade and shall be sufficiently smooth so that when tested with the straightedge placed upon the surface parallel with the center line the surface does not deviate more than in .
Shoulders abutting the HMA surface course of any twolane pavement that is being used by traffic shall be completed as soon as possible after completion of the surface course on that lane .
HOT MIX ASPHALT PAVEMENT Removal of the existing pavement or structure for the final tiein will be measured and paid for at the Contract unit price for the pertinent items used .
Removal of existing raisedrecessed pavement markers will not be measured but the cost will be incidental to the Hot Mix Asphalt item .
Removal of existing raisedrecessed pavement markers that are encountered below the existing pavement will be considered for payment in conformance with GP .. .. Price Adjustment for Asphalt Binder .
when the hot mix asphalt properties or pavement density does not conform to Specifications .
The Contract unit price will be adjusted for noncompliance with HMA properties and pavement density in conformance with these procedures .
A pay reduction or incentive payment adjustment for pavement density will be based on individual sublot core test data for a given lot and the lot average density as specified in this section .
Price adjustment will be waived for that portion of the pavement where the Engineer determines that inadequate density is due to a poor foundation .
Repair rigid flexible or composite pavements by removing part or all of the section of the existing pavement and replacing the removed materials using hot mix asphalt HMA paving material .
PDP consists of the removal of areas of unsound pavement material up to a percent of the pavement thickness and replacement with HMA .
The pavement thickness is defined as the thickness of all bound materials in the pavement structure including HMA portland cement concrete PCC and any other asphalt or cement modified materials .
FDP consists of the removal of the full thickness of the pavement sections to the top of the aggregate base material and replacement with HMA .
Construct FDP whenever more than percent of the pavement thickness requires repair. . MATERIALS .
The faces of the remaining pavement shall be square and vertical without ragged edges .
Do not use equipment that could damage the existing pavement .
Remove existing pavement by milling grinding or saw cutting and removal to the specified depth .
For PDP of composite pavements protect the PCC from damage during removal of the HMA .
When PCC is encountered in a composite pavement and is determined to be unsuitable follow the removal and replacement procedures for a FDP .
Make a perpendicular saw cut full depth around the perimeter and remove the existing pavement to the top of the aggregate base .
Refer to the applicable portions of .. for the concrete portion of a composite pavement .
Immediately remove and dispose of the existing pavement materials .
Cores control strip and HOT MIX ASPHALT PATCHES pavement profile measurements are waived .
Prior to placing the HMA thoroughly clean and tack coat the exposed vertical surface of adjacent pavement as specified in Spread the HMA mixture by shovel rake or other approved method approved .
The payment will be full compensation for saw cutting milling grinding removal disposal trimming of the existing pavement subgrade preparation placing all materials including tack coat steel plates emergency filler and for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
The payment will be full compensation for furnishing hauling placing all material additional removal of pavement above the aggregate base and for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
Place the pavement to the specified thickness .
The cure rate for permitting traffic on the pavement without damaging the surface shall be within two hours for SS and one hour for LMSS .
Mill hot mix asphalt HMA pavement. . MATERIALS .
Use a power operated planing machine or grinder capable of removing in one pass a layer of asphalt pavement at the specified depth and at least half the lane width .
Where uneven pavement joints exist provide adequate advance warning devices in conformance with the Contract Documents .
of pavement depth .
of pavement depth .
Grind hot mix asphalt HMA pavement. . MATERIALS .
Provide a final pavement surface with a transverse pattern of .
When necessary to maintain an adequate cross slope for drainage grind the pavement adjacent to the ground pavement .
Where uneven pavement joints exist provide adequate advance warning devices in conformance with the Contract Documents .
Remove existing deteriorated filler using equipment capable of removing the material to the required depth without damaging the sides of the pavement within the crack .
Repair damage done to sound pavement resulting from construction operations .
Perform crack filling when the ambient and pavement surface temperatures are least F and rising unless otherwise recommended by the manufacturer and approved by the Engineer .
below or level with the pavement surface .
Remove excess filler from the surface of the pavement .
Do not allow traffic on the filled pavement until the crack filler has cured .
Filler that pulls loose within hours after opening the pavement to traffic shall be repaired at no additional cost to the Administration . .
Construct plain and reinforced portland cement concrete pavements .
Protect the pavement against damage from all causes .
Repair or replace damaged pavement .
The equipment and methods used shall provide a means to obtain the prescribed weights within the allowable tolerances to obtain the consistency specified with a minimum amount of water to achieve proper placement of the mixture in a condition of maximum density with no segregation and to finish and cure the pavement as specified herein .
Construct the total width of the foundation to the width of the pavement plus at least in .
and a depth equal to the edge thickness of the pavement .
When paving adjacent to an existing pavement the portion of the equipment supported by the existing pavement shall have wheels with rubber tires or crawler treads on protective pads .
Maintain a clearance of at least ft from the inner edge of the paver track or wheel to the edge of the existing pavement .
Slip forms shall be spaced and braced in a vertical position at a uniform and constant width and of a length sufficient to prevent slumping or sagging of the sides and top edges of the pavement slab .
Slip form equipment shall be capable of placing and securing embedded tie bars and keyways in proper position in the plastic concrete before the edge of the pavement slab is free of the slip form .
PLAIN AND REINFORCED PCC PAVEMENTS b Tie bars for longitudinal construction joints may be placed on chairs or machine placed so that upon the initial set of the concrete they are at the proper alignment depth and spacing and at right angles to the center line of the pavement .
Where concrete is to be placed adjoining a previously constructed lane of pavement mechanical spreading and finishing equipment may be operated upon the existing lane of pavement only after the existing concrete has reached a compressive strength of psi in conformance with Wheels that rest on the previously completed concrete shall be flat without flanges at least in .
For pavement constructed using bar mat or wire fabric reinforcement place the concrete in two layers unless it is demonstrated that the bar mat or wire fabric can be properly supported on approved devices .
Following the finishing float use a long handled scraping straightedge ft long to bring the pavement to the correct grade .
After the pavement is placed and before final acceptance cut cores by which the Engineer will check the thickness .
Remove and replace the full pavement section .
On open sections apply texturing uniformly for the full width of pavement .
Secure all laps and edges in place to provide continuous contact of the sheet with the pavement surface .
Construct joints in conformance with the details specified perpendicular to the finished grade of the pavement and sealed as specified in Section .
Transverse expansion and contraction joints shall be straight and continuous from edge to edge of the pavement .
Leave the metal supports in the pavement .
Remove the cap bar without damaging the pavement to provide a space for sealing the joint .
Use a joint filler of the specified type thickness and width to form expansion joints around structures and features that project through into or against the pavement .
Base the time of sawing on current and anticipated weather conditions and to prevent uncontrolled cracking of the pavement .
Maintain the insert perpendicular to the finished grade of the pavement and straight in alignment .
below the pavement surface .
Refer to pavement surface profile requirements specified .
The pavement may be opened to vehicular traffic after having attained a compressive strength of psi .
Plain and reinforced portland cement concrete pavements will be measured and paid for at the Contract unit price per square yard for the pertinent Portland Cement Concrete Pavement item .
The square yard measurement will be computed on the basis of plan width and asbuilt length measured along the pavement center line .
Construct continuously reinforced portland cement concrete pavement on a prepared subgrade. . MATERIALS .
Do not place transverse expansion or contraction joints in continuously reinforced portland cement concrete pavement .
Form the joints using an approved header board in conformance with the cross section of the pavement placed at right angles to the center line and perpendicular to the surface .
Finish the pavement flush with the header board without edging .
Refer to the pavement surface profile requirements in the Contract Documents . .
Repair plain conventionally reinforced or continuously reinforced portland cement concrete pavement .
Repair or replace any part of the repaired pavement that is damaged .
When the range in daily temperature is expected to exceed F concrete may be placed in the late afternoon after the existing pavement has achieved its maximum expansion unless otherwise directed .
Complete all repairs within the same working day on which the pavement is removed .
Perform saw cutting and pavement removal as follows a Plain and Conventionally Reinforced Portland Cement Concrete Pavement .
Trim the existing pavement edge neatly and vertical .
The Engineer will require the removal of any pavement breaking equipment from the project that could damage the adjacent concrete pavement .
Use forms conforming to Overlap existing pavement at least ft on each side of the patch and securely fasten to prevent movement .
Align reinforcement in the direction of the pavement and parallel to the surface .
For continuously reinforced portland cement concrete pavement use reinforcement steel bars of the same size and spacing as the existing bars .
Place an amount of steel at least equal to the amount of steel in the existing pavement .
For plain and conventionally reinforced pavement coat the protruding ends of the dowel bars with an approved water insoluble lubricant .
When the range in daily temperature is expected to exceed F concrete may be placed in the late afternoon after the existing pavement has achieved maximum expansion unless otherwise directed .
Construct both plain and continuously reinforced concrete pavement repairs in one full depth operation .
Construct conventionally reinforced concrete pavement repairs by placing two equal lifts with the wire mesh laid on the surface of the first lift .
Screed the repair longitudinally to provide uniformity of ride to adjacent pavement .
Portland cement concrete pavement repairs will be measured in place and paid for at the Contract unit price per square yard for the pertinent type Plain Portland Cement Concrete Pavement Repair Conventionally Reinforced Portland Cement Concrete Pavement Repair and Continuously Reinforced JOINT SEALING OF PCC PAVEMENTS Portland Cement Concrete Pavement Repair item .
Clean and seal portland cement concrete pavement joints. . MATERIALS .
Apply sealer when the ambient air and pavement temperatures are at least F and rising .
below the pavement surface .
below the pavement surface .
below the pavement surface .
Remove any excess sealer from the surface of the pavement .
Curing time for silicone material varies with temperature and humidity and may delay opening the pavement to traffic .
Traffic is not allowed on the pavement surface until the sealer has cured .
Any sealer that pulls loose from the joint or shows excessive bubbling within one week after opening the pavement to traffic shall be replaced . .
Apply durable and nondurable pavement markings line markings letters numbers arrows and symbols to various surfaces at locations and patterns as specified or as directed. . MATERIALS .
Do not begin placement operations until the QCP is approved and a walkthrough has been performed to approve the layout with the Engineer Contractor and pavement marking foreman .
Do not apply pavement line markings over longitudinal joints Offset the markings in .
All pavement marking operations shall be suspended until the Contractor provides a certified replacement technician .
Pavement surfaces shall be dry and free of oil dirt grease and other contaminants prior to application of pavement markings .
As specified or as directed place a to ft cumulative quality control test strip of pavement marking material that conforms to the Contract Documents at a location determined by the Engineer .
Remove existing pavement markings that conflict with new or altered traffic patterns .
Use an approved method and ensure that the pavement surface in not damaged by the process .
Repair or replace damaged pavement at no additional cost to the Administration .
If a vehicle damages uncured markings reapply the markings and remove marks left on the pavement by the vehicle at no additional cost to the Administration .
The Contractor shall be responsible for any defects in materials and workmanship of the pavement markings for a period of days for durable and days for nondurable materials from the date the pavement is opened to traffic .
At the end of the observation period the Engineer will inspect the pavement markings for durability color and retroreflectivity and inform the Contractor of pavement markings that have failed and that require corrective action .
The payment for furnishing and applying the pavement marking line markings letters numbers arrows and symbols will be made under the pertinent pavement markings items .
Use ft spacing between joints except where a lesser spacing is necessary for closures and for matching expansion and contraction joints in contiguous concrete pavements .
Construct expansion joints at points of curves tangents at locations coinciding with adjoining pavement joints and as specified or as directed .
Match adjacent joints in curb or pavement .
Perform turfgrass establishment when the temperature is above F and the soil is not frozen according to the following schedule SEEDING SEASONS AND SEED MIXES REGION SEEDING SEASON MONTHDAY Spring Summer Fall Late Fall SHA Turfgrass Seed Mix to to to to to to to to to to to to and Plus Additive A or B Plus Additive C Plus Additive D when seeding Areas ft and greater from the pavement edge Slopes and steeper When seeding areas within miles of a State airport Areas flatter than Use no Additives Slopes and steeper Use SHA Special Purpose Seed Mix in lieu of SHA Turfgrass Seed Mix Additives A Weeping Lovegrass C SHA Temporary Seed Mix B Foxtail Bristlegrass D Sericea Lespedeza TURFGRASS ESTABLISHMENT c Nutrient Management Plan NMP .
yd compost per yd of topsoil a SEED MIXES SHA Turfgrass Seed Mix Areas less than ft from the pavement edge flatter than and at facilities .
SHA Turfgrass Seed Mix Sericea Lespedeza Areas ft and more from the pavement edge and slopes and steeper SHA Turfgrass Seed Mix Sericea Lespedeza . . SHA Special Purpose Seed Mix Slopes and steeper within four miles of a State airport .
g Recycled asphalt pavement may be used as a component not to exceed percent and is not subject to aggregate physical property requirements in TABLE B. h When this material is used for drainage applications recycled concrete is prohibited .
g Recycled asphalt pavement may be used as a component not to exceed percent and is not subject to aggregate physical property requirements in TABLE B h When this material is used for drainage applications recycled concrete is prohibited .
When recycled asphalt pavement RAP is used the PV shall be .
b For mixes Mix Modified Hour Patch Mix used for portland cement concrete pavement repairs the maximum allowable percentage of alkalies in portland cement is ..
e When constructing plain and reinforced concrete pavements the testing frequency for slump air content and temperature shall be per yd or fraction thereof .
Performance graded asphalt binders for mixes containing all virgin materials recycled asphalt pavement materials or roofing shingles from manufacturing waste shall meet M Table for the specified performance grade .
mm sieve shall be tested for flat and elongated particles using D . When recycled asphalt pavement is used in an HMA mix as defined in MSMT it shall be considered an aggregate source .
PERFORMANCE GRADED ASPHALT BINDERS AND HMA Crushed recycled asphalt pavement RAP material and maximum of percent roofing shingles from manufacturing waste may be used in the mix design .
Thin Lift Mix Design Identification Table Gradation Classification Mix Designation Control Sieve Mix Design Target Passing Fine Graded Coarse Graded A thin lift is a specified A thin lift is a specified .mm pavement thickness pavement thickness inch .
When the .mm is When the .mm is or a thin lift is a a thin lift is a .mm specified pavement specified pavement thickness inches thickness inches When the .mm is When the .mm is or a thin lift is a a thin lift is a .mm specified pavement specified pavement thickness inches thickness inches When the .mm is When the .mm is or a thin lift is a a thin lift is a .mm specified pavement specified pavement thickness inches thickness inches When the .mm When the .mm is is or a thin lift is a thin lift is a .mm a specified pavement specified pavement thickness inches thickness inches When the .mm When the .mm is or a thin lift is a thin lift is a .mm is a specified pavement specified pavement thickness inches thickness inches PERFORMANCE GRADED ASPHALT BINDERS AND HMA .. Antistripping Additives .
Unless otherwise specified dowel bars and dowel bars used as ties in portland cement concrete pavement expansion and contraction joints shall be plain round steel bars meeting A Grade or A .
M . Fabric used in pavement construction shall be furnished in flat sheets. . WELDED DEFORMED STEEL WIRE FABRIC .
Recycled portland cement concrete or recycled HMA pavement may be used as common select and modified borrow with the written approval of the Engineer .
Recycled portland cement concrete recycled HMA pavement and processed contaminated soil are prohibited for use within ft of the surface in any area to be vegetated .
Material shall be manufactured from polymers having a high resistance to deterioration by pavement deicing salts petroleum based materials and naturally occurring soil chemicals .
Fittings for the pavement edge drain systems including but not limited to end seals splices outlets and shunts shall meet the manufacturers recommendations and be of sufficient strength to withstand construction handling and permanent loading .
