An agency or a department not specified as a federal or local agency or department is a California agency or department. . ABBREVIATIONS Unless context indicates otherwise interpret the meaning of an abbreviation used in the specifications and the Bid Item List as shown in the following tables SECTION GENERAL Abbreviations Abbreviation Meaning AASHTO American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials AB aggregate base ACI American Concrete Institute ADL aerially deposited lead AISC American Institute of Steel Construction AISI American Iron and Steel Institute AMA archaeological monitoring area ANSI American National Standards Institute API American Petroleum Institute AREMA American Railway Engineering and MaintenanceofWay Association AS aggregate subbase ASME American Society of Mechanical Engineers ASQ American Society for Quality ATPB asphalt treated permeable base ATS active treatment system AWG American Wire Gauge AWPA American Wood Protection Association AWSa American Welding Society AWWA American Water Works Association AWIS automated work zone information system BBS battery backup system BNSF Burlington Northern Santa Fe CalOSHA California Division of Occupational Safety and Health Administration CBC California Building Code CDPH California Department of Public Health CIDH castindrilledhole CIH Certified Industrial Hygienist CIP cast in place CJP complete joint penetration CMU concrete masonry unit CPM critical path method CPL composite plastic lumber CRCP continuously reinforced concrete pavement CRM crumb rubber modifier CTB cement treated base CTPB cement treated permeable base CVN Charpy Vnotch CWI AWS Certified Welding Inspector DBE disadvantaged business enterprise DRA Dispute Resolution Advisor DRB Dispute Resolution Board DTSC Department of Toxic Substances Control DVBE disabled veteran business enterprise ECTC Erosion Control Technology Council EIAECIA Electronic Industries AllianceElectronic Components Industry Association ELAP Environmental Laboratory Accreditation Program ESA environmentally sensitive area ETL Electrical Testing Laboratories fc extreme fiber compressive stress in concrete at service loads fc compressive strength of concrete FHWA Federal Highway Administration FDR full depth reclamation GAAP Generally Accepted Accounting Principles GGBFS ground granulated blast furnace slag slag cement SECTION GENERAL GSP galvanized steel pipe HMA hot mix asphalt HMAO hot mix asphalt open graded HS high strength ICC International Code Council ICEA Insulated Cable Engineers Association ITE Institute of Transportation Engineers IEEE Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers JMF job mix formula JPCP jointed plain concrete pavement ksf kips per square foot ksi kips per square inch LCB lean concrete base LCS Departments lane closure system LEED Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design LTDS long term design strength MC medium curing METS Departments Materials Engineering and Testing Services MPI Master Painters Institute MPQP Material Plant Quality Program published by the Department MR movement rating MSDSb material safety data sheet MT magnetic particle testing MUTCD Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices NAL numeric action level NDT nondestructive testing NEL numeric effluent limitation NETA International Electrical Testing Association NEC National Electrical Code NEMA National Electrical Manufacturers Association NFPA National Fire Protection Association NMAS nominal maximum aggregate size NPDES National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System NPT National Pipe Thread Taper NRTL Nationally Recognized Testing Laboratory NTU nephelometric turbidity unit OBC optimum binder content OGFC open graded friction course OSD Offices of Structure Design PLAC permit license agreement certification or any combination of these PC precast PCC portland cement concrete pcf pounds per cubic foot PCMS portable changeable message sign PG performance grade PJP partial joint penetration POC pedestrian overcrossing PQR procedure qualification record PS prestressed PSF pedestrian signal face PV programmed visibility QSD qualified SWPPP developer QSP qualified SWPPP practitioner RAP reclaimed asphalt pavement RCSC Research Council on Structural Connections RECP rolled erosion control product SECTION GENERAL RFI request for information RHMA rubberized hot mix asphalt RHMAG rubberized hot mix asphalt gap graded RHMAO rubberized hot mix asphalt open graded RHMAOHB rubberized hot mix asphalt open graded high binder RPL recycled plastic lumber RSC rapid strength concrete RSP rock slope protection RSS revised standard specifications RT radiographic testing RWQCB regional water quality control board SMSA Standard Metropolitan Statistical Area SC slow curing SCC selfconsolidating concrete SCM supplementary cementitious material SDS safety data sheet SSPC The Society for Protective Coatings SWPPP stormwater pollution prevention plan SWRCB State Water Resources Control Board TEES Transportation Electrical Equipment Specifications TIA Telecommunications Industry Association time impact analysis TRO timerelated overhead TV target value UFFA ultra fine fly ash UL Underwriters Laboratories Inc USC United States Code USLE Universal Soil Loss Equation USM unidentified stock material UT ultrasonic testing VECP value engineering change proposal VFD variablefrequency drive VPM volts per mil WMA warm mix asphalt WPC water pollution control WPCP water pollution control program WPS welding procedure specification WQO water quality objective aInterpret a reference to AWS as a reference to AWS ANSIAWS or AASHTOAWS bInterpret a reference to MSDS as a reference to SDS under CFR .
base Layer of specified material of planned thickness placed immediately below the pavement or surfacing .
grading plane Basement material surface on which the lowest layer of subbase base pavement surfacing or other specified layer is placed .
pavement Uppermost layer of material placed on a traveled way or shoulder .
subgrade Roadbed portion on which pavement surfacing base subbase or a layer of any other material is placed .
surfacing Uppermost layer of material placed on a traveled way or shoulders pavement .
A project is in a freezethaw area if the project is specified in the special provisions to be in a freezethaw area. . PAVEMENT CLIMATE REGIONS To help account for the effects of various climatic conditions on pavement performance the State has been divided into climate regions .
The projects pavement climate region is shown on the project plans .
Prevent construction equipment that exceeds the maximum weight limits in Veh Code Div from operating on completed or existing treated base pavement or structures .
Treated base or pavement under construction or completed .
Completed or existing base pavement and structures under the Departments Transportation Permits Manual whether open to the public or not Loads imposed on existing new or partially completed structures must not exceed the loadcarrying capacity of the structure or any portion of the structure as determined by AASHTO LRFD with interims and California Amendments Design Strength Limit State II .
Work related to the corrective work including traffic control and temporary and permanent pavement markings The Engineer notifies you when the plan is authorized .
The Engineer may order or consent to your request to open a completed section of surfacing pavement or structure roadway surface for public use .
applies to asphalt contained in materials for pavement structures and pavement surface treatments such as HMA tack coat asphaltic emulsions bituminous seals asphalt binders and modified asphalt binders placed in the work .
.C Landscaping Reserved .D Traffic Stripes Pavement Markings and Pavement Markers Before obliterating any traffic stripes pavement markings and pavement markers to be replaced at the same location reference the stripes markings and markers .
foot exists between the elevation of the existing pavement and the elevation of an excavation within feet of the left edge or within feet of the right edge of the traveled way at the end of each working day place and compact material against the vertical cut adjacent to the traveled way .
Place the material to the top of the existing pavement and taper at a slope of horizontalvertical or flatter to the bottom of the excavation .
Cement the channelizer bases to the pavement as specified for cementing pavement markers to the pavement in section .
When no longer required for the work remove the channelizers and the underlying adhesive used to cement the channelizer bases to the pavement .
Do not move the modules and supporting pallets or frames by sliding or skidding along the pavement or bridge deck .
SECTION TEMPORARY TRAFFIC CONTROL .C Construction Relocate each system during the progress of the work such that the systems are located at the ends of the pavement at the end of each work shift .
Vertical clearances of traveled ways including shoulders due to activities such as pavement overlays overhead sign installation or falsework girder erection Submit closure schedule changes including additional closures by noon at least business days before a planned closure .
GENERAL Section includes specifications for placing temporary pavement delineation except for delineation on a seal coat project .
Temporary painted traffic stripes and painted pavement markings used for temporary delineation must comply with section .
Temporary signs for nopassing zones must comply with section .. . MATERIALS .A General The following types of temporary pavement delineation must be on the Authorized Material List for signing and delineation materials .
Temporary pavement markers for long term daynight use days or less .
Temporary pavement markers for short term daynight use days or less SECTION TEMPORARY TRAFFIC CONTROL .
Temporary removable striping and pavement marking tape days or less .
Permanent traffic striping and pavement marking tape .
Channelizers .B Temporary Pavement Markers Temporary pavement markers must be the same color as the lane line or centerline markers being replaced .
Temporary pavement markers must be for longterm day or night use days or less except you may use temporary pavement markers for shortterm day or night use days or less if you place the permanent pavement delineation before the end of the days .
.C Channelizers Channelizers used for temporary edge line delineation must be orange and surface mounted. . CONSTRUCTION .A General If work activities obliterate pavement delineation place temporary or permanent pavement delineation before opening the traveled way to traffic .
The temporary pavement delineation must consist of a lane line and centerline pavement delineation for traveled ways open to traffic .
On multilane roadways freeways and expressways the temporary pavement delineation must also include edge line delineation for traveled ways open to traffic .
Establish the alignment for temporary pavement delineation including the required lines or markers .
Do not apply temporary pavement delineation over existing pavement delineation or any other temporary pavement delineation .
Maintain temporary pavement delineation until no longer needed or replace it with a new striping detail of temporary or permanent pavement delineation .
When the Engineer determines the temporary pavement delineation is no longer required for the direction of traffic remove the temporary pavement markers and underlying adhesive and removable traffic tape from the final layer of surfacing and from the pavement to remain in place .
Remove temporary pavement delineation that conflicts with any subsequent or new traffic pattern for the area .
.B Temporary Lane Line and Centerline Delineation If lane lines or centerlines are obliterated and temporary pavement delineation to replace the lines is not shown the minimum lane line and centerline delineation must consist of temporary pavement markers placed longitudinally at foot maximum intervals .
For temporary lane line or centerline delineation consisting entirely of temporary pavement markers for shortterm day or night use days or less do not use the markers for more than days on lanes opened to traffic .
Place the permanent pavement delineation before the end of the days .
If the permanent pavement delineation is not placed within days replace the temporary pavement markers with additional temporary pavement delineation equivalent to the pattern described for the permanent pavement delineation for the area .
If nopassing centerline pavement delineation is obliterated install the following temporary nopassing zone signs before opening lanes to traffic .
Maintain the temporary nopassing zone signs in place until you place the permanent nopassing centerline pavement delineation .
SECTION TEMPORARY TRAFFIC CONTROL .C Temporary Edge Line Delineation On multilane roadways freeways and expressways open to traffic where edge lines are obliterated and temporary pavement delineation to replace those edge lines is not shown provide temporary pavement delineation for .
Temporary pavement markers placed longitudinally at foot maximum intervals You may apply temporary traffic stripe paint of the same color as the stripe being replaced instead of solid inchwide temporary traffic stripe tape where the removal of the temporary traffic stripe is not required .
Cement the bases of channelizers used for temporary edge line delineation to the pavement with hot melt bituminous adhesive as specified in section for cementing pavement markers to pavement .
Slowly roll the tape with a rubbertired vehicle or roller to ensure complete contact with the pavement surface . .
Apply the tape straight on a tangent alignment and on a true arc on a curved alignment. . Do not apply the tape when the ambient air or pavement temperature is less than degrees F unless otherwise authorized .
except you may apply or coats of the temporary traffic stripe paint for new or existing pavement .
.D Temporary Pavement Marking Tape Apply temporary removable pavement marking tape as specified for applying temporary removable traffic stripe tape in section .D .
.D Temporary Pavement Marking Paint Apply temporary pavement marking paint under section .
except you may apply or coats of the temporary pavement marking paint .
You are not required to remove of painted temporary pavement markings that will be covered by paving work .
You may use permanent or temporary removable pavement marking tape instead of temporary pavement marking paint .
SECTION TEMPORARY TRAFFIC CONTROL .D Temporary Pavement Markers Place temporary pavement markers under the manufacturers instructions .
Cement temporary markers to the surfacing with the manufacturers recommended adhesive except do not use epoxy adhesive in areas where the removal of the pavement markers is required .
You may use retroreflective pavement markers instead of temporary pavement markers for longterm day or night use days or less except to simulate patterns of broken traffic stripe .
Retroreflective pavement markers used for temporary pavement markers must comply with section except the waiting period before placing pavement markers on new asphalt concrete surfacing as specified in section .
Do not use epoxy adhesive to place pavement markers in areas where the removal of the pavement markers is required. . PAYMENT The Department does not pay for additional temporary pavement delineation used to replace temporary pavement markers .
Temporary pavement marking is measured as specified for pavement marking in section .
GENERAL Section includes specifications for placing temporary pavement delineation for a seal coat project .
Temporary signs for nopassing zones must comply with section .. . MATERIALS Temporary raised pavement markers for seal coat applications must be temporary pavement markers for shortterm day or night use days or less on the Authorized Material List for signing and delineation materials. . CONSTRUCTION Before applying binder that will obliterate existing traffic stripes place temporary raised pavement markers on the existing traffic stripes except for right edge lines at foot maximum intervals .
Place temporary raised pavement markers under the manufacturers instructions .
Before opening the lanes to uncontrolled traffic remove the covers from the temporary raised pavement markers .
If you obliterate nopassing centerline pavement delineation install the following temporary nopassing zone signs before opening lanes to traffic .
Maintain the temporary nopassing zone signs in place until you place the permanent nopassing centerline pavement delineation .
Maintain temporary pavement delineation until you replace it with the permanent pavement delineation. . PAYMENT Not Used RESERVED WATER POLLUTION CONTROL GENERAL .
Staining or discoloration on pavement or soils .
Do not grind or groove pavement during precipitation .
Do not allow the slurry to run onto lanes open to traffic or off the pavement .
Do not leave the residue on the pavement or allow it to flow across the pavement .
Do not unload transfer or load bituminous material for pavement markers within feet of drainage inlets or receiving waters .
During pavementstructure construction activities .
Secure the barrier to the pavement with nails and adhesive gravelfilled bags or a combination of both .
Reattach any barrier that becomes detached or dislodged from the pavement .
Type Y material California hazardous waste that may be reused under a variance from the DTSC if the contaminated soil is placed at least feet above the maximum historic elevation of the water table and protected from infiltration by pavement that will be maintained by the Department .
applies if the removal of existing yellow thermoplastic and yellow painted traffic stripe and pavement marking that will produce hazardous waste residue is specified in the special provisions .
includes specifications for removing handling and disposing of yellow thermoplastic and yellow painted traffic stripe and pavement marking .
Residue from the removal of yellow thermoplastic and yellow painted traffic stripe and pavement marking contains lead chromate .
When applied to the roadway the yellow thermoplastic and yellow painted traffic stripe and pavement marking contained as much as .
Residue produced from the removal of this yellow thermoplastic and yellow painted traffic stripe and pavement marking contains heavy metals in concentrations that exceed thresholds established by the Health Safety Code and CA Code of Regs .
Removal of existing yellow thermoplastic and yellow painted traffic stripe and pavement marking exposes workers to health hazards that must be addressed in your lead compliance plan .
.B Submittals .B General Reserved .B Work Plan Submit a work plan for the removal containment storage and disposal of yellow thermoplastic and yellow painted traffic stripe and pavement marking .
Procedures for the removal and collection of yellow thermoplastic and yellow painted traffic stripe and pavement marking residue including dust .
.C Removal When grinding or other authorized methods are used to remove yellow thermoplastic and yellow painted traffic stripe and pavement marking that produces a hazardous waste residue .
Use a HEPA filterequipped vacuum attachment operated concurrently with the removal operations or other equivalent approved method for collection of the residue .D Sampling and Testing of Residue Hazardous waste residue from the removal of yellow thermoplastic and yellow painted traffic stripe and pavement marking must be tested as required by the disposal facility and including .
Does not extend above the grade established by the Engineer where concrete base or pavement is to be placed . .
Remove pavement within the limits of roadway excavation .
Structure backfill placed within feet of finished grade at abutments abutment wingwalls retaining walls and other portions of structures Structure backfill placed at bridge supports in waterways and water channels not beneath any embankment pavement or slope protection .
For trenches in existing pavement place controlled lowstrength material no higher than the bottom of the existing pavements permeable drainage layer .
Where a drainage layer does not exist place the material no higher than inch below the bottom of the existing asphalt concrete surfacing or no higher than the top of the base below the existing concrete pavement .
Do not extend geosynthetic reinforcement into the pavement structure .
GENERAL Section includes specifications for constructing shoulder backing adjacent to the edge of new pavement surfacing. . MATERIALS Shoulder backing must be clean and consist of one or any combination of the following materials .
Do not deposit shoulder backing on new pavement .
Before opening a lane adjacent to uncompleted shoulder backing place portable delineators and W Low Shoulder signs off of and adjacent to the new pavement surfacing .
Place portable delineators at the beginning and along the dropoff of the edge of pavement in the direction of travel at maximum intervals of feet on tangents and feet on curves .
Place the W signs at the beginning and along the dropoff of the edge of pavement in the direction of travel at maximum intervals of feet .
GENERAL Section includes specifications for placing subgrade enhancement geosynthetic between the subgrade and pavement structure .
Wetting vehicles pedestrians and pavement .
Mowing must extend to the edges of pavement dikes curbs sidewalks walls and fences .
Make a minimum inchdeep saw cut along neat lines around the perimeter of the pavement to be removed at locations determined by the Engineer .
Except for the part of the trench backfilled with surfacing or pavement the remainder of the trench must be backfilled with material that is excavated from the trench .
Before removing or disturbing existing pavement markers that show the location of the existing irrigation conduit mark the location of the existing conduit on the pavement .
Type A pavement markers and adhesive must comply with section .
Jacking or drilling pits must be no closer than feet from the pavement edge whenever possible .
If authorized small holes may be cut in the pavement to locate or remove obstructions .
Do not use excessive water that will soften the subgrade or undermine the pavement .
Do not apply duff within feet of the pavement edge .
Drill seed in rows no greater than inches apart and to a depth of inch. . Make a minimum of passes in different directions with seeding equipment to reduce any uniform row appearance. . Do not apply seed within feet of the pavement edge .
Do not incorporate materials within feet of the pavement edge .
At medians For a graded roadbed without surfacing or pavement trim and shape the entire roadbed to uniform cross sections and slopes .
Do not stockpile material on finished pavement or allow material to drift across pavement .
Clean finished pavement of dirt and foreign material .
foot above or below the grade established by the Engineer except wherever concrete pavement will be placed on CTB the finished CTB surface must not extend above the grade established by the Engineer .
foot from the grade established by the Engineer remove the base and replace it with CTB or if authorized fill low areas according to the pavement material as follows .
For HMA pavement fill low areas with HMA that complies with the specifications for the lowest layer of pavement .
Do not fill low areas concurrently with the paving operation. . For concrete pavement fill low areas with pavement concrete concurrent with the paving operation .
If concrete pavement will be placed on LCB construct longitudinal construction and longitudinal contraction joints in the LCB to provide at least foot of horizontal clearance from planned longitudinal construction and longitudinal contraction joints in the concrete pavement .
If using a spring steel tine device the device must produce a scored surface with scores parallel or transverse to the pavement centerline .
For LCB to be paved with concrete pavement do not texture LCB .
For LCB to be paved with concrete pavement the finished surface must not be above the grade or more than .
.F Curing After finishing LCB cure LCB with pigmented curing compound under section .B and .I except for LCB to be paved with concrete pavement comply with section .
Apply curing compound to the area to be paved with concrete pavement .
.G Surfaces Not Within Tolerance For LCB not to be paved with concrete pavement remove the base where the surface is higher than .
For LCB to be paved with concrete pavement remove the base where the surface is higher than the grade established by the Engineer and replace it with LCB .
After grinding LCB to be paved with concrete pavement and after all free water has left the surface clean foreign material and grinding residue from the surface .
foot from the grade established by the Engineer remove the base and replace it with LCB or if authorized fill low areas according to the pavement material as follows .
For HMA pavement fill low areas with HMA that complies with the specifications for the lowest layer of pavement .
Do not fill low areas concurrently with the paving operation. . For concrete pavement fill low areas with pavement concrete concurrent with the paving operation. . PAYMENT The payment quantity for lean concrete base does not include lean concrete base used to fill low areas of subgrade RAPID STRENGTH CONCRETE BASE .
Clean the ground area of RSC base that is to be covered with pavement of all foreign material and grinding residue as soon as any free water has left the surface and apply curing seal .
foot from the grade established by the Engineer remove the base and replace it with RSC base or if authorized fill low areas with HMA that complies with the specifications for the lowest layer of pavement .
Consolidate adjacent to the forms and across the full pavement width .
foot from the grade established by the Engineer remove and replace it with concrete base or if authorized fill low areas with HMA that complies with the specifications for the lowest layer of pavement .
If authorized fill low areas with pavement material as follows .
For HMA pavement fill low areas with HMA that complies with the specifications for the lowest layer of HMA pavement .
Do not fill low areas concurrently with the HMA paving operation. . For concrete pavement fill low areas with paving concrete concurrent with the concrete pavement paving operation. . PAYMENT The payment quantity for treated permeable base is the volume determined from the dimensions shown .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes general specifications for constructing reclaimed pavement bases .
.B Definitions OMC Optimum moisture content .C Submittals .C General At least days before starting pavement reclamation work submit the QC plan .
.C Asphaltic Emulsion For each dilution of asphaltic emulsion used on the finished reclaimed pavement surface submit as an informational submittal .
.Cc Quality Control Reporting For each lot submit a report daily that includes the following items based on the frequencies specified in the table for sampling locations and testing frequencies for the type of pavement reclamation work performed or if not specified once per lot .
For asphalt emulsion used on finished reclaimed pavement surface if asphaltic emulsion is specified .. Emulsion type SECTION RECLAIMED PAVEMENTS .. Emulsion application rate in galsq yd .. Emulsion dilution as the weight ratio of added water to the original asphaltic emulsion .
If a quantity of reclaimed pavement placed at the end of a work shift is less than sq yd you may either count this quantity as lot or include the test results for quality control in the previous lot .
For any lot including the test strip stop reclaimed pavement activities and immediately inform the Engineer if any test result does not comply with the specifications .
Stop reclaimed pavement activities for noncompliance with the specifications .
Ground supervisors SECTION RECLAIMED PAVEMENTS .. Representative from testing lab Do not start pavement reclamation activities including test strips until the listed personnel have attended a preoperation meeting .
.D Test Strip On the st day of pavement reclamation activities and using the same equipment and materials that will be used during production construct at least feet in a single lane width to determine the .
Equipment materials and processes can produce reclaimed pavement in compliance with the specifications .
Application rate of asphaltic emulsion as applicable Do not proceed with reclaimed pavement activities until the Engineer informs you the test strip is authorized .
For dilution the weight ratio of water added to asphaltic emulsion must not exceed to . . CONSTRUCTION .A General Except for pulverized roadbed before starting daily pavement reclaiming activities sweep the area constructed the previous day to remove loose material .
Do not use a heating device to soften the pavement .
If supplementary aggregate or cement is spread before pulverizing the existing pavement the pulverizing equipment must produce a uniform mixture without segregation .
.C Surface Preparation Before pavement reclamation activities start prepare the existing roadway surface by .
Marking the proposed longitudinal cut lines on the existing pavement as follows .. Cut lines must coincide with points where the existing cross slope changes approximately at the centerline and edge of traveled way .. Cut lines must indicate the sequence of the cuts .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for constructing a uniform reclaimed pavement base by pulverizing the asphalt concrete pavement and underlying material .
Pulverize the existing pavement and underlying material to the required size .
Mix the pulverized pavement underlying material and water into a homogeneous and uniform mixture .
Have a minimum foot wide cutter that can remove the existing pavement to the specified depths SECTION RECLAIMED PAVEMENTS Compacting equipment must be a sheepsfoot roller a vibratory steeltired roller and a pneumatictired roller .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for constructing a reclaimed pavement base using FDRfoamed asphalt .
Obtain representative pavement and underlying base material samples for FDRfoamed asphalt from the test pits .
If additional samples of subgrade material are needed test pits can be excavated outside the edge of pavement to variable dimensions .
Use the sampled material to determine the mix design according to the proportions of the pavement structure shown .
Mark the existing pavement where the center of the pulverizing drum stops .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for constructing a reclaimed pavement base using FDRcement .
Pulverizing existing asphalt concrete pavement and underlying materials .
If any portion of existing asphalt concrete pavement is to be removed before pulverizing remove that portion of asphalt concrete pavement from the samples used in the mix design .
If additional samples of subgrade material are needed sampling locations can be excavated outside the edge of pavement to variable dimensions .
Use the sampled material to determine the mix design represented by the sampling location according to the proportions of the pavement structure shown .
Before opening the mix design sampling locations to traffic backfill sampling locations by replacing and compacting with an authorized material or minor HMA that complies with section .. Backfill and compact to the existing grade and thickness of asphalt concrete pavement in the Engineers presence .
Mark the existing pavement where the center of the pulverizing drum stops .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for constructing a base by cracking seating and preparing the surface of existing concrete pavement .
Modify your equipment and procedures and crack the noncompliant pavement again .
Construct an inspection strip if the concrete pavement has HMA on the surface .D Test Section The Engineer determines and marks a test section up to sq ft within the crack and seat area shown .
Immediately before cracking the test section apply water to the pavement surface so that cracking can be readily evaluated .
Take at least cores per test section and core per lane mile for each pavement cracking machine used .
MATERIALS .A General Use fastsetting or polyester concrete to fill core holes. . CONSTRUCTION .A General Reserved .B Cracking Crack existing concrete pavement using the procedures and equipment from the authorized test section .
Crack existing concrete pavement into segments that nominally measure feet transversely by feet longitudinally .
If the existing pavement is already cracked into segments crack it into equalsized square or rectangular pieces that nominally measure not more than feet transversely and from to feet longitudinally .
Do not impact the pavement within foot of another break line pavement joint or edge of pavement .
Cracks must be vertical continuous and penetrate the full depth of pavement .
Cracks must be within inches of vertical along the full depth of pavement .
Do not cause surface spalling over .foot deep or excessive shattering of the pavement or base .
Cracking equipment must impact the pavement with a variable force in a controlled location .
If the concrete pavement has no more than .
foot of asphalt concrete on the surface you may crack the pavement without removing the asphalt concrete .
After cracking allow public traffic on the cracked or initial pavement layer for no more than days .
Reseat any segment of cracked pavement that has not been overlaid within hours of seating .
.D Surface Preparation Before opening cracked and seated pavement to traffic or overlaying .
Remove all loose debris and sweep the pavement .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes general specifications for constructing surfacings and pavements .
.B Definitions Reserved .C Submittals Reserved .D Quality Assurance .D General Reserved .D Preconstruction Meetings At least business days before the start of surfacing and pavement operations hold a preconstruction meeting with the Engineer and your .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for applying or placing a base bond breaker between a base and concrete pavement .
If the bond breaker moves or wrinkles during concrete pavement placement use more fasteners at a smaller spacing .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for measuring the smoothness of pavement surfaces .
Submit the raw profile data in an unfiltered electronic pavement profile file format .
with no leading zero X profile operation EXIST for existing pavement INTER for after prepaving smoothness correction PAVE for after paving and CORR for after final surface pavement correction PT type of HMA or concrete pavement such as Type A HMA RHMAG JPCP or CRCP If you are submitting multiple inertial profiler data files compress the files into a .ZIP file format and submit them using the filenaming convention TT_EA_X_YYYYMMDD.zip .
For correction areas not within a traffic lane .. Identify the pavement area such as shoulder weigh station or turnout ..
.D Quality Control .Da General Reserved SECTION GENERAL .Db Smoothness .Dbi General Test pavement smoothness using an inertial profiler except use a foot straightedge for the pavement at .
Determine the pavement smoothness for each traffic lane by obtaining the International Roughness Index for the left and right wheel paths in an individual lane .
Where OGFC is required test pavement smoothness of the final HMA or concrete pavement surface before placing OGFC and after placing OGFC .
The test section must be a .mile segment of existing concrete pavement if you are measuring new concrete pavement or existing asphalt concrete pavement if you are measuring new asphalt concrete pavement .
For concrete pavement use a minimum inch line laser sensor .
mile that is the result of an interruption to a continuous pavement surface must comply with the Mean Roughness Index specifications for a full section .
.D Department Acceptance The Department accepts pavement surfaces for smoothness based on compliance with the smoothness specifications for the type of pavement surface specified .
For areas that require pavement smoothness determined using a foot straightedge the pavement surface must not vary from the lower edge of the straightedge by more than . . foot when the straightedge is laid parallel with the centerline . . foot when the straightedge is laid perpendicular to the centerline and extends from edge to edge of a traffic lane . . foot when the straightedge is laid within feet of a pavement conform For each .mile section your International Roughness Index values must be within percent of the Departments International Roughness Index values .
Before profiling remove foreign objects from the pavement surface and mark the beginning and ending station on the pavement shoulder .
Wherever final sweeping or brooming of the seal coat surface is complete place permanent traffic stripes and pavement markings within days .
If you fail to place the permanent traffic stripes and pavement markings within the specified time the Department withholds percent of the estimated value of the seal coat work completed that has not received permanent traffic stripes and pavement markings .
Use brooms to clean the existing pavement .
.C Applying Emulsion and Asphalt Binder Cover the edges of existing pavement not receiving seal coat using a material such as kraft paper .
Do not track asphaltic emulsion on existing pavement surfaces .
Apply asphaltic emulsion when the ambient air temperature is from to degrees F and the pavement surface temperature is at least degrees F. Do not apply asphaltic emulsion when weather forecasts predict the ambient air temperature will fall below degrees F within hours after application .
Apply polymer asphaltic emulsion when the ambient air temperature is from to degrees F and the pavement surface temperature is at least degrees F. Do not apply polymer asphaltic emulsion when weather forecasts predict the ambient air temperature will fall below degrees F within hours after application .
SECTION BITUMINOUS SEALS Apply asphalt rubber binder when the ambient temperature is from to degrees F and the pavement surface temperature is at least degrees F. Do not apply asphalt rubber binder unless enough screenings are available at the job site to cover the asphalt rubber binder within minutes .
Do not apply asphalt rubber binder when pavement is damp or during high wind conditions .
Applying a slurry seal consists of spreading a mixture of asphaltic emulsion or polymer modified asphaltic emulsion aggregate setcontrol additives and water on a surface or pavement .
Applying a microsurfacing consists of spreading a mixture of microsurfacing emulsion water additives mineral filler and aggregate on the pavement .
The belting must contact the pavement to prevent loss of slurry from the box . .
Equipped with rear flexible strikeoff blades in close contact with the pavement and adjustable to various crown shapes to uniformly apply the slurry seal . .
Designed to maintain close contact with the pavement during spreading .
Capable of being adjusted to the various pavement cross sections The final strikeoff device must be .
.D Surface Preparation .Da General Before you place slurry seal or microsurfacing clean the pavement surface by removing loose particles of extraneous materials including paving and dirt .
The fog spray must be adjusted for pavement .
Spread scratch course by adjusting the steel strikeoff of a scratch course box until it is directly in contact with the pavement surface .
SECTION BITUMINOUS SEALS .Daii Weather Conditions Only place slurry seal or microsurfacing if both the pavement and air temperatures are at least degrees F and rising .
Do not place slurry seal or microsurfacing if either the pavement or air temperature is below degrees F and falling .
If there is a bid item for tack coat coat the pavement surface with an SS or CSS grade asphaltic emulsion mixed with additional water .
The microsurfacing spread rates must be within the ranges shown in the following table Microsurfacing Spread Rates Microsurfacing type Location Range lb of dry aggregatesq yd Type II Full lane width Type IIIa Full lane width Type IIIb Full lane width a Over asphalt concrete pavement b Over concrete pavement and concrete bridge decks SECTION BITUMINOUS SEALS Spread microsurfacing either in the direction of traffic or in the opposite direction .
.Dcii Joints The maximum difference between the pavement surface and the bottom edge of a foot straightedge placed perpendicular to the joint must be . . foot for longitudinal joints . . foot for transverse joints .Dciii Finished Surface Finished microsurfacing must be free of irregularities such as scratch or tear marks .
Sealing a parking area consists of spreading a mixture of asphaltic emulsion aggregate polymer and water on a parking area pavement surface .
Oil seal primer must be manufactured to isolate the parking area slurry seal from pavement with residual oils petroleum grease and spilled gasoline .
CONSTRUCTION .A General Reserved .C Surface Preparation If cracks in the existing parking area pavement surface are from to inch wide treat the cracks under section .
If cracks in the existing parking area pavement surface are greater than inch wide the Engineer orders the repair .
After any crack treatment and before placing parking area seal clean the pavement surface including removal of oil and grease spots .
If cleaning the pavement surface with detergents thoroughly rinse with water .
If the pavement surface has oil or grease spots that do not come clean and sealing is insufficient the Engineer orders the repair of the pavement .
Before placing the parking area seal dampen the pavement surface using a distributor truck .
Place the seal on the damp pavement but do not place it with standing water on the pavement .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for treating cracks in asphalt concrete pavement .
.B Definitions Reserved SECTION BITUMINOUS SEALS .C Submittals If your selected crack treatment material is on the Authorized Material List for flexible pavement crack treatment material submit a certificate of compliance including .
If the pavement temperature is below degrees F or if there is evidence of moisture in the crack use a hot air lance immediately before applying crack treatment .
The hot air lance must not apply flame directly on the pavement .
Immediately remove crack treatment material that is spilled or deposited on the pavement surface .
Sweep up excess sand before opening to traffic. . PAYMENT The payment quantity for crack treatment is the length measured in lane lines along the edge of each paved lane parallel to the pavements centerline .
leveling course Thin layer of HMA used to correct minor variations in the longitudinal and transverse profile of the pavement before placement of other pavement layers .
Perform density tests at the centerline of the joint inches from the upper vertical notch after the adjacent lane is placed and before opening the pavement to traffic . .
.Ahviii Density Cores Except for HMA pavement placed using method compaction take or inch diameter density cores at least once every business days .
Take cores after the adjacent lane is placed and before opening the pavement to traffic .
.Ahix Pavement Smoothness For HMA pavement within feet from and parallel to the construction joint formed between curbs gutters or existing pavement test pavement smoothness using a foot straightedge .
Pavement smoothness .Aiii InPlace Density Except for HMA pavement placed using method compaction the Engineer tests the density core you take from each tons of HMA .
Density cores must be taken from the final layer cored through the entire pavement thickness shown .
.Aiiii Pavement Smoothness For areas that require pavement smoothness determined using an inertial profiler the pavement surface must .
Correct pavement to the Mean Roughness Index specifications .
SECTION ASPHALT CONCRETE .B Geosynthetic Pavement Interlayer Geosynthetic pavement interlayer must comply with the specifications for pavement fabric paving mat paving grid paving geocomposite grid or geocomposite strip membrane as shown .
The asphalt binder for geosynthetic pavement interlayer must be PG PG or PG .
.C Construction .C General Do not place HMA on wet pavement or frozen surface .
HMA handled spread or windrowed must not stain the finished surface of any improvement including pavement .
Hardened lumps Complete finish rolling activities before the pavement surface temperature is .
Prepaving inertial profiler work includes taking profiles of the existing pavement and analyzing the data with ProVAL to determine existing pavement International Roughness Index Mean Roughness Index and areas of localized roughness .
If ordered not to correct areas of localized roughness the smoothness specifications do not apply to the final pavement surface placed in those areas .
The final pavement surface must comply with section .Aiiii .
To existing pavement including planed surfaces .
Concrete pavement and existing asphalt concrete surfacing .
. . Planed pavement .
Do not allow the tracking of tack coat onto pavement surfaces beyond the job site .
.Cg Geosynthetic Pavement Interlayer Where shown place geosynthetic pavement interlayer over a coat of asphalt binder and in compliance with the manufacturers instructions .
Repair cracks inch and wider spalls and holes in the pavement .
Repairing cracks is change order work. . Clean the pavement of loose and extraneous material .
If placing HMA against the edge of existing pavement saw cut or grind the pavement straight and vertical along the joint and remove extraneous material .
SECTION ASPHALT CONCRETE .C Pavement Edge Treatments Construct edge treatment on the HMA pavement as shown .
Measure the angle from the plane of the adjacent finished pavement surface .
.C Widening Existing Pavement If widening existing pavement construct new pavement structure to match the elevation of the existing pavements edge before placing HMA over the existing pavement .
If a driveway or a road connection is shown place additional HMA along the pavements edge to conform to road connections and driveways .
Do not open new HMA pavement to traffic until its mid depth temperature is below degrees F. If the surface to be paved is both in sunlight and shade pavement surface temperatures are taken in the shade .
HMA pavement thickness shown is less than .
.Cc.Ce Reserved .C Smoothness Corrections If the pavement surface does not comply with section .Aiiii grind the pavement to within specified tolerances remove and replace the pavement or place an overlay of HMA .
Do not use equipment with carbide cutting teeth to grind the pavement unless authorized .
If ordered core the pavement at the locations selected by the Engineer .
Remove and replace deficient pavement areas where the overlay thickness is less than percent of the thickness specified .
Corrected HMA pavement areas must be uniform rectangles with edges .
Parallel to the nearest HMA pavement edge or lane line .
Perpendicular to the pavement centerline On ground areas not to be overlaid with OGFC apply a fog seal coat under section .
Take data cores of the completed HMA pavement underlying base and subbase material .
Protect data cores and surrounding pavement from damage .
.D Payment The payment quantity for geosynthetic pavement interlayer is the area measured from the actual pavement covered .
.Bb Aggregate Gradations The aggregate gradations for Type A HMA must comply with the requirements shown in the following table Aggregate Gradation Requirements Type A HMA pavement thickness shown Gradation .
.C Construction Where the pavement thickness shown is greater than .
.Bb Aggregate Gradations The aggregate gradations for RHMAG must comply with the requirements shown in the following table Aggregate Gradation Requirements RHMAG pavement thickness shown Gradation .
The tarps must completely cover the exposed load until you transfer the mixture to the pavers hopper or to the pavement surface .
Tarps are not required if the time from discharge to truck until transfer to the pavers hopper or the pavement surface is less than minutes .
Complete finish compaction before the surface temperature drops below degrees F. Spread sand at a rate between and lbsq yd on new RHMAG pavement when finish rolling is complete .
Keep traffic off the pavement until spreading of the sand is complete .
.Aciii Pavement Smoothness Pavement smoothness of OGFC must comply with the requirements shown in the following table for a . mile section OGFC Pavement Smoothness Acceptance Criteria OGFC placement on Mean Roughness Index requirement New construction or HMA overlay inmi or less Existing pavement inmi or less Milled surface inmi or less .Aciv.Acv Reserved .B Materials .B General When mixed with asphalt binder aggregate must not be more than degrees F except aggregate for OGFC with unmodified asphalt binder must be not more than degrees F. .B Open Graded Friction Course Mix Design The Department determines the asphalt binder content under California Test within days of your complete JMF submittal and provides you a Caltrans Hot Mix Asphalt Verification form .
AASHTO T Flat and elongated particles max by weight at ASTM D Report only .Bb Aggregate Gradations The aggregate gradations for HMAO must comply with the requirements shown in the following table Aggregate Gradation Requirements HMAO pavement thickness shown Gradation .
foot or greater inch The aggregate gradations for RHMAO and RHMAOHB must comply with the requirements shown in the following table Aggregate Gradation Requirements RHMAO and RHMAOHB pavement thickness shown Gradation .
.B Sand Sand for spreading over RHMAO and RHMAOHB pavement must be free of clay or organic matter .
The tarps must completely cover the exposed load until you transfer the mixture to the pavers hopper or to the pavement surface .
Tarps are not required if the time from discharge to truck until transfer to the pavers hopper or the pavement surface is less than minutes .
Concrete pavement and existing asphalt concrete surfacing .
. . Planed pavement .
Complete compaction before the surface temperature drops below degrees F. Spread sand at a rate between and lbsq yd on new RHMAO and RHMAOHB pavement after finish rolling activities are complete .
Keep traffic off the pavement until spreading of the sand is complete .
If the spray bar is adjusted for changing pavement widths the paver must prevent excess spraying of asphaltic emulsion beyond inches of the HMA edge .
.Ac Applying Asphaltic Emulsion Before spreading HMA apply asphaltic emulsion on dry or damp pavement with no free water .
Asphaltic emulsion must have a target residual rate for the surfaces to receive the emulsion as shown in the following table Asphaltic Emulsion Target Residual Rate Surface to receive asphaltic emulsion Target residual rates Concrete pavement galsq yd ..
Dense compacted new HMA pavement galsq yd .. Open textured dry aged or oxidized existing asphalt concrete pavement galsq yd ..
The aggregate gradations for BWCG must comply with the requirements shown in the following table SECTION ASPHALT CONCRETE Aggregate Gradation Requirements BWCG pavement thickness shown Gradation less than .
.B Construction Apply asphaltic emulsion when the ambient air and pavement temperatures are above degrees F. .B Payment Not Used SECTION ASPHALT CONCRETE .
For HMA placed on a deck seal use the minimum residual rate specified for concrete pavement .
Test pavement smoothness with a foot straightedge .
includes specifications for cold planning asphalt concrete pavement .
Cold planning asphalt concrete pavement includes the removal of pavement markers traffic stripes and pavement markings within the area of cold planning .
.B Materials HMA for temporary tapers must be of the same quality that is used for the HMA overlay or comply with the specifications for minor HMA in section .. .C Construction .C General Do not use a heating device to soften the pavement .
If referencing from existing pavement the cold planing machine must be controlled by a self contained grade reference system .
Construct a temporary HMA taper to the level of the existing pavement. . Place HMA during the next work shift . .
The completed surface of the planed pavement must not vary more than .
.C Temporary HMA Tapers If a dropoff between the existing pavement and the planed area at transverse joints can not be avoided before opening to traffic construct a temporary HMA taper .
Placed to the level of the existing pavement and tapered on a slope of horizontalvertical or flatter to the level of the planed area .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes general specifications for constructing concrete pavement .
raveling Progressive disintegration of the concrete pavement surface resulting in dislodged aggregate .
Epoxypowder coating .C Quality Control Plan Submit a concrete pavement QC plan .
.C Test Strips You may request to eliminate a test strip if you use paving equipment and personnel from a Department project for the same type of pavement and completed within the past months .
Submit your coefficient of thermal expansion test data at httpcte .C.C Reserved .D Quality Assurance .D General If the pavement quantity is at least cu yd provide a QC manager .
Core pavement as described for thickness bar placement and air content .
Notify the Engineer when a lane or lanes are scheduled to be opened to traffic and when the pavement is ready for testing which is the latter of .
When the pavement has attained a modulus of rupture of at least psi The Department tests for the coefficient of friction within days of receiving notification that the pavement is ready for testing .
The QC plan must address the elements affecting concrete pavement quality including .
Protecting pavement .
Use a laboratory that complies with ASTM C to determine the mix proportions for concrete pavement .
.D Test Strips Construct a test strip for each type of pavement if the quantity is at least cu yd .
Constructed using the same equipment to be used for constructing pavement The Engineer selects from to core locations for dowel bars and up to locations for tie bars for each test strip .
Concrete mix proportions .D Quality Control .Da General During paving test the concrete pavement under the test methods and at the frequencies shown in the following table Concrete Pavement Test Methods and Testing Frequencies Quality characteristic Test method Minimum testing frequency Cleanness value California Test per day Sand equivalent California Test Aggregate gradation California Test Air content air entrainment specified California Test per hour Air content air entrainment not specified California Test per hours Density California Test Penetration California Test Aggregate moisture meter calibrationa California Test or per day a Check the calibration of the plant moisture meter by comparing moisture meter readings with California Test or California Test test results .
Before placing concrete pavement each day and at intervals not to exceed hours during production use a tachometer to test and record the vibration frequency of the concrete vibrators .
psi for the average of beams .Dc.Dh Reserved .D Department Acceptance .Da General The Department tests the concrete pavement under the test methods and at the frequencies shown in the following table Department Acceptance Testing Frequency Quality characteristic Test method Minimum testing frequencya CRCP JPCP Air contentb California Test days paving Modulus of rupture at days California Test cu yd Dowel bar placement Measurement sq yd Tie bar placement Measurement sq yd Coefficient of friction California Test days paving Thickness California Test sq yd aA single test represents no more than the frequency specified .
If your QC test results are not verified core at least specimens from the concrete pavement under section .M .
If your QC test results are verified based on this comparison the Engineer uses the QC test results for acceptance of concrete pavement for air content .
.Dc Acceptance Testing .Dci General The Department accepts concrete pavement based on compliance with the requirements shown in the following table t X c X v S p n c n v and S p S c n c S v n v n c n v SECTION CONCRETE PAVEMENT Concrete Pavement Requirements for Acceptance Quality characteristic Test method Requirement CRCP JPCP Air content California Test .
of the specified valuea Modulus of rupture at days min psi California Test b Bar reinforcement depth tolerance at joints min Field measurement inch below the saw cut depth Dowel bar placement tolerancesc Horizontal offset inch Longitudinal translation inch Horizontal skew max inch Vertical skew max inch Vertical depth Field measurement The minimum distance measured from the concrete pavement surface to any point along the top of the dowel bar must be DB inch where DB of the pavement thickness or the saw cut depth in inches whichever is greater The maximum distance below the depth shown must be inch .
At least inches from any point along the bar to the pavement surface or bottom Coefficient of friction min Concrete pavement Ramp termini California Test . . Pavement smoothness California Test AASHTO R and AASHTO R . No area of localized roughness with an International Roughness Index greater than inmi .
.Dciii Pavement Smoothness The Department may accept pavement smoothness based on your inertial profiler testing in the absence of its own testing .
To identify the limits of concrete pavement deficient in thickness by more than .
The thickness of the concrete pavement must not be deficient by more than .
The Engineer determines this secondary area by measuring the thickness of each concrete pavement slab adjacent to the measurement found to be more than .
Slabs without bar reinforcement are defined by the areas bound by longitudinal and transverse joints and concrete pavement edges .
Slabs with bar reinforcement are defined by the areas bound by longitudinal joints and concrete pavement edges and foot lengths .
The minimum thickness is not reduced for specifications that may affect concrete pavement thickness such as allowable tolerances for subgrade construction .
The Engineer determines the areas of noncompliant pavement thickness deficiencies and limits where removal is required .
foot you may request authorization to leave the pavement in place and accept a payment adjustment .
foot you must remove and replace the pavement .
The deduction for pavement thickness deficiency in each primary area is as shown in the following table SECTION CONCRETE PAVEMENT Deduction for Thickness Deficiency Average thickness deficiencya Deduction .
.B Concrete .B General Concrete placed for tapered edges after the pavement has been placed may be minor concrete .
For widenings and lane reconstruction construct only the portion of the pavement where the work will be completed during the same closure .
If you do not complete the construction during the same closure construct temporary roadway pavement under section .E .
.B Joints .B General Do not bend tie bars or reinforcement in existing concrete pavement joints .
The filler material must not react adversely with the concrete or damage the pavement .
Before placing fresh concrete against hardened concrete existing concrete pavement or structures apply curing compound no .
At joints between concrete pavement and asphalt concrete pavement apply a tack coat between the two pavements .
Cut transverse contraction joints straight across the full width of the concrete pavement between isolation joints and edges of pavement .
In areas of converging and diverging pavements space transverse contraction joints such that the joint is continuous across the maximum pavement width .
Longitudinal contraction joints must be parallel with the concrete pavement centerline except where lanes converge or diverge .
Make the saw cut the same depth as the depth of the new pavement .
Bar reinforcement must be more than inch below the saw cut depth at concrete pavement joints .
.D Dowel Bar Placement Dowel bar placement must comply with the tolerances shown in the following table SECTION CONCRETE PAVEMENT Dowel Bar Placement Dimension Tolerance Horizontal offset inch Longitudinal translation inch Horizontal skew max inch Vertical skew max inch Vertical depth The minimum distance measured from the concrete pavement surface to any point along the top of the dowel bar must be DB inch where DB of the pavement thickness or the saw cut depth in inches whichever is greater The maximum distance below the depth shown must be inch .
Anchor the baskets with at least fastener per foot of basket section and at least feet in advance of the pavement placement activity .
At least inches from any point along the bar to the pavement surface or bottom NOTE Tolerances are measured relative to the completed joint .
Anchor the baskets at least feet in advance of the pavement placement activity .
Uniformly moist but free of standing or flowing water Place concrete pavement with stationary side forms or slip form paving equipment .
The transverse construction joint must be at the same longitudinal location as the contraction joint in the adjacent lane location or you must remove the concrete pavement to the preceding transverse joint .
Place the concrete pavement in fulllane widths separated by construction joints or monolithically with contraction joints .
If the surface width is constructed as shown you may construct the pavement sides on a batter not flatter than verticalhorizontal .
.F Paving Adjacent to Existing Concrete Pavement Wherever pavement is placed adjacent to existing concrete pavement .
Grind the adjacent pavement before placing the new pavement. . Use paving equipment with padded crawler tracks or rubbertired wheels with enough offset to prevent damage . .
Match the pavement grade with the elevation of the existing concrete pavement after grinding .
.F Concrete Pavement Transition Panel For concrete pavement placed in a transition panel texture the surface with a drag strip of burlap broom or spring steel tine device that produces scoring in the finished surface .
The side form base width must be at least percent of the shown concrete pavement thickness .
Place the forms to the grade and alignment of the finished concrete pavement edge .
Side forms must remain in place for at least day after placing the concrete and until the pavement edge no longer requires protection from the forms .
Use a calibrated device to measure the frequency of vibration. . Amplitude of vibration must cause perceptible concrete surface movement at least foot from the vibrating element. . Vibrators must not rest on side forms or new concrete pavement. . Power to vibrators must automatically cease if forward or backward motion of the paving machine is stopped. . Highfrequency internal vibrators must be used within minutes of depositing concrete on the subgrade to uniformly consolidate the concrete across the paving width including the area adjacent to the forms. . Mass of concrete must not be shifted with the vibrators .
Do not deviate from the pavement alignment by more than .
You may mount the vibrators with their axes parallel or normal to the pavement alignment .
If vibrators are mounted with their axes parallel to the pavement alignment space the vibrators no more than .
If vibrators are mounted with their axes normal to the pavement alignment space vibrators with a maximum .foot lateral clearance between individual vibrators .
For tapered edges placed after the concrete pavement is complete install connecting bar reinforcement under section .
The angle of the tapered edge slope must not deviate by more than degrees from the angle shown measured from the plane of the adjacent finished pavement surface .
foot from the outside edge of the pavement .
Orient the mark such that it can be read from the outside edge of the pavement .
Do not apply water to the pavement surface before float finishing .
.Hb Stationary Side Form Finishing If you use stationary sideform construction apply a preliminary finish to the pavement by machinefloat or hand method .
Determine the number of machine floats required to perform the work at a rate equal to the pavement placement .
If the time from paving to machinefloat finishing exceeds minutes stop pavement placement .
When machine floats are in proper position you may resume pavement placement. . Run machine floats on side forms or adjacent pavement lanes .
If running on adjacent pavement protect the adjacent pavement surface under section .J .
For the hand method finish the pavement smooth and true to grade with manually operated floats or powered finishing machines .
.Hc Slip form Finishing For slip form construction the slip form paver must give the pavement a preliminary finish .
Before the pavement hardens correct the slump of the pavement edge in excess of .
Texture the pavement before curing it .
Construct longitudinal grooves with a selfpropelled machine designed specifically for grooving and texturing pavement .
The machine must have tracks to maintain constant speed provide traction and maintain accurate tracking along the pavement surface .
The machine must apply a constant downward pressure on the surface of the pavement during texturing .
Construct grooves over the entire pavement width in a single pass except do not construct grooves inches from the pavement edges and longitudinal joints .
The grooves must be parallel and aligned to the pavement edge across its width .
The grooves must be from to inch deep after the pavement has hardened .
Initial and final texturing must produce a coefficient of friction of at least .. Do not open a lane or lanes to traffic unless the coefficient of friction is at least .. For ramp termini use heavy brooming normal to the ramp centerline to produce a coefficient of friction of at least .. .I Curing Cure the concrete pavement exposed area using the waterproof membrane method or curing compound method with curing compound no .
If you remove the side forms within hours of the start of curing also cure the pavement edges .
.J Protecting Concrete Pavement Maintain the concrete pavement surface temperature at not less than degrees F for the initial hours .
Prevent soil gravel petroleum products concrete or asphalt mixes from being deposited on the pavement surface .
Do not open crossings until the Department determines that the pavement modulus of rupture is at least psi under California Test or California Test .
Do not allow traffic on concrete pavement or use equipment on it for days after paving and before the concrete has attained a modulus of rupture of psi based on the Departments testing unless .
One side of the paving equipment tracks may be on the concrete pavement after a modulus of rupture of psi has been attained if .. Unit pressure exerted on the pavement by the paver does not exceed psi .. You change the paving equipment tracks to prevent damage or the paving equipment tracks travel on protective material such as planks .. No part of the track is closer than foot to the concrete pavement edge ..
Authorized If visible cracking or other damage occurs to the concrete pavement stop operating the paving equipment on the pavement and repair the damage .
.K Early Use of Concrete Pavement To request early use of concrete pavement .
Test the beams for the modulus of rupture under California Test The pavement must have a modulus of rupture of at least psi .
Protect the pavement under section .J .
.L Reserved .M Drilling Cores Drill concrete pavement cores under ASTM CCM .
.N Correcting Noncompliant Pavement Work .N General Correct noncompliant pavement as follows .
Replace the pavement .
Replace damaged joint seals under section In addition to removing pavement for other noncompliance remove and replace JPCP slabs that have either of the following .
Pressure injecting epoxy resin under ASTM CCM Type IV Grade .O Smoothness and Friction Correction Correct pavement that is noncompliant for .
PAYMENT The payment quantity for any type of concrete pavement is the volume determined by the dimensions shown .
If the Engineer authorizes a test strip that remains in place as part of the pavement the payment quantity for any type of concrete pavement includes the volume of the test strip .
The Department does not pay for additional tie bars required due to the curvature of the pavement slab .
Payment for grinding existing pavement is not included in the payment for concrete pavement .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for constructing continuously reinforced concrete pavement .
Constructing continuously reinforced concrete pavement includes terminal joints expansion joints wide flange beam terminals and pavement anchors .
During production test the coefficient of thermal expansion of the concrete at a frequency of test for each cu yd of paving but not less than test for a project with less than cu yd of concrete. . MATERIALS .A General Class permeable material filter fabric and slotted plasticpipe cross drain for pavement anchors must comply with section .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for constructing jointed plain concrete pavement .
Earlyage concrete pavement stress and strength prediction plan .
If slabs are constrained at both longitudinal edges by the existing pavement use dowel bars instead of tie bars .
GENERAL .A General Section includes general specifications for performing work on existing concrete pavement .
.E Temporary Pavement Structure Temporary pavement structure consists of RSC or HMA over AB .
RSC not complying with section may be used as temporary pavement structure if .
RSC thickness is greater than or equal to the existing concrete pavement surface layer .
RSC is replaced during the next paving shift AB used for temporary pavement structure must comply with the inch maximum gradation specified in section .B .
CONSTRUCTION .A General Construct only the portion of pavement where the work will be completed during the same closure .
If removal is required remove only the portion of pavement where the work will be completed during the same closure .
Concrete pavement work is complete when cured material attains the specified minimum properties required before opening to traffic .
If you fail to complete the concrete pavement work during the same closure construct temporary pavement structure before opening the lane to traffic .
Except for saw cutting the equipment materials and personnel for constructing temporary pavement structure must be at the job site or an approved location before starting concrete pavement work .
Maintain the temporary pavement structure and replace it before you resume concrete pavement work .
After removing temporary pavement structure you may stockpile that AB at the job site and reuse it for another temporary pavement structure .
.D Placing Concrete The pavement surface temperature must be at least degrees F before placing concrete .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for subsealing and jacking using grout to fill voids under existing concrete pavement .
Drilling holes through existing concrete pavement .
Filling the drilled holes with mortar or concrete Jacking includes raising pavement to grade using injected grout .
.D Department Acceptance For Department acceptance the final pavement elevation must be within .
CONSTRUCTION .A General Drill holes in the pavement inject grout plug the holes and finish the holes with mortar .
Drill holes through the pavement and underlying base to a depth from to inches below the pavement surface .
Inject grout under pressure until the voids under the pavement slab are filled .
Use string lines to monitor the pavement movement .
If you move adjacent slabs correct the grade within the tolerances for final pavement elevation .
After grouting remove grout from drilled holes to at least inches below the pavement surface .
Finish filled holes flush with the pavement surface .
.D Tolerances The final pavement elevation must be within .
If the final pavement elevation is from .
foot higher than the required grade grind the noncompliant pavement surface under section to within .
If the final pavement elevation is higher than .
foot from the required grade remove and replace the noncompliant pavement under section . . PAYMENT The payment quantity for subsealing is the sum of the dry weights of cement and fly ash used in placed grout .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for applying highmolecularweight methacrylate to partialdepth concrete pavement surface cracks .
Treat the test area under weather and pavement conditions similar to those expected during crack treatment production .
sieve when tested under California Test . . CONSTRUCTION Before applying HMWM clean the pavement surface by abrasive blasting and blow loose material from visible cracks with highpressure air .
Remove concrete curing seals from the pavement to be treated .
The pavement must be dry when blast cleaning is performed .
If the pavement surface becomes contaminated before applying the HMWM clean the pavement surface by abrasive blasting .
During pavement treatment protect pavement joints working cracks and surfaces not being treated .
Flood the treatment area with HMWM to penetrate the pavement and cracks .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for repairing spalls in concrete pavement .
SECTION EXISTING CONCRETE PAVEMENT .B Remove Pavement The Engineer determines the rectangular limits of unsound concrete pavement .
Before removing pavement mark the saw cut lines and spall repair area on the pavement surface .
Do not remove pavement until the Engineer verbally authorizes the saw cut area .
Remove pavement as shown and .
At least inches beyond the saw cut edge to produce a rough angled surface Produce a rough surface by chipping or other removal methods that do not damage the pavement remaining inplace .
If you damage concrete pavement outside the removal area enlarge the area to remove the damaged pavement .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for sealing concrete pavement joints or replacing concrete pavement joint seals .
Submit a work plan for removing pavement and joint materials .
Include descriptions of the equipment and methods for removal of existing pavement and joint material .
CONSTRUCTION .A General If joint seals are shown for new concrete pavement seal new concrete pavement joints at least days after the concrete pavement is placed .
Before sealing joints complete pavement repairs and grinding and grooving .
Remove existing pavement and joint material by sawing rectangular plowing cutting or manual labor .
.B Joint Cleaning .B General Clean the joint after removing existing pavement and before installing joint seal material .
.B Vacuuming After air blasting use a vacuum sweeper to remove debris and contaminants from the pavement surfaces surrounding the joint .
SECTION EXISTING CONCRETE PAVEMENT .B Reserved .C Installing Liquid Joint Sealant Before installing liquid joint sealant the pavement and reservoir surfaces must be dry and the ambient air temperature must be at least degrees F and above the dew point .
Before installing asphalt rubber joint sealant the pavement surface temperature must be at least degrees F. Where backer rods are shown place the rods before installing liquid joint sealant .
After each joint is sealed remove excess liquid joint sealant on the pavement surface .
Transverse seals must be continuous for the entire transverse length of concrete pavement except splices are allowed for widening and staged construction .
Without stretching the seal more than percent Cut preformed compression joint seal material to the exact length of the pavement joint to be sealed .
GENERAL Section includes specifications for constructing transition tapers in existing concrete pavement .
Remove the temporary HMA taper before constructing the transition taper. . PAYMENT The payment quantity for pavement transition taper is determined from the dimensions shown .
Temporary pavement structure provisions including Quantity and location of standby material Determination of need .
Procedures or methods for controlling pavement quality including .. Materials quality .. Constructing contraction and construction joints ..
Protecting pavement before opening to traffic .C Mix Design At least days before constructing a trial slab submit a mix design .
Personnel performing saw cutting and joint sealing Discuss the pavement structure removal as an additional topic during the preconstruction meeting .
Determine the modulus of rupture at opening age under California Test except beam specimens may be fabricated using an internal vibrator under ASTM C. Cure the beams under the same conditions as the pavement until hour before testing .
Notify the Engineer when the pavement is scheduled to be opened to traffic .
.Dc Concrete Pavement Smoothness The Department tests for concrete pavement smoothness using a foot straightedge .
Straightedge smoothness specifications do not apply to the pavement surface placed within inches of existing concrete pavement except parallel to the centerline at the midpoint of a transverse construction joint .
The concrete pavement surface must not vary from the lower edge of a foot straightedge by more than . . feet when parallel to the centerline . . feet when perpendicular to the centerline extending from edge to edge of a traffic lane .Dd Cracking and Raveling The Department rejects an RSC slab within year of contract acceptance if there is either of the following .
CONSTRUCTION .A General Complete individual slab replacement adjacent to new pavement or existing pavement shown for construction before constructing the other pavement work .
Replace individual slabs damaged during construction before placing final pavement delineation .
.B Removing Existing Pavement Remove pavement under section .
After removing pavement to the depth shown grade the subgrade to a uniform plane .
Place the top of the joint filler flush with the top of the pavement and extend to the top of the base layer .
Secure joint filler to the joint face of the existing pavement to prevent the joint filler from moving during the placement of RSC .
Side forms must remain in place until the pavement edge no longer requires the protection of forms .
Do not use vibrators for extensive shifting of concrete pavement .
.E Construction Joints Before placing fresh concrete against hardened concrete existing concrete pavement or structures apply curing compound no .
or to the vertical surface of the hardened concrete existing concrete pavement or structures and allow it to dry .
At joints between concrete pavement and HMA apply tack coat between the concrete pavement and HMA .
Longitudinal contraction joints must be parallel with the concrete pavement centerline except when lanes converge or diverge .
Level the location of the stamp with a steel trowel below the pavement texture .
Before curing texture the pavement .
Grooves must extend over the entire pavement width except do not construct grooves inches from longitudinal pavement edges or joints .
Grooves must be parallel and aligned to the pavement edge across the pavement width .
.G Temporary Pavement Structure Temporary pavement structure must be RSC or inchthick HMA over AB .
If pavement is noncompliant for coefficient of friction groove or grind the pavement under section .
.I Replace Pavement Delineation Replace traffic stripes pavement markings and markers that are removed obliterated or damaged by individual slab replacement under sections and .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for drilling installing and bonding tie bars and dowel bars in concrete pavement .
Cut the rejected bar flush with the pavement joint surface and coat the exposed end of the bar with chemical adhesive .
SECTION EXISTING CONCRETE PAVEMENT .B Tie Bar Tolerance Place tie bars within the tolerances shown in the following table Tie Bar Tolerances Dimension Tolerance Horizontal skew horizontal skew bar length Vertical skew vertical skew bar length Longitudinal translation inch Horizontal offset embedment inch Height relative to the adjacent bar Vertical depth clearance from the pavement surface or bottom inches min .C Dowel Bar Tolerance Place dowel bars within the tolerances specified in section .D .
GENERAL Section includes general specifications for removing concrete pavement and base .
Remove concrete pavement or concrete pavement and base to the depth shown .
Before placing subsequent layers of subbase base pavement or other material the subgrade must comply with section .C .
CONSTRUCTION .A General Reserved .B Remove Concrete Pavement If there is overlying material on the concrete pavement remove it with the pavement .
Saw cut using a diamond blade and make cuts perpendicular to the pavement surface .
Saw cutting is not required where concrete pavement is adjacent to asphalt concrete pavement .
Saw cut no more than days before removing pavement such that traffic will not dislodge any pavement piece or segment .
Saw cut perpendicular to the traveled way except you may cut parallel or diagonal to the traveled way when saw cutting and removing the pavement during the same closure .
Saw cuts must be the full pavement depth unless otherwise shown .
Do not impact the surface within inches of pavement remaining in place .
Slablifting equipment must attach to the pavement .
.B Definitions Reserved .C Submittals Reserved .D Quality Assurance .D General Reserved .D Department Acceptance The Department accepts grooved areas if at least percent of any by foot longitudinal pavement area is grooved except where prevented by irregularities in the pavement surface. . MATERIALS Not Used .
For new pavement or bridge decks groove the full lane width .
.B Definitions Reserved .C Submittals Reserved .D Quality Assurance .D General Reserved .D Quality Control Test for pavement smoothness under sections and except .
After grinding the existing pavement must comply with specifications for smoothness and coefficient of friction in section except .
.D Department Acceptance The Department accepts pavement for smoothness and coefficient of friction under section .D .
Adjacent feet of approach pavement After grinding bridge decks approach slabs and the adjacent feet of approach pavement the coefficient of friction must comply with section .Dbiii. . MATERIALS Not Used .
SECTION GROOVE AND GRIND CONCRETE Grinding equipment must have diamond cutting blades mounted on a selfpropelled machine designed for grinding and texturing concrete pavements .
.B Pavement Grind existing concrete pavement that is adjacent to an individual slab replacement .
Grind existing concrete pavement that is adjacent to new lanes of concrete pavement before paving .
As an alternative to grinding existing concrete pavement you may replace the existing pavement .
The new concrete pavement must be the same thickness as the removed pavement .
Replace existing pavement between longitudinal joints or pavement edges and transverse joints .
Replacement of existing concrete pavement must comply with specifications for individual slab replacement in section .
.C Bridge Decks Approach Slabs and Approach Pavement Grind bridge decks approach slabs and approach pavement if described. . PAYMENT Grinding an existing approach slab and the adjacent feet of approach pavement is paid for as grind existing bridge deck .
Posts located in the row of falsework posts nearest to the roadway or railroad and where the horizontal distance from the traffic side of the falsework to the edge of pavement or to a point feet from the centerline of track is less than the total height of the falsework and forms The falsework design at the above locations must comply with section .B and the following requirements .
Do not release falsework for box culverts and other structures with decks lower than the roadway pavement and span lengths of feet or less until the last placed concrete has attained a compressive strength of psi .
.E Falsework Lighting .E General Falsework lighting includes lighting to illuminate the pavement portals and pedestrian walkways at or under openings in the falsework required for traffic .
Illuminate the following only during hours of darkness as provided in division section of the California Vehicle Code Falsework portals and pavement under falsework with portals less than feet apart .
.E Pavement Illumination Illumination of pavement at vehicular openings through falsework must comply with the following requirements .
Mounting heights of fixtures must be between and feet above the roadway surface and must present an unobstructed light pattern on the pavement .
Each lamp must be supported approximately feet above the pavement and approximately feet in front of the portal face. . Portal lighting and clearance guides must be installed on the day the vertical members are erected .
Completed roadway concrete surfaces of structures and approach slabs and the adjacent feet of approach pavement .
.F Finishing Roadway Surfaces .Fa General Construct concrete roadway surfaces of structures approach slabs sleeper slabs and adjoining approach pavement and concrete decks to be covered with another material to the grade and cross section shown .
.D Removal of Existing Facilities Remove portions of existing structures pavement and base approach slabs asphalt concrete surfacing concrete pavement subsealing material and cementtreated base as necessary for the construction of the new approach slab .
Saw cut full depth the outline of concrete pavement to be removed using a powerdriven saw .
feet of pavement to remain in place .
These excavations must be permanently or temporarily backfilled to conform to the grade of the adjacent pavement before opening the lane to traffic .
.D Existing Base Material Uniformly grade and compact the existing base material remaining in place after removing the existing pavement and base materials to the required depth .
SECTION CONCRETE STRUCTURES Where pavement subsealing has been performed under existing approach slabs remove the full depth of subsealing material .
foot from the lower edge of a foot straightedge placed parallel with the centerline and must match the elevation of the existing pavement and structure along the joints between the existing pavement and structure and the temporary surfacing .
Traffic signals and flashing beacons on the mast arm must provide a minimum vertical clearance of feet from bottom of equipment to pavement .
.C Construction .C General Before starting deck rehabilitation activities complete the removal of any traffic stripes pavement markings and pavement markers .
Taper the polyester concrete overlay edges if the overlay is not completed within the allowable lane closure time and is more than inch higher in elevation than the adjacent pavement .
.C Materials Epoxy must comply with the specifications for epoxy resin adhesive for injection grouting of concrete pavement .
Intermediate outlet connections between the couplings at each end of the curved section of the Y fitting Edge drains include cross drain interceptors at structure approaches at end anchors or pressure relief joints and at pavement terminals joining existing pavements .
Cuts along the joint between existing asphalt concrete and existing concrete pavement are not required .
Remove concrete deposits that could occur along the lower edge of the concrete pavement in Type installations .
Place Type A pavement markers under section on paved shoulders or dikes at outlet vent and cleanout locations where authorized .
The waiting period for placing pavement markers on new HMA surfacing does not apply .
Whenever concrete pavement is placed near an inlet depression place the pavement before constructing the inlet depression .
Rapid set epoxy adhesive for pavement markers .
Standard set epoxy adhesive for pavement markers .
Where paving or surfacing work is shown do not adjust to final grade until the adjacent pavement or surfacing is complete .
Where inlets are adjusted before placing the uppermost layer of pavement or surfacing limit the work area so that adjusting the inlet and final paving or surfacing is completed within the same work day .
Where inlets are adjusted after placing the uppermost layer of pavement or surfacing do not adjust the inlet to final grade until the paving or surfacing has been completed immediately adjacent to the inlet. . PAYMENT If adjust inlet is paid by the linear foot adjusting the inlet is measured as the difference in the length between the top of the existing inlet and the top of the adjusted inlet .
If no item is shown for adjust inlet payment for adjusting the inlet is included in the payment for the type of pavement or surfacing shown in the Bid Item List .
If no item is shown for adjust inlet and pavement or surfacing is not involved payment for adjusting the inlet is included in the payment for the type of excavation shown in the Bid Item List .
If no item is described for adjust frames covers grates or manholes payment for adjusting these materials is included in the payment for the type of pavement or type of surfacing in the Bid Item List .
If no item is shown for adjust frames covers grates or manholes and if pavement or surfacing is not involved payment for adjusting these materials is included in the payment for the type of excavation shown in the Bid Item List .
CONSTRUCTION .A General If curbs are constructed over existing pavement use steel dowels and reinforcing steel or adhesive to anchor the curb to the existing pavement .
If adhesive is used remove all dust loose material or oil from the surface of the existing pavement by either wire brushing or blast cleaning .
For curbs adjacent to existing concrete align the curb joints with the existing concretes pavement joints .
If placing pavement around or adjacent to manholes pipe inlets or other miscellaneous structures in sidewalk gutter depression island paving curb ramps or driveway areas do not finish the miscellaneous structures to final grade until the pavement is finished beyond the miscellaneous structure .
The mounting hardware must be galvanized steel. . CONSTRUCTION Verify that pavement is in suitable condition to start installation under the manufacturers instructions .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for placing pavement markers .
.B Definitions Reserved .C Submittals Submit a certificate of compliance for each type of pavement marker used .
MATERIALS .A General A pavement marker must be on the Authorized Material List for signing and delineation materials .
Date of manufacture Protect pavement markers from moisture during shipment to the job site and when stored at the job site .
.B Nonreflective Pavement Markers .B General A nonreflective pavement marker must be a ceramic or plastic type .
.B Plastic Nonreflective Pavement Markers Types A and AY plastic nonreflective pavement markers must be polypropylene or ABS plastic and comply with the requirements shown in the following table Plastic Nonreflective Pavement Marker Requirements Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Luminance factor Type A white markers only top surface min California Test Yellowness index Type A white markers only top surface max Type AY markers only .
Pass Compressive strength min lb Artificial weathering hours exposure white markers only yellowness index max A plastic nonreflective pavement marker must not be coated with any substance that interferes with the adhesive bond .
.B Ceramic Nonreflective Pavement Markers A ceramic nonreflective pavement marker must comply with the requirements shown in the following table Ceramic Nonreflective Pavement Marker Requirements Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Bond strength min psi California Test Glaze thickness min in .
.C Retroreflective Pavement Markers The exterior surface of a retroreflective pavement marker must be smooth and contain or retroreflective faces of the specified color .
A retroreflective pavement marker must comply with the requirements shown in the following table SECTION MISCELLANEOUS TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES Retroreflective Pavement Marker Requirements Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Bond strength min psia California Test Compressive strength min lbb Compressive strength recessed markers min lb Abrasion resistance specific intensity minimum requirements after abrasion Pass Water soak resistance No delamination of the body and lens system or loss of reflectance Reflectance Specific intensity Clear Yellow Red incidence angle min .
spindle rpm F centipoise ASTM D Bond strength to concrete min psi California Test Bond strength to retroreflective pavement marker min psi California Test The filler material must be Type PC Grade III calcium carbonate complying with ASTM D. The fineness of the filler material must comply with the gradation requirements shown in the following table Sieve size Percentage passing No .
SECTION MISCELLANEOUS TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES .E Epoxy Adhesive The epoxy adhesive must be either rapid set or standard set. . CONSTRUCTION .A General Establish the alignment for placing pavement markers .
Do not place pavement markers over longitudinal or transverse joints in the pavement surface .
Place pavement markers when the pavement surface is dry .
Before placing pavement markers remove undesirable material from the pavement surface including dirt curing compound grease oil loose or unsound layers and paint .
Regardless of the pavements age or type clean the surface by abrasive blast cleaning except where you apply hot melt bituminous adhesive on clean asphalt concrete or on a new clean seal coat .
Apply pavement markers to the pavement with bituminous adhesive flexible bituminous adhesive standard set epoxy or rapid set epoxy adhesive except .
Apply pavement markers in pavement recesses with flexible bituminous adhesive .
Do not use epoxy adhesive to apply plastic nonreflective pavement markers Comply with the manufacturers installation instructions for the type of adhesive used .
Completely cover the pavement surface or bottom of the pavement marker with the adhesive without leaving any voids .
Place the marker into position and firmly apply pressure until contact is made with the pavement .
Place retroreflective pavement markers such that each retroreflective face is perpendicular to a line parallel to the roadway centerline .
The Engineer determines when the adhesive has set long enough for newly installed pavement markers to bear traffic .
.B Hot Melt Bituminous Adhesive If using hot melt bituminous adhesive place pavement markers on asphalt concrete or a new seal coat after the surface or seal coat has been open to traffic for at least days and when the pavement and ambient air temperatures are above degrees F. Indirectly heat hot melt bituminous adhesive in an applicator with continuous agitation or recirculation .
Place pavement markers immediately after applying hot melt bituminous adhesive .
.C Epoxy Adhesive If using epoxy adhesive place pavement markers on asphalt concrete or a new seal coat after the surface or seal coat has been open to public traffic for at least days and at the pavement and ambient air temperatures complying with the epoxy adhesive manufacturers instructions .
Apply epoxy adhesive and place pavement markers before the epoxy starts to thicken .
.D Pavement Recesses Locate pavement recesses along the line or lines of new or existing stripes .
The equipment used for recess construction must be power operated mechanical and capable of removing pavement to the dimensions shown .
Do not allow the residue to flow across the pavement or into gutters or drainage facilities. . PAYMENT Not Used RESERVED EXISTING PAVEMENT MARKERS AND DELINEATORS .
GENERAL Section includes specifications for performing work on existing pavement markers and delineators .
Work performed on existing pavement markers and delineators must comply with section . . MATERIALS Not Used .
CONSTRUCTION .A General Not Used .B Remove Pavement Markers Remove pavement markers and the underlying adhesive by methods that cause the least possible damage to the pavement or surfacing .
When removing ceramictype pavement markers use screens or other protective devices to contain fragments .
If median barrier delineation is shown match the barrier marker spacing to the raised pavement marker spacing on the adjacent median edgeline pavement delineation .
For a concrete barrier constructed on existing pavement or on an existing structure adjust the barrier height to compensate for irregularities in the existing grade .
.A Locating Expansion Joints Locate concrete barrier expansion joints at deck pavement and principal wall joints .
Instead of the above method for maintaining the barrier grade the extrusion or slip form machine may be operated on rails or forms set at a uniform depth below the predetermined finished top of the barrier grade or on existing pavement or bridge decks .
Match the barrier marker spacing to the raised pavement marker spacing on the adjacent median edgeline pavement delineation .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for applying traffic stripes and pavement markings .
.B Definitions pavement marking Transverse marking such as a limit line a stop line or a word symbol shoulder parking stall or railroadgradecrossing marking .
Submit retroreflectivity readings for traffic stripes and pavement markings at locations with deficient retroreflectivity determined by the Engineer .
Test each lot of glass beads for arsenic and lead under EPA Test Method and B or C. The Engineer will perform a nighttime drivethrough visual inspection of the retroreflectivity of the traffic stripes and pavement markings and notify you of any locations with deficient retroreflectivity .
MATERIALS .A General Traffic stripes and pavement markings must be retroreflective .
Within days of applying traffic stripes and pavement markings the retroreflectivity of the stripes and markings must be a minimum of mcdmlx for white and mcdmlx for yellow when measured under ASTM E. .B Thermoplastic Thermoplastic must comply with State Specification PTHSPRAY PTHHYDRO or PTHALKYD .
For recessed thermoplastic stripes and pavement markings mark packages of thermoplastic with the words For Recessed Application .
.C Paint The paint for traffic stripes and pavement markings must comply with the specifications for the paint type and color shown in following table Paint Specifications Paint type Color Specification Waterborne traffic line White yellow and black State Specification PTWBR Acetonebased White yellow and black State Specification PTVOCA Waterborne traffic line for the international symbol of accessibility and other curb markings Blue red and green Federal Specification TTPE The color of painted traffic stripes and pavement markings must comply with ASTM D. .D Glass Beads Glass beads applied to paint must comply with State Specification .
Each lot of glass beads used in pavement markings must contain less than ppm each of arsenic and lead when tested under EPA Test Methods and B or C. .E Thermoplastic Traffic Stripes and Pavement Markings with Enhanced WetNight Visibility A thermoplastic traffic stripe or pavement marking with enhanced wetnight visibility consists of a single uniform layer of thermoplastic and layers of glass beads .
Within days of applying a thermoplastic traffic stripe or pavement marking with enhanced wetnight visibility the retroreflectivity must be a minimum of mcdmlx for white stripes and markings and mcdmlx for yellow stripes and markings when measured under ASTM E. .F TwoComponent Painted Traffic Stripes and Pavement Markings A twocomponent painted traffic stripe or pavement marking consists of coat of paint and applications of retroreflective glass beads of gradations .
The daytime and nighttime color of the painted traffic stripes and pavement markings must comply with ASTM D. .G Recessed TwoComponent Painted Traffic Stripes and Pavement Markings Reserved .H Traffic Stripe and Pavement Marking Tape Reserved .I.M Reserved .
CONSTRUCTION .A General Establish the alignment for traffic stripes and the layouts for pavement markings with a device or method that will not conflict with other traffic control devices .
Protect existing retroreflective pavement markers during work activities .
Remove existing pavement markers that are coated or damaged by work activities and replace each with an equivalent marker on the Authorized Material List for signing and delineation materials .
A completed pavement marking must have welldefined edges without running or deformation .
A completed thermoplastic traffic stripe or thermoplastic pavement marking must be free from runs bubbles craters drag marks stretch marks and debris .
Protect newly placed traffic stripes and pavement markings from traffic and other deleterious activities until the paint is thoroughly dry or the thermoplastic is hard enough to bear traffic .
.B Surface Preparation Use mechanical wire brushing to remove dirt contaminants and loose material from the pavement surface that is to receive the traffic stripe or pavement marking .
Use abrasive blast cleaning to remove laitance and curing compound from the surface of new concrete pavement that is to receive the traffic stripe or pavement marking .
.C Application of Stripes and Markings .C General Apply thermoplastic for a pavement marking with a stencil or a preformed marking .
SECTION MARKINGS Apply paint for a pavement marking by hand with a stencil and spray equipment .
You may use permanent tape for a traffic stripe or a pavement marking instead of paint or thermoplastic .
Apply a traffic stripe or a pavement marking only to a dry surface during a period of favorable weather when the pavement surface is above degrees F. The glass beads must be embedded in the coat of paint or thermoplastic to a depth of their diameters .
Completely coat and fill voids in the pavement surface with the thermoplastic .
An applied thermoplastic pavement marking must be from .
After constructing the recesses apply the thermoplastic traffic stripes and pavement markings before the end of the same work shift .
Apply thermoplastic pavement marking at a rate of at least .
The applied thermoplastic pavement marking must be at least .
You may apply glass beads by hand on pavement markings .
Uniformly distribute glass beads on traffic stripes and pavement markings .
.C Painted Traffic Stripes and Pavement Markings .Ca General Do not thin paint for traffic stripes and pavement markings .
Use mechanical means to paint traffic stripes and pavement markings and to apply glass beads for traffic stripes .
For an existing surface apply traffic stripes and pavement markings in coat .
For a new surface except for the black stripe between the yellow stripes of a double traffic stripe apply traffic stripes and pavement markings in coats .
Do not paint traffic stripes and pavement markings if .
.Cb TwoComponent Painted Traffic Stripes and Pavement Markings Do not apply paint for twocomponent painted traffic stripes and pavement markings until authorized .
Apply the paint only to clean completely dry surfaces when the pavement surface temperature is above degrees F and the ambient temperature is above degrees F. Comply with the paint manufacturers instructions for the temperature of the paint during its application .
Uniformly distribute the glass beads on traffic stripes and pavement markings .
You may apply the glass beads by hand methods on pavement markings .
The payment quantity for a pavement marking is the area covered .
.B Rumble Strips in Concrete Pavement Construct rumble strips by grinding indentations in new concrete pavement .
Concrete pavement must be hardened before grinding the indentations .
.C Rumble Strips in Asphalt Concrete Pavement Construct rumble strips in the top layer of asphalt concrete by grinding indentations in the pavement .
Remove traffic stripes and pavement markings including paint in the gaps by methods that do not materially damage the pavement .
Remove a pavement marking such that the old message can not be identified .
The minimum dimensions for the rectangular area are the height and width of the pavement marking .
.C Remove Traffic Stripes and Pavement Markings Containing Lead Reserved .D Remove Contrast Treatment If contrast treatment is shown to be removed remove it by a method that does not materially damage the pavement .
If no bid item is shown on the Bid Item List for remove pavement marking remove pavement marking is paid for as remove traffic stripe of the types shown in the Bid Item List and the payment quantity for square foot of pavement marking is linear feet .
Additional testing of the curing compound may be required before its use if the compound has not been used within year or if the Engineer believes that the compound may no longer be acceptable. . MATERIALS .A General Concrete for pavement approach slabs and bridge decks must comply with the shrinkage limitations shown in the following table when tested under section .D Type of work Maximum length change of laboratory cast specimens at days drying average of percent Paving and approach slab concrete .
For proportioning pavement concrete install and maintain in good operating condition an electronically actuated moisture meter that indicates on a readily visible scale changes in the moisture content of the fine aggregate as it is batched within a sensitivity of .
For pavement or base concrete install and maintain suitable batch counters in good operating condition at job site batching plants and stationary mixers .
SECTION CONCRETE .G Quantity of Water and Penetration or Slump Regulate the quantity of water used in the concrete mix such that the penetration as tested under California Test or the slump as tested under ASTM C complies with the nominal range shown in the following table Type of work Nominal Maximum Penetration Slump Penetration Slump in in in in Concrete pavement .
If the film of curing compound is damaged before the expiration of days after the concrete is placed for structures and hours for pavement immediately repair it with additional compound .
percent for each of runs of gal for pavement or gal for structures .
After production starts recalibrate the proportioning devices at least every days for pavement or days for structures or when you change the source or type of any ingredient .
Components of bridge structures including girders deck panels bent caps abutments slabs closure wall panels and piling .. Prestressed pavement .
Use Class C whenever the surface temperature is above degrees F. .E Rapid Set Epoxy Adhesive for Pavement Markers Rapid set epoxy adhesive for bonding pavement markers to concrete and HMA must comply with ASTM CCM Type IV Grade Class B or C. The gel time for rapid set epoxy adhesive may be less than minutes .
Use Class B whenever the surface temperature is from to degrees F. Use Class C whenever the surface temperature is above degrees F. The epoxy adhesive must comply with the requirements shown in the following table Rapid Set Epoxy Adhesive For Pavement Markers Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Gel time max minutes at F California Test Bond strength to concrete minutes maximum to reach not less than psi at F at F Slant shear strength min psi days at F days at F plus water soak Tensile adhesion and cohesion min psi Ceramic marker bottom Ceramic marker bottom including post cure Retroreflective pavement marker bottom Color of mixed epoxy gray Glass transition temperaturea Tg minimum F aBefore testing samples must be conditioned at F for hours under ASTM D .F Standard Set Epoxy Adhesive for Pavement Markers Standard set epoxy adhesive for bonding pavement markers to concrete and HMA must comply with ASTM CCM Type IV Grade Class B or C. Use Class B whenever the surface temperature is from to degrees F. Use Class C whenever the surface temperature is above degrees F. The epoxy adhesive must comply with the requirements shown in the following table Standard Set Epoxy Adhesive For Pavement Markers Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Bond strength to concrete hours maximum to reach not less than psi California Test at F . at F Slant shear strength min psi days at F days at F plus water soak Tensile adhesion and cohesion min psi Ceramic marker bottom Ceramic marker bottom including post cure Reflective pavement marker bottom Color of mixed components gray Glass transition temperaturea Tg minimum F aBefore testing samples must be conditioned at F for hours under ASTM D SECTION EPOXY .G Epoxy Sealant for Inductive Loops The epoxy for sealing inductive loops and leads imbedded in HMA and concrete must comply with ASTM CCM Type I Grade .
The epoxy sealant must comply with the requirements shown in the following table Epoxy Sealant for Inductive Loops Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Tensile strengtha min psi California Test Elongationa min Shore D hardnessa minimum aTest on a .inchthick cast sheet cured hours at F plus hours at F .H Epoxy Resin Adhesive for Pressure Injection Grouting of Concrete Pavement The epoxy resin adhesive for injection grouting of concrete pavement must comply with the requirements shown in the following table Epoxy Resin Adhesive for Injection Grouting of Concrete Pavement Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Brookfield viscosity No .
PAYMENT Not Used RESERVED DIVISION XII BUILDING CONSTRUCTION BUILDING CONSTRUCTION Reserved INDEX A abandon Abbreviations Abrasives blast cleaning Access gates Access openings bridge Act of God Activity Addresses adjust Adjust frames covers grates and manholes inlets Admixtures dispensing liquid types Aerially deposited lead Aggregate coarse fine gradations minor concrete washing Aggregate bases approach slabs compacting grade tolerance spreading subgrade Aggregate subbases grade tolerance Agreements Air pollution control Air quality Air release valve assembly Alternative dispute resolution Alternative earth retaining systems Alternative slotted pipe Alternative sound wall systems Anchor assemblies overside drains steel Antitrust Claims Apprentices Approach slabs cementitious material content coefficient of friction compressive strength rapid strength concrete smoothness Type N Type R Arbitration Archaeological resources archaeological monitor archaeological monitoring area Arches structural metal plate INDEX Areas for use Armorclad conductors irrigation systems Asbestos Asbuilt drawings Asphalt binders Asphalt concrete Asphalt rubber binder hot mix asphalt seal coats Asphalt treated permeable base spreading and compacting Asphalt treated permeable material Asphaltic emulsions nonpolymer seal coats polymer seal coats seal coats Asphaltic plug joint seals Authorized Facility Audit List Authorized laboratory Authorized Material List Authorized Material Source List B Backfill structure cement treated for slotted corrugated steel pipe Backflow preventer assembly irrigation systems Ball valves irrigation systems Barricades Barrier thrie beam Barriers concrete Base Basement material Bases aggregate cement treated permeable Bending reinforcement Bent plates steel structures Bid item Bid Item List Bid items applicable sections Bid items incidental Bidders bonds insurance security bidding Bids protest Biological resources bird protection Contractorsupplied biologist fish protection natural resource protection plan species protection INDEX Wetland protection Bird protection Bituminous seals Blast cleaning painting Blasting earthwork Bolted connections steel structures Bonded wearing course Bonded wearing coursegap graded Bonding materials magnesium phosphate concrete modified highaluminabased concrete portlandcementbased concrete Bonds Booster pumps Borrow Bracing wood structures Bridge Bridge deck surface texture Bridge deck drainage system Bridge joint restrainers Bridge railings cable railing California bridge rail chain link railing pipe handrailing tubular handrailing Bridge rehabilitation remove asphalt concrete surfacing remove concrete deck surface Bridge removal protective covers Bridges wood Buildingconstruction contract Buried manmade objects earthwork Buy America C Cable railing California bridge rail California Test Cam coupler assembly irrigation system Casings for bridges miscellaneous drainage facilities Castings carbon steel gray iron malleable iron Castinplace concrete piles CIDH concrete piles CISS concrete piles driven steel shells filled with concrete Cattle guards Cement Cement mortar reinforced concrete pipe joints INDEX Cement treated permeable base spreading and compacting Cement treated bases compacting construction joints curing seal grade tolerance operation time requirement plantmixed roadmixed subgrade Cement treated permeable material Cement treated structure backfill for slotted corrugated steel pipe Cementitious material content concrete structures corrosive environment freezethaw area minor concrete precast concrete rapid strength concrete Certificate of compliance Certifications Certified Industrial Hygienist Certified payroll records certify backflow preventers Chain link fence Chain link railing Change Order approval bills Change order work Changeable message signs portable Changes work character Channelizers Charpy Vnotch testing structural steel Check testing Check valves irrigation systems Checks Chemical adhesives CIDH concrete piles CISS concrete piles Class surface finish Class surface finish Class N steel pipe piles Class R steel pipe piles Cleanup Clearing and grubbing Closure Coated welded steel pipe miscellaneous drainage facilities Coatings Coatings miscellaneous Cofferdam waterfilled Cofferdams Cold planing asphalt concrete pavement Colored concrete INDEX Column casings Commercial quality Commercial source Compaction Compaction equipment cement treated permeable bases Compaction equipment earthwork Composite steel spiral rib pipe with smooth interior Compressive strength concrete concrete structures minor concrete rapid strength concrete selfconsolidating concrete Concrete admixtures aggregate aggregate gradations backfill pipe trenches cementitious material content cementitious materials channel lining compressive strength corrosive environment curing deicing chemicals exposed to ditch lining form liners freezethaw area gutter depressions gutter lining members prestressing minor mixing pavement portland cement pavement sealed joints precast precast members prequalification proportioning protecting rapid strength selfconsolidating shrinkage slope paving slope protection supplementary cementitious materials textured and colored transporting uniformity water mixing water quantity of Concrete anchorage devices installation materials Concrete backfill Concrete barriers Concrete removal Concrete structures INDEX cementitious material content compressive strength construction joints finishing pier columns placing concrete precast members prequalification seal course sealed joints sliding joints waterstops Concretedrock slope protection Cones traffic Confined space Construction area signs Construction surveys Containment systems painting Contract acceptance award compliance failure execution failure of enforcement form hierarchy of components intent termination time Contract time Contractor representative Contractorgenerated hazardous waste Contractorsupplied biologist Control pump booster pump pumping plant electrical equipment Control and neutral conductors irrigation systems Controlled lowstrength material Controlling activity Conversion table asphaltic emulsions Coordination other entities Core and pressure grout dowels Core concrete Corrugated aluminum pipe Corrugated metal pipe aluminum steel Corrugated metal pipe arch Corrugated metal pipe miscellaneous drainage facilities Corrugated steel pipe Costs flagging Cottonwood cuttings Coupling bands corrugated metal pipe Crack and Seat Crack treatment INDEX Crash cushion module temporary Crib walls Critical path Critical path method Critical path method schedule Level Level Level Crumb rubber modifier hot mix asphalt seal coats Cultivation Cultural resources Culvert Culvert beddings Culvert rehabilitation machine spiral wound PVC pipeliners Curb construction extruded slipform Curbs and sidewalks existing Curing compound testing water loss Curing concrete concrete structures curing compound method formsinplace method precast steam water for water method waterproof membrane method Curing seal cement treated bases Cuttings planting D Damage repair and restoration Dampproofing Data cores Data date Deck bleeder drain Deck seal Decks bridge bleeder drains cementitious material content coefficient of friction crack intensity curing placing concrete rapid strength concrete removing forms smoothness Decomposed granite Deduction Deficiency thickness aggregate bases INDEX thickness aggregate subbases thickness cement treated bases Delay Delineators portable Delivery storage and handling steel structures Density cores Department Departmentfurnished material Departmentgenerated hazardous waste Departmentowned float Depressions concrete gutter Described interpretation Determination of pile length Detour Detours obliterating Devices temporary traffic control Differing site conditions Direct design method reinforced concrete pipe Director Disabled veteran business enterprise Disadvantaged Business Enterprise Disposal material on nonhighway property District Disturbance of existing paint systems on bridges Divided highway Douglas fir Downdrains pipe aluminum plastic steel Drainage inlets Drainage appurtenances miscellaneous drainage facilities Drainage inlet markers miscellaneous drainage facilities Drainage pumping equipment Drains horizontal overside plastic pipe horizontal subsurface Drill and bond dowel chemical adhesive Drill and bond dowels Drilled holes drilling to assist pile driving predrilled holes Drip irrigation tubing irrigation systems Drip valve assemblies irrigation systems Driven piles precast prestressed concrete piles steel pipe piles steel sheet piles steel shells structural shape steel piling Driven steel shells INDEX Driving system submittal Drums traffic plastic Dynamic monitoring E Early completion time Earth retaining systems alternative Earthwork borrow material cofferdams compaction deficiency material ditch excavation embankment construction ground anchor walls relative compaction roadway excavation selected material settlement periods slides and slipouts slopes soil nail walls soldier pile walls structure excavation and backfill surcharge surplus material Edge drains Edging landscape Elastomeric bearing pads Electrical systems falsework lighting painting pavement illumination falsework pedestrian walkway illumination through falsework Embankment mechanically stabilized Embankment construction Emissions reduction Emulsions asphaltic Enclosures painting Engineer authority by the to the Entrance tapers aluminum steel Environmentally sensitive area Epoxy binder bonding freshly mixed concrete to hardened concrete pressure injection grouting of concrete pavement rapid set for pavement markers sealant for inductive loops INDEX standard set for pavement markers Epoxy crack injection bridge Epoxycoated prefabricated reinforcement reinforcement Epoxycoated and epoxycoated prefabricated reinforcement Equipment booster pumps drainage pumping identification pumping and controls pumping plant electrical Erosion control quality assurance submittals Erosion control application bonded fiber matrix compost compost socks drill seed dry seed duff fiber rolls hydromulch hydroseed incorporate materials rolled erosion control products straw topsoil Erosion control materials compost compost socks duff fasteners fertilizer fiber fiber rolls imported topsoil local topsoil rolled erosion control products blankets jute mesh netting turf reinforcement mats seed straw tackifier bonded fiber matrix topsoil Erosion control payment Estimated cost Excavation regional notification center Existing curbs and sidewalks Existing asphalt concrete Existing facilities abandon adjust INDEX culvert rehabilitation culvert rehabilitation machine spiral wound PVC pipeliners modify remove drainage facilities remove irrigation facilities Existing Irrigation facilities Existing planting Existing Planting Existing plants maintaining pruning of transplanting Existing structures access opening bridge deck rehabilitation bridge removal bridge removal protective covers core concrete epoxy crack injection methacrylate resin bridge deck treatment polyester concrete overlay prepare concrete deck surface rapid setting concrete patch refinish bridge deck rehabilitate structures remove chip seal remove unsound concrete repair spalled surface area structure removal Expanded polystyrene Expansion joints concrete sidewalks Exploratory work horizontal drains Extra work Extra work performed by specialists Extruded curb construction F Fabrication steel structures Falsework lighting pavement illumination pedestrian walkway illumination portal illumination steel structures Fastener threads Fasteners steel structures Faying and bearing surfaces steel structures Federalaid contract Fences chain link existing fences gates high visibility temporary INDEX Type CL Types BW and WM Fertilizer Field tests irrigation systems Filter fabric Final pay item Finished grade Finishing roadway Fish protection Fixed cost Flag trees telescoping Flagging costs Flared end sections miscellaneous drainage facilities Flashing arrow signs Flexible hose irrigation systems Float Flow sensors irrigation systems Flume downdrains aluminum steel Foliage protectors Force account equipment rental general labor material Force account work Form panels Form panels concrete structures Formed relief texture Forms Forms concrete structures Foundation preparation Fractured rib texture Framed bents wood structures Framing wood structures Freezethaw areas Full Depth ReclamationCement Full Depth ReclamationFoamed Asphalt G Gabions Galvanized reinforcement Galvanizing Gammagamma logging Garden valve assemblies irrigation systems Garden valves irrigation systems Gate valves irrigation systems Geocomposite drain systems Geocomposite strip membrane Geosynthetic pavement interlayer Geosynthetic reinforced embankment Geosynthetic reinforcement Geosynthetics filter fabric geocomposite strip membrane geosynthetic reinforcement INDEX gravelfilled bag paving fabric paving geocomposite grid paving grid paving mat rock slope protection fabric sediment filter bag silt fence fabric subgrade enhancement geotextile temporary cover wall drain Grade tolerance aggregate bases tolerance cement treated bases Grade tolerance earthwork Grading plane Grates Gravel mulch Gravelfilled bag Groove and grind pavement Ground anchor walls earthwork Ground anchors load testing submittals Ground covers inert Grout Guarantee Gutter depressions concrete H Handrailing pipe Handrailing tubular Hardware wood structures Hazardous waste and contamination Hazardous waste management Headed bar reinforcement Headings Heavy abrasive blast texture HemFir High strength fasteners steel structures Highway Holiday definition document submittal Horizontal drains Hot mix asphalt bonded wearing course bonded wearing coursegap graded bridge decks data cores density cores dispute resolution edge treatment geosynthetic pavement interlayer job mix formula modification renewal INDEX verification joints longitudinal leveling lime treatment liquid antistrip material transfer vehicle method compaction miscellaneous areas and dikes open graded friction course plants plasticity index production startup reclaimed asphalt pavement rubberized hot mix asphaltgap graded smoothness corrections superpave tack coat Hot mix asphalt Type A hours of darkness I Idle equipment Imperative mood Indemnification Inertial profiler Informalbid contract Information Handout Inlet depressions miscellaneous drainage facilities Inspection access final request Inspection job site Installation tension testing steel structures Insurance Irrigation conduit irrigation systems Irrigation controllers irrigation systems Irrigation supply line irrigation systems Irrigation system testing Irrigation systems armorclad conductors backflow preventer assembly cam coupler assembly certify backflow preventers check and test existing irrigation facilities conductors flow sensors irrigation conduit irrigation controller enclosure cabinet irrigation controllers irrigation supply line pipe pressure tests sprinkler assemblies temporary testing INDEX trenching and backfilling valve boxes and covers valves wiring plans and diagrams J Jacking pavement Job mix formula Job site Job site appearance Job site management Joint seal assemblies MR inches Joint seal assemblies MR inches Joints culvert and drainage pipe culvert and drainage pipe performance specifications expansion concrete sidewalks plastic pipe culvert rubber gasketed reinforced concrete pipe siphons corrugated metal pipe slip overside drains aluminum steel L Labor Code Labor Surcharge and Equipment Rental Rates Lagging timber Landscape cultivation definition irrigation landscape elements pesticides plant damage plant establishment work planting repair of damage roadside clearing weed germination Landscape elements decomposed granite edging gravel mulch inert ground cover and mulches rock blanket site furnishings wood mulch Laws federal Lead compliance plan Lean concrete backfill Legal actions against the Department License contractor federalaid contract contractor nonfederalaid contract INDEX joint venture bidder subcontractors Licenses Lighting falsework falsework portal illumination pavement illumination falsework portal illumination walkway illumination through falsework Lime Stabilized Soil Lime treatment Liquid antistrip Liquidated damages Lists Load limits Load test piles Location marker irrigation systems M Magnesium phosphate concrete Mailboxes relocating resetting Maintaining traffic bridge painting and cleaning operations Maintaining Traffic Maintenance and protection relief Manhole frames and covers Markings existing markings Mass concrete Material control of Department furnished found on the job site furnishing of local new on hand procurement from nonhighway property proportioning source source inspection source testing storage Material hauling equipment lane Material shortage Material transfer vehicle Materials steel structures structural steel Materialsource facility audit Measurement aggregate imported top soil mulch roadway material soil amendment INDEX Measuring devices Mechanically stabilized embankment Median Members prestressed concrete Membrane waterproofing and protective cover asphalt deck seal preformed Methacrylate resin bridge deck treatment Methacrylate resin treatment bridge Method compaction Microsurfacing Midwest guardrail system end anchor assembly rail tensioning assembly steel posts wood posts Milestone Mineral grit blast cleaning Minor concrete Minor hot mix asphalt Minor structures Miscellaneous areas and dikes Miscellaneous bridge metal bolted connections construction materials Miscellaneous drainage facilities casings for bridges corrugated metal pipe drainage appurtenances drainage inlet markers flared end sections inlet depressions precast concrete pipe welded steel pipe Miscellaneous iron and steel Miscellaneous metal Miscellaneous traffic control devices delineators pavement markers Mobilization Modified highaluminabased concrete modify Modify inlets manholes and risers pipes Mortar cement reinforced concrete pipe joints Mulch landscape N Narrative report Natural resource protection plan Near critical path Noise control INDEX Nondiscrimination Nonhighway facilities Nonskid abrasive finish Nonsmall business substitution Numeric action level O obliterate Open graded friction course Ordinary surface finish OSHA Outlets edge drains underdrains Overside drains P Paint Painting antigrafitti coating application concrete containment sytems electrical systems enclosures faying surfaces galvanized surfaces machinery painting quality work plan preparing structural steel sign structures steel soldier piles steel structures structural steel thermal spray coating timber ventilated containment systems weather conditions wood structures zinc coatings Paints miscellaneous Paleontological resources Parking area seals Parking bumpers Partnering Pavement grind groove jacking portland cement concrete replacement subsealing transition tapers Pavement markers Pavement smoothness inertial profiler INDEX straightedge Paving fabric Paving geocomposite grid Paving grid Paving mat Paving notch extension Payment alternatives eliminated items progress scope PC concrete members cementitious material content PC drainage inlets PCC pavement side forms for slip form construction Perforated pipe aluminum underdrains plastic underdrains steel underdrains Permanent steel casings Permanent steel deck forms Permeable base asphalt treated cement treated Permeable material asphalt treated cement treated untreated Permits Personal liability Pervious backfill material Pesticides Pier columns Pile driving equipment Pile reinforcement Pin connections steel structures Pipe alternative slotted arches structural metal plate composite steel spiral rib with smooth interior corrugated metal corrugated metal aluminum corrugated metal arch corrugated metal bituminous coated corrugated metal bituminous lined corrugated metal coupling bands corrugated metal paved inverts corrugated metal polymeric sheet coating corrugated metal protective coatings linings and paving corrugated metal steel corrugated metal thickness corrugated steel damaged aluminum coating corrugated steel damaged galvanizing corrugated steel siphons downdrains aluminum downdrains plastic INDEX downdrains steel end finish corrugated aluminum end finish corrugated steel irrigation supply line joints culvert and drainage pipe exfiltration and infiltration testing joint systems and couplers low pressure air test other tests performance specifications plastic pipe rubber gasketed watertightness metal liner plate perforated aluminum underdrains perforated plastic .
underdrains perforated steel underdrains plastic culvert plastic horizontal drains reinforced concrete reinforced concrete circular reinforced concrete class reinforced concrete direct design method reinforced concrete joints cement mortar resilient material rubber gasketed reinforced concrete marking reinforced concrete oval shaped reinforced concrete siphons slotted corrugated steel slotted plastic edge drains spiral rib structural metal plate temporary culverts Pipe handrailing Pipe irrigation systems PLACs Plans project plans revised standard plans standard plans Plant establishment period plant establishment work Plant group designations Plant stakes Plant ties Plant pumping Plant pumping electrical equipment Planting materials watering Planting work planting plants preparing planting areas Plantmixed cement treated bases Plants maintenance of pruning INDEX replacement of staking of watering Plaster sand Plastic pipe culvert underdrain couplings Plastic lumber composite reinforced recycled structures unreinforced recycled Plastic traffic drums Plugs edge drains Polyester concrete expansion dams Polyester concrete overlay bridge Portable changeable message signs delineators signs Portal illumination falsework Portland cement Portland cement concrete pavement Portland cement concrete PCC pavement Potential claims Full and Final Potential Claim Record Initial Potential Claim Record Supplemental Potential Claim Record Precast concrete Precast concrete members Precast concrete pipe miscellaneous drainage facilities Preconstruction conference Preconstruction scheduling conference Predrilled holes Premolded expansion joint filler Prepare concrete deck surface Preparing planting areas Prepaving grinding Prepaving inertial profiler Prequalification concrete rapid strength concrete selfconsolidating concrete Preservative treatment of lumber timber and piling Pressure regulating valves irrigation systems Pressure relief valves irrigation systems Pressure rinsing Pressure tests irrigation systems Pressure washing Prestressing concrete anchorages and distribution ducts equipment and calibration grout prestressing steel shop drawings test samples vents Price adjustment INDEX changed quantities for changed quantities quantity decreases of more than percent quantity increases of more than percent Price index fluctuations Production startup Proportioning automatic concrete minor concrete volumetric Protecting cementitious materials concrete Protecting concrete structures Protection stray current Protest Pruning PTFE spherical bearings Public convenience Public safety Public works contractor registration number Pull boxes irrigation systems Pulverized Roadbed Pumping booster pumps equipment and controls equipment drainage plant electrical equipment Pumping equipment and controls Pumping plant electrical equipment Pumping plant metal work Pumps booster drainage use of before contract acceptance Q QC inspector welding QC manager welding QC plans welding QC procedure certification Quality characteristic Quality control welding Quality control plan Quick coupling valves irrigation systems R Railings cable railing California bridge rail chain link railing midwest guardrail system INDEX pipe handrailing tubular handrailing Type DTB transition railing Type K temporary Type STB transition railing Type WB transition railing railroad relations Railroads property Rapid setting concrete patch bridge Rapid strength concrete Reclaimed asphalt pavement Reclaimed Pavement crack and seat full depth reclamationcement full depth reclamationfoamed asphalt pulverized roadbed reconstruct Reconstruct metal bridge railing Records auditing change order bills copying cost accounting inspection retention Recycled water identification irrigation systems Redwood Reference to a code to a department to a document to a law Refinish bridge deck Regulated species Rehabilitate structures Reinforced concrete extensions Reinforced concrete pipe Reinforcement epoxycoated epoxycoated and epoxycoated prefabricated galvanized headed bar prefabricated epoxycoated splicing stray current protection welded wire relocate Remote control valves irrigation systems Removal of yellow traffic stripe and pavement marking with hazardous waste residue remove Remove asphalt concrete surfacing bridge concrete deck surface drainage facilities guardrail irrigation facilities Remove asphalt concrete dike INDEX Remove base and surfacing Remove chip seal bridge Remove unsound concrete bridge Replace asphalt concrete surfacing Request for information Required Contract Provisions FederalAid Construction Contracts reset Resilient joint material reinforced concrete pipe Resources furnishing of Retaining wall type Retroreflective bands portable delineators cone sleeves sheeting Revised standard specifications RFI Risers underdrains Roadbed Roadmixed cement treated bases Roadmixing machines cement treated bases Roads obliterating Roadside Roadside clearing Roadside signs constructing roadside signs existing roadside signs and markers Type N CA Type P CA and Type R CA marker panels Roadway Rock blanket Rock slope protection Rock slope protection fabric Root barrier Root protectors Root stimulant Rotational capacity testing steel structures Rubber gasketed joints reinforced concrete pipe Rubberized hot mix asphaltgap graded Rumble strips S salvage Salvage guardrail Salvaging facilities Sand blast cleaning Schedule baseline critical path method revised updated Schedule of values Scheduled completion date Seal coat claims Seal coats INDEX asphalt rubber binder asphaltic emulsions asphaltic emulsions nonpolymer asphaltic emulsions polymer flush coats fog seal coat stress absorbing membrane interlayer Sealed joints asphaltic plug joint seals joint seal assemblies MR inches joint seal assemblies MR inches Type A and AL joint seals Type B joint seals Seals bituminous slurry Sediment filter bag Selfconsolidating concrete mockup Settlement periods earthwork Shear connectors Shop drawings steel structures Shotcrete structural Shoulder Shoulder backing Shown interpretation Side form PCC pavement Sign panels and markers existing roadside signs and markers fabricating and installing markers furnishing sign panels sign overlays Sign structures fabrication welding Signs bridge painting and cleaning operations construction area flashing arrow portable portable changeable message stationary mounted construction area Signs removal of warning regulatory or guide Silt fence fabric Siphons corrugated steel pipe reinforced concrete pipe Site furnishings landscape Slab replacement Sliding joints Slip form curb construction Slip form PCC pavement Slope paving exposed aggregate finish Slope protection concrete slope protection gutter lining ditch lining and channel lining concretedrock INDEX gabions rock slope paving smallrock Slopes earthwork Slotted corrugated steel pipe Slotted pipe edge drains horizontal drains Slurry mineral slurry synthetic slurry Slurry cement backfill Slurry leveling course Slurry seal Small business participation report Small tool Smallrock slope protection Smoothness Snowplow deflectors Sod Soil amendment Soil nail walls earthwork Soil nails load testing submittals Soldier pile walls Solid waste disposal and recycling Sound walls alternative sound wall systems masonry block Source inspection expense deductions Southern yellow pine Spall repair Special provisions Specifications Specified interpretation Spiral rib pipe Splicing reinforcing steel Sprinkler assemblies irrigation systems Stabilized Soil Stabilized Soils Lime Staining concrete rock sculpted shotcrete shotcrete textured concrete Staking plants Standard specifications Standards and poles fabrication welding Start of job site activities State State Parks State Reclamation Board INDEX State Specification Stationary mounted signs construction area Steam cleaning Steel lists reinforcement prestressing Steel grit blast cleaning Steel pipe piles Class N Class R Steel sheet piles Steel shot blast cleaning Steel soldier piles painting Storm water pollution prevention plan numeric action level sampling and analysis day Stormwater pollution prevention plan construction site monitoring program rain event action plan sampling and analysis reports stormwater annual report Stray current protection Stress absorbing membrane interlayer Stringers wood structures Strip waterstops Structural aluminum plate pipe Structural metal plate pipe arches and pipe arches Structural metal wood structures Structural shotcrete Structural steel erection painting thermal spray coating Structural steel plate pipe Structural timber and lumber wood structures Structure approach drainage systems Structure backfill Structure Design Structure excavation and backfill Structures plastic lumber wood Stud connectors Subbase Subbases aggregate Subcontracting Subgrade aggregate bases aggregate subbases cement treated bases treated permeable bases Subgrade enhancement geotextile Submittals action informational Subsealing INDEX pavement Substantial defects Substructure Subsurface drains Superstructure supplemental information Supplemental project information Supplementary cementitious materials concrete corrosive environment deicing chemicals exposed to freezethaw area minor concrete precast concrete Supply line on structures Surcharge earthwork Surface Mining and Reclamation Act Surfacing Survey monuments T Tack coat Tapered inlets overside drains aluminum steel Telephone Numbers Telescoping flag trees Temporary active treatment systems Temporary concrete washouts Temporary cover Temporary culverts Temporary facilities construction mats general job site water control miscellaneous pedestrian Temporary irrigation systems Temporary linear sediment barriers Temporary sediment control Temporary soil stabilization Temporary steel casings Temporary structures Temporary tracking control street sweeping temporary construction roadways and entrances Temporary traffic control Temporary traffic control devices Termination Contract Contractors control Test borings Test panels Test samples check testing Testing job site Thrie beam barrier Timber INDEX catwalk lagging painting Time impact analysis timerelated overhead Timescaled network diagram Topsoil erosion control Total bid Total float Trade name Traffic cones Traffic lane Traffic stripes and pavement markings glass beads painted traffic stripes and pavement markings thermoplastic traffic stripes or pavement markings with enhanced wetnight visibility twocomponent painted traffic stripes and pavement markings Transition railings Type DTB Type STB Type WB Traveled way Treated permeable bases asphalt cement grade tolerance subgrade Treated timber wood structures Treated wood waste Treatment of lumber timber and piling preservative Tubular handrailing Tunnel Type A and AL joints seals Type B joint seals Type DTB transition railing Type K temporary railing Type STB transition railing Type WB transition railing U Unauthorized work Underdrains outlets perforated aluminum pipe perforated plastic pipe perforated steel pipe risers Unions irrigation systems Units Unsuitable material Use of pumps before contract acceptance Utilities Utility facilities V Value analysis INDEX Value engineering change proposal Valve boxes irrigation systems Valves irrigation systems Vehicle Code Verification tension testing steel structures Volume conversion table asphalt binder asphaltic emulsions Volumetric proportioning W Wages Wall drain Wall drains Warm mix asphalt technology Water control and foundation treatment earthwork water meter charges Water pollution control Water pollution control manager Water pollution control program Water quality monitoring report Water erosion control Watering planting Watering plants Waterproofing asphalt membrane deck seal membrane and protective cover preformed membrane Waterstops Watertightness culvert joints Weather conditions painting Websites Weed germination Weep holes Welded steel pipe miscellaneous drainage facilities Welded wire reinforcement Welding quality control sign structures standards and poles steel structures structural steel Wetland protection Wheel guards and railings wood structures Wildlife passage way Willow cuttings Withhold Withholds Wood mulch Wood structures Work alternatives assignment completion control of INDEX description maintenance means and methods noncompliant rejection scope unauthorized Work plan colored concrete deck placement painting quality thermal spray coating quality Work zone Worker character Working hours Writing from the Contractor from the Department Wye strainer assemblies irrigation systems Wye strainers
