The graded portion of a highway prepared as a foundation for the pavement structure and shoulders .
The top surface of a roadbed upon which the pavement structure and shoulders are constructed .
The Department will not normally consider a VECP that would require any changes in pavement design rightofway relocation of bridges or any changes that would require modification of the approved environmental documents for the project .
Conduct sufficient field checks of features such as existing streams drainage structures pavement elevations and road and street tie points to ensure the proposed work on the Plans will correspond with the existing andor proposed surroundings .
If the paving including the connections through the structures is completed on any of the sections involved the Engineer after final inspection may accept the pavement and relieve the Contractor of further maintenance expense in connection with the section .
If the pavement is not fully completed on any of the sections ordered opened the Contractor shall maintain the paving in accordance with .
Do not load a concrete pavement base or structure before the expiration of the cure period .
Construction loads are not allowed on concrete pavements base or structures before the end of the curing period .
During the life of the Contract allow parties bearing such permits and only such parties to make openings in the pavement .
purpose limit the acceptably installed items of Work to the following items used for safety and traffic control traffic signal systems signs lighting guardrail impact attenuators median barriers parapet rails and permanent pavement markings .
Description This work consists of removing entirely or partially and disposing of all buildings fences structures old pavements abandoned pipe lines and other obstructions not designated or permitted to remain except for obstructions to be removed and disposed of under other contract items .
Do not use hoe rams pneumatic shears pavement breakers or other heavy equipment to remove slabs where girders or adjacent slab portions are to remain .
Removal of Pavement Sidewalks and Curbs Constructed of Portland Cement Concrete As directed dispose of pavement base course sidewalks curbs gutters and similar features constructed of Portland cement concrete designated for removal .
If the Plans do not to identify the existence of concrete pavement under asphaltic pavement do not interpret this as meaning that no concrete is present .
Remove and dispose of concrete pavement parking strip and base all with or without bituminous overlay concrete curb and gutter sidewalk driveways and similar features as follows or as directed .
When specified remove and stockpile ballast gravel bituminous pavement or other pavement materials in accordance with .
The work also includes all embankment construction as specified in shoulder and ditch construction as specified in and if the Contract includes construction of pavement or other surfacing Subgrade Construction and Preparation as specified in . .
The Department will pay for the removal of concrete pavement base parking strip and sidewalk curb and gutter and similar features under the classifications specified in .
Remove and dispose of concrete pavement parking strip and base all with or without bituminous overlay concrete curb and gutter sidewalk .
If the Contract includes the placement of base stone or other components of a pavement structure upon the subgrade compact the top inches in both cut and fill sections to a density equal to of the maximum density as specified in ..
Description This work consists of constructing and preparing part or all of the roadbed to a condition suitable for supporting the immediate construction of a base or pavement . .
Where forms are required to construct base or pavement prepare the subgrade inches wider on each side than the neat width of the base or pavement. . Compacting Subgrade On subgrades that require reworking remove all vegetation within the limits of subgrade preparation and dispose of this material as directed by the Engineer before beginning reworking and recompacting operations .
Checking Subgrade Check the lines crosssections and grades of the subgrade as completed to ensure they are in reasonably close conformity with those shown on the Plans for the bottom of subbase base or pavement or with those established by the direction of the Engineer .
Recheck the subgrade as specified in the respective sections governing construction of the particular type of base and pavement . .
Subgrade Construction and Preparation will be measured by the station feet along the median centerline of the Project for divided sections and along the centerline of the pavement for lane and other undivided sections excluding bridges . .
If the Contract includes the construction of the combined grading drainage and pavement structure the Department will consider the construction and preparation of the subgrade as incidental to the construction and preparation of the road and the material moved will be classified and included in the computation of pay items provided in .
If the Contract provides for the construction of a subbase base or pavement on a road that has been graded under a previous contract and the item for Subgrade Construction and Preparation is included in the Contract the Department will pay for this item at the contract unit price per foot station .
Description This work consists of constructing shoulders and ditches adjacent to both sides of the base or pavement to obtain proper drainage .
General While constructing shoulders protect the surface and edges of pavement .
Do not start shoulder work until the pavement has developed effective resistance to damage .
Construction of a base andor pavement on a road that has been graded under a previous Contract or . . Base andor paving project that includes sections of grading .
Limitations Only process the amount of soilcement that will be covered with the succeeding stage of base or pavement construction during the same construction season .
Tolerance in Base Thickness For base thickness meet the tolerance specified for pavement thickness in ..
Limitations Only process the amount of aggregatecement base that will be covered with the succeeding stage of base or pavement construction during the same construction season .
Conditioning Mineral Aggregate Base by the linear mile based on a horizontal measurement made along the median centerline of the Project for divided sections and along the centerline of the pavement for twolane sections excluding bridges. . Calcium Chloride by the ton in accordance with .. D. .
Cover the aggregatelimefly ash stabilized base course with the succeeding stage of base or pavement construction before December th. . Subgrade Preparation Prepare the subgrade as specified in or whichever is applicable. . Mixing Mix the aggregate with the proper amount of lime fly ash and water in an approved mixer .
B. Asphalt or Cement Treated Permeable Base From the time of placement until placement of the following pavement layer protect the treated permeable base from severe weather conditions particularly freezing rain snow and icing and from contamination by dust dirt mud or other fine grained material .
Remove and replace at no additional cost to the Department all portions of the treated permeable base that become contaminated to the extent that drainage is reduced or inhibited. . Do not allow traffic on the treated permeable base with the exception of equipment required to place the following layer of pavement provided that it enters and exits as near as possible to the paving operation .
Limitations If using asphalt treated permeable base adhere to the limitations specified in .. Do not place any treated permeable base that can not be covered by the next course of pavement within the same construction season . .
The Department will consider the cost of taking cores for verification of pavement thickness to be included in the contract unit price of treated permeable base .
The Department will not allow additional compensation for leveling of the treated permeable base except on ramps that contain square yards or less of Portland cement concrete pavement .
If approved by the Engineer the limitations for construction to be covered by a succeeding stage of pavement after October and prior to April shall be as follows Adhere to the seasonal limitations specified in .. .
Description This Section is applicable to all types of bituminous pavements of the asphalt plant mix type as described in and .
Deviations from these general requirements will be indicated in the specific requirements for each pavement type . .
This work consists of constructing one or more courses of bituminous mixture on a prepared foundation in accordance with this Section and the specific requirements of the pavement type under contract .
The asphalt pavement mix designproduction verification procedure shall consist of the following Submit mix designs to the Engineer for approval before mix production .
e Determine gradation and asphalt content of reclaimed asphalt pavement when used as a component material . .
asphalt pavement is a component material .
If reclaimed asphalt pavement RAP is approved for use as a component material in a hot bituminous mixture the Contractors Quality Control Plan shall include determination of the gradation and asphalt content of the RAP material at a minimum frequency of stockpile sample per tons used in the mixture. . E. Testing Procedures Conduct the Tensile Strength Ratio TSR Stripping and Loss on Ignition LOI testing in accordance with the following .
In addition the paver shall have an articulated screed that can be adjusted to fit the pavement cross section and a power unit capable of handling the increased loading without undue stress. . B .
and when weather conditions otherwise allow the pavement to be properly placed compacted and finished .
Only place TL TLD and OGFC mixtures when the pavement surface temperature and the ambient air temperature are a minimum of F and rising limit placement to the period from April to November . .
Conditioning the Existing Surface If bituminous mixes are to be placed upon an existing concrete pavement with or without a bituminous overlay remove all excess bituminous material from joints and cracks .
Remove sections of existing pavement that are broken and pumping under traffic .
Remove pavement where blowups have occurred at joints or cracks to provide a minimum opening of foot for the full width of the pavement .
If the bituminous mixture is to be placed upon an existing bituminous pavement remove areas containing excess bitumen and failures in the existing surface and base as directed by the Engineer .
Adjust all manholes and catch basin frames which are associated with the storm sewer system to the finished grades of the pavement .
The respective Utility Owners will properly adjust all utility manholes utility valve covers and similar structures to the finished grades of the pavement unless otherwise shown on the Plans .
Remove unsatisfactory subgrade material encountered when removing the existing pavement and replace with approved material .
Use overlay mixture or other approved material to fill openings left by the pavement and base removal to the full depth of the existing pavement as directed by the Engineer and compact the material in layers not to exceed inches in thickness .
Use preset control string lines to control the alignment of the outside edge of the pavement .
Where multicourse pavements are placed offset the longitudinal joint in one layer from that in preceding layer by approximately foot however construct the joint in the top layer at the centerline of the pavement if the roadway comprises two lane widths or at lane lines if the roadway is more than two lanes in width .
When the string line system is required on a multicourse pavement use it on at least two courses exclusive of the surface course .
Have the string line reference system be complete in place at least feet in advance of the point where the pavement is being placed .
When no density requirements are specified use a system of compaction for roadway pavements that has previously produced the required bituminous pavement densities .
b. Incidental construction such as bridge approaches and driveways and c. Projects containing less than square yards of bituminous pavement. . Compaction of OGFC mixtures shall consist of a minimum of two passes with a steel double drum asphalt roller with minimum weight of tons before the material temperature has fallen below F. Provide a minimum of two roller units so as to accomplish the compaction promptly following the placement of the material .
Do not park rollers on the bituminous pavement .
Do not refuel rollers on bituminous pavements .
Density Requirements for any ADT Mix Type of Maximum Theoretical Density Average No Single Test Less Than Shoulder Mix B BM BM D or E AS and ACRL None None CS None None TL TLD and OGFC None None The Department will waive density requirements on Bituminous Plant Mix Base Grading ACRL Grading AS and Bituminous Plant Mix Leveling Course Grading CS however the Contractor shall use a system of compaction for roadway pavements that has been approved by the Engineer .
When placing Bituminous Plant Mix Base Grading ACRL and Grading AS the Contractor may replace the specified intermediate roller pneumatic tire with a steelwheel type if irreparable damage to the pavement is occurring .
The Department will perform density testing in accordance with .. B .. C. Test Strips Construct test strips for all A B BM BM C CW D and E mixes to establish rolling patterns to calibrate nuclear gauges to verify that the base course or surface course meets the density requirements of the specifications and for mix design and production verification as required. . Before constructing the test strip obtain the Engineers approval of the underlying base or other pavement course .
Compact the test strip using equipment as specified in this subsection and .. Construct the test strip at the beginning of work on the pavement course .
Construct each test strip to be paver width wide with an area of at least square yards and of the depth specified for the pavement course concerned .
If a different nuclear gauge needs to be used for acceptance it will be necessary to cut new cores from the ongoing pavement construction to calibrate the new gauge .
Use a brush or sprayed coat of bituminous material on contact surfaces of longitudinal and transverse joints just before placing additional mixture against the previously rolled material. . Pavement Samples When directed cut samples from the compacted pavement for testing by the Engineer .
Fill holes left by taking samples with the same type mixture that was used to construct the course sampled and compact to conform to the surrounding pavement .
Surface Requirements Test the surface with a foot straightedge applied parallel to the centerline of the pavement .
Test the transverse slopes of tilted pavements with a stringline and string level applied at right angles to the centerline of the pavement .
The percent of slope when computed for the full width of the pavement shall not deviate more than .
Test the crown in crowned pavements with a stringline applied at right angles to the centerline of the pavement .
Remove and replace pavement that can not be corrected to comply with the specified tolerances at no cost to the Department .
The Department will determine quantities of mineral aggregate including mineral filler when required by weighing the bituminous pavement mixture on truck scales meeting and deducting the weight of the bituminous material from the weight of total mixture accepted .
Removal of unsatisfactory subgrade material where existing pavement has been removed by the cubic yard in accordance with ..
The Department will measure bituminous mixtures used to fill openings left by pavement removal as specified in this Subsection ..
For density testing purposes the Department will divide the pavement into lots of square yards except for Gradings A B BM and BM which will be divided into lots of approximately square yards .
Description This work consists of constructing an asphaltic concrete pavement composed of a mixture of coarse aggregate fine aggregate mineral filler if specified or required and asphalt cement on a prepared roadbed at the rate of application shown on the Plans or established by the Engineer .
The Contractor may use asphalt pavement that has been removed from a Department project or other State Highway Agency project by an approved method and stored in a Department approved stockpile .
General Requirements Construct the pavement as specified in .
Remove all thermoplastic pavement markings flush with the existing surface before applying the tack coat . .
Vary the rate of application within the range specified above as required by the condition of the pavement to obtain a minimum thickness of inch above the high points of the milled areas and inch thickness on unmilled areas .
Take care to restore the designed profile of the pavement crosssection .
If the coarse aggregate settles to the bottom of the mix remove the mix from the pavement .
After curing perform rolling with a pneumatic tired roller for sections of pavement not to be exposed to traffic .
Before opening to traffic apply pavement markings meeting ..
Weather Limitations Only place microsurface and slurry seal when the pavement surface temperature and the ambient air temperature are a minimum of F and rising .
Opening to Traffic Microsurface material shall cure sufficiently within hour after application and slurry seal material shall cure sufficiently within hours after application so that traffic can be allowed on the pavement without damaging the surface .
Description This work consists of cold planing an existing bituminous plant mix pavement .
Equipment Provide a power broom a water truck and a planing machine as well as equipment to remove the material planed from the pavement .
The machine shall be capable of accurately establishing profile by referencing from either the existing pavement or from an independent grade control and shall have positive means for controlling crossslope .
The machine shall have an effective means of removing cuttings from the pavement and for preventing dust from escaping into the air .
When milling the Interstate or controlled access freeways the planing machine shall be capable of restoring pavement profile with a noncontact .
Do not begin milling unless the subsequent layer of pavement can be placed within the limitation specified in ..
Thoroughly sweep the planed pavement immediately behind the machine and haul away all materials swept up .
Where sound pavement has been gouged torn or otherwise damaged during the milling operations or damage is done to any other property of any kind including utility frames grates and covers make repairs at no cost to the Department .
Surface Requirements Where the planed pavement is not to be resurfaced provide a uniform texture throughout the Project and a satisfactory riding surface .
Method of Measurement The Department will measure Cold Planing of Bituminous Pavement by the quantity of material removed in tons or cubic yards or by the square yard of planed pavement .
Where payment is by the square yard the Department will measure the pavement acceptably planed by the square yard in accordance with . .
Basis of Payment The Department will pay for the accepted quantity of Cold Planed Bituminous Pavement at the contract unit price which payment shall be full compensation for all labor materials equipment hauling and incidentals necessary to plane the pavement control dust and dispose of the cuttings .
Description This work consists of constructing a pavement of Portland cement concrete with or without reinforcement as specified on a prepared surface .
If approved by the Engineer the Contractor may use Class A Concrete as specified in and modified herein in variable width sections ramps and on projects containing square yards of concrete pavement or less .
Metal pins shall be of proper size and length to hold the forms rigidly and securely in place. . Do not use builtup forms except where the total area of pavement of any specified thickness on the Project is less than square yards .
Provide slipform pavers designed to spread consolidate screed and floatfinish freshly placed concrete in one complete pass of the paver so that only a minimum of hand finishing will be necessary to provide a dense and homogeneous pavement that conforms with the Plans and Specifications .
Control pavement alignment with an electronic sensing device in continuous contact with a sensing guide .
Construct the base to such grade tolerances as will ensure the required concrete pavement thickness is obtained .
If the slipform method of paving is used place compact and finish the base to the proper grade to a width beyond the pavement limits sufficient to support all paving equipment .
The Contractor may fill low areas with base material and compact to correspond with the surrounding areas except that for low areas in cement treated bases and bituminous bases fill with concrete integral with the pavement .
If placing concrete adjacent to a previously constructed lane of pavement and mechanical equipment is to be operated on this existing lane of pavement that lane shall meet the requirements for opening to traffic specified in ..
When using the slipform method of concrete paving place the concrete with an approved slipform paver meeting the requirements of .. D .. Equip the slipform paver with vibrators meeting the applicable requirements of .. D. to vibrate the concrete for the full width and depth of the strip of pavement being placed .
Before the concrete has hardened correct any edge slump of the pavement exclusive of edge rounding in excess of inch .
Any reduction in payment because of low strength will be in addition to any reduction in payment related to deficiencies in pavement thickness or rideability .
The Engineer will determine pavement thickness from test cores drilled by the Contractor from each unit of pavement in accordance with .. . StrikeOff of Concrete and Placement of Reinforcement Following the placing of concrete strike it off to conform to the cross section shown on the Plans and to an elevation such that when the concrete is properly consolidated and finished the surface of the pavement will be in .
When reinforced concrete pavement is placed in two layers strike off the entire width of the bottom layer to such length and depth that the sheet of fabric or bar mat may be laid full length on the concrete in its final position without further manipulation .
A. Longitudinal Joints Install longitudinal joints perpendicular to the pavement surface and along or parallel to the centerline of the pavement unless otherwise specified .
Include all costs involved in the above procedure in the price bid for concrete pavement .
Cut longitudinal sawed joints with approved concrete saws to the depth width and line shown on the Plans not later than days after placing concrete and before any equipment or vehicles are allowed on the pavement .
B. Transverse Expansion Joints Construct transverse joints to be straight vertical to the pavement surface and at the angle to the centerline of the pavement shown on the Plans .
Instead of using dowel assemblies at contraction joints the Contractor may place dowel bars in the full width of pavement using a mechanical device approved by the Engineer .
To use a dowel implanting device first demonstrate accurate dowel placement and pavement finish .
Only use lightweight sawing equipment on the newly constructed pavement .
The Contractor may use gang saw units or similar heavy equipment if the equipment is operated from a bridge or platform supported independently of the pavement . .
Form these joints by placing inserts in the plastic concrete at the angle to the centerline of the pavement shown on the Plans and perpendicular to the surface .
Ensure that the groove so formed maintains its full width and depth as shown on the Plans and the pavement at the joint meets surface requirements .
B. Finishing at Joints Consolidate concrete adjacent to joints to eliminate voids or segregation against the joint material under and around all load transfer devices joint assembly units and other features designed to extend into the pavement .
When the panfloat finisher combination machine is used for finishing the pavement longitudinal floats are not necessary .
If uniform and satisfactory consolidation of the concrete is not obtained by the vibratory method at joints along forms at structures and throughout the pavement furnish equipment and methods that will produce satisfactory work. . D. Hand Finishing The Engineer may allow hand finishing methods in the following situations .
When reinforcement is used in the pavement provide a strikeoff template for striking off the bottom layer of concrete .
over each area of pavement at least two times while preventing excessive operation over a given area .
After floating remove excess water and laitance from the surface of the pavement with a straightedge feet or more in length .
G. Surface Texturing Texture the surface using a burlap drag consisting of a seamless strip of damp burlap which when dragged longitudinally along the full width of pavement produces a uniform surface of gritty texture .
After finishing the pavement by the burlap drag texture the surface by forming transverse grooves .
H. Edging at Forms and Joints After the final finish but while the concrete is still in a plastic state round the outside edges of the pavement to a inch radius .
When pavement is formed along a lane line round the edges to a inch radius .
Round the edges of the pavement on each side of transverse expansion joints formed joints and transverse construction joints to a inch radius .
Surface Testing As soon as the concrete has hardened sufficiently the Department will test the pavement surface with a foot straightedge .
When the straightedge is placed parallel to the centerline of the pavement the surface deviation from the lower edge of the straightedge shall not exceed inch for mainline and auxiliary lanes and inch for ramps .
In addition to the straightedge test Rainhart Profilograph tests or Roadway Profiler tests of the pavement surface using a .inch blanking band will be performed on the following pavements .
Mainline pavement .
Pay Factors Corrective Action for Ramps with Posted Speeds of mph Profile Indexes Pay Factor Corrective Action inches per mile None to inches per mile None to inches per mile Grind to inches per mile plus inches per mile Grind to inches per mile Consider high speed ramps between freeways that do not have stop or yield conditions to be mainline pavement .
When the pavement being constructed longitudinally abuts an adjacent pavement constructed under a previous contract the Department will test the adjacent pavement for smoothness .
If the profile index of the existing pavement surface exceeds the above limits the Department will increase the allowable profile index of the pavement surface being constructed by half the difference between the profile index of the existing pavement surface and the requirements specified in the tables above .
To determine pavement sections where corrective work or pay adjustments will be necessary the Department will evaluate the pavement in .mile sections .
and .. After corrective action is complete the Department will retest and evaluate the pavement .
Perform required corrective work with approved grinding equipment or by removing and replacing the pavement as directed by the Engineer .
When it is necessary to remove and replace a section of pavement also remove and replace all remaining portions of the slab adjacent to the joints that are less than .
After the Contractor performs corrective grinding the Department will test the affected pavement for thickness in accordance with ..
Remove solid residue from pavement surfaces before it gets blown by traffic action or wind .
Cotton or Burlap Mats Entirely cover the surface of the pavement with cotton or burlap mats .
The mats used shall be of such length or width that as laid they will extend at least twice the thickness of the pavement beyond the edges of the slab .
B. Waterproof Paper Entirely cover the top surface and sides of the pavement with waterproof paper .
The paper shall have such dimensions that each unit as laid will extend beyond the edges of the slab at least twice the thickness of the pavement or it shall be of pavement width with foot strips of paper provided for the edges .
Thoroughly wet the surface of the pavement before placing the paper .
C. Impervious Membrane Method Spray the entire pavement surface and edges uniformly with white pigmented curing compound immediately after finishing the surface and before concrete set has taken place or if the pavement is cured initially with jute or cotton mats apply the curing compound upon removal of the mats .
D. White Polyethylene Sheeting Entirely cover the top surface and sides of the pavement with polyethylene sheeting .
Use sheeting with such dimensions that each unit as laid will extend beyond the edges of the slab at least twice the thickness of the pavement .
Thoroughly wet the surface of the pavement before placing the sheeting .
At any time the temperature is expected to reach the freezing point during the day or night spread such material over the pavement to a sufficient depth to prevent freezing of the concrete .
Remove the forms carefully to avoid damaging the pavement .
. . Sealing Joints Seal joints with one of the specified joint sealing materials before opening the pavement to traffic and as soon after completion of the curing period as is feasible .
Immediately remove any excess material on the surface of the concrete pavement and clean the pavement surface .
Ream all random cracks with a suitable tool and fill with an approved joint sealant. . Protection of Pavement Protect the pavement and its appurtenances against both public traffic and traffic caused by the Contractors employees and agents .
This shall include watchmen to direct traffic and the erection and maintenance of the warning signs lights pavement bridges or crossovers .
Repair or replace all damage to the pavement prior to final acceptance at no cost to the Department .
Such protective materials shall include standard metal forms or wood plank having a nominal thickness of not less than inches and a nominal width of not less than the thickness of the pavement at its edge for the protection of the pavement edges and covering material such as burlap or cotton mats curing paper or plastic sheeting material for the protection of the surface of the pavement .
personnel to begin placing forms against the sides of the pavement and covering the surface of the plastic concrete with the protective covering . .
Opening to Traffic The Engineer will determine when the pavement will be opened to traffic .
The Engineer will not allow traffic on the completed pavement until the concrete has attained a compressive strength of pounds per square inch or until days following concrete placement whichever occurs first .
Ensure pavement is free from construction debris rocks and other deleterious materials before opening to traffic .
All other testing of the concrete pavement for smoothness and thickness shall be complete before opening to traffic . .
Shoulders Construct shape and dress shoulders according to the shoulder type shown on the Plans as soon as practicable following the completion of the pavement .
Construct longitudinal joints between the concrete pavement and the asphalt shoulder by sawing unless otherwise directed by the Engineer to form an opening inch wide by inch deep as measured from the lowest elevation .
Apply the sealant so that it flows into the joint without overlapping onto the pavement .
Remove all sealant that overlaps onto the pavement at no cost to the Department .
Base with Rigid Surface Perform this work in accordance with the applicable Sections of Part Base and Subgrade Treatments and Part Rigid Pavement. . Construct the longitudinal joint between the Portland cement concrete pavement and the Portland cement concrete shoulder in accordance with these Specifications and the details shown on the Plans .
Use materials including tie bars and joint sealant that are of the same type as the Portland cement concrete mainline pavement .
Both expansion and contraction joints shall include dowel assemblies of the same type specified for the roadway pavement . .
Tolerance in Pavement Thickness The Department will determine pavement thickness based on the average measurement of cores taken by the Contractor from each unit as defined in .. A .
Defining Units For the purpose of determining the pavement thickness and for establishing an adjusted unit price for pavement that is deficient in thickness the Department will define separate units as follows unless otherwise specified .
Placement widths of feet in length starting at the end of the pavement bearing the smaller station number will be considered separate units .
In each unit so established the Department will make thickness measurements and apply price adjustments if any as specified in .. B for pavement units on the main line and ramps except the location and spacing of cores will be as designated by the Engineer .
When the measurement of the core from a unit is within inch from the Plan thickness the Department will make full payment for the pavement in the area represented .
In calculating the average thickness of the pavement unit the Department will consider measurements that exceed the average thickness by more than inch as the specified thickness plus inch and will exclude from the average measurements that are less than the specified thickness by more than inch .
When the measurement of any core is less than the specified thickness by more than inch the Department will determine the actual thickness of the pavement in this area from additional cores taken at not less than foot intervals parallel to the centerline in each direction from the affected location until a core is found in each direction that is not deficient by more than inch .
Payment for Portland Cement Concrete Pavement of the type and thickness shown on the Plans also includes all labor equipment materials and incidentals required to construct the longitudinal joint between the pavement and either flexible or rigid shoulders and to texture the surface by forming transverse grooves .
For pavement found deficient in thickness by more than inch but not more than inch the Department will pay only the reduced price specified in .. B .
No additional payment over the contract unit bid price will be made for pavement that has an average thickness in excess of that shown on the Plans .
Where the average thickness per unit of pavement is deficient in thickness by more than inch but not .
When the thickness of pavement is deficient by more than inch and the judgment of the Engineer is that the area of such deficiency does not warrant removal and the Contractor elects not to remove the pavement there will be no payment for the area retained. . Pavement Rideability .
If the pavement being tested abuts an adjacent pavement constructed under a previous contract the profile indexes in Tables .
The Department will perform all acceptance testing and independent assurance sampling and testing in accordance with .. B. C. High Early Strength When the Plans for structural or pavement repairs or other type work require high early strength concrete the Contractor may use Type I Type IL or Type III cement .
for the method specified in .. . Manholes catchbasins inlets and pipe end walls Cement concrete sidewalks driveways and median pavement Cement concrete curb gutter and combined curb and gutter Cement concrete ditch paving Guard rail Fences Riprap slope paving Highway signing Roadway and structure lighting .
C. Class III Float Finish For unformed surfaces except slab surfaces for pavements or bases achieve a Class III finish by placing an excess of material in the form and removing or striking off the excess with a template forcing the coarse aggregate below the mortar surface .
Submit a color sample to the Engineer for approval. . Finishing Slab Surfaces for Pavements or Bases Use approved mechanical finishing machines to finish bridge floors or top slabs of structures serving as finished pavements or bases .
Finish and texture the surface of bridge approach slabs bridge decks and top slabs of other structures serving as roadway pavements by Method below except Method or may be used where shown on the Plans andor where the design speed of the roadway on which the structure is located is less than miles per hour . .
B. Smoothness Testing After the bridge decks approach slabs and roadway pavement tieins are completed the Department will conduct smoothness tests using the Rainhart Profilograph or high speed road profiler output converted to a profile index in each wheel path beginning and ending feet past each end of the bridge unless a shorter distance is specified by the Engineer or shown on the Plans .
Using a .inch blanking band the pavement roughness index for each lot shall not exceed the maximum allowable Pavement Roughness Index values specified Table .. . Table .
In addition all areas of pavement roughness index using a .inch blanking band represented by high points having deviations in excess of .
C. Corrective Action For each lot that the pavement roughness index exceeds the maximum allowable value specified in Table .
For each foot section of wheel path that the pavement roughness index exceeds .
Correct pavement roughness indexes exceeding those described above or areas failing the straightedge requirements by a method approved by the Engineer .
Remove solid residue from pavement surfaces during the grinding or grooving operation .
The Department will retest corrected surfaces with the profile testing equipment to ensure that the pavement roughness index does not exceed the minimum requirements .
Perform corrective action including grinding of bridge decks and approach slabs removal of pavement tieins resurfacing and application of sealants at no additional cost to the Department. . Loading and Opening to Traffic Do not allow any traffic heavy equipment storage of materials or other loading on a structure or any part thereof except as noted in .
Complete the roadway base and pavement up to the surface course before beginning installation of the bridge deck seal .
Ensure that the profile of the joint in the pavement area conforms to the roadway crosssection slope skew and grade .
To construct sidewalks driveways and median pavement use Class A concrete meeting the requirements of .
. . Subgrade Preparation Prepare subgrade for sidewalks driveways and median pavement to the required depth and to a width that will allow for the installation and bracing of the forms .
Expansion Joints Unless otherwise shown on the Plans or directed by the Engineer place premolded expansion joint filler inch in thickness at the locations and in line with expansion joints in the adjoining pavement gutter or curb .
Install inch thick expansion joint filler between concrete curb and median pavement and unless otherwise specified between concrete curb and sidewalk .
This expansion joint material shall extend for the full depth of the walk or median pavement . .
Carefully finish the edges of the sidewalks driveways and median pavement and round with an edging tool having a inch radius .
Place grooves in median pavement to be in line with corresponding joints in adjoining construction or as directed by the Engineer .
Place expansion joints in line with corresponding expansion joints in adjoining pavement or other construction .
The Department will not measure or make payment under this Section for curb integral with concrete pavement or concrete base unless otherwise shown on the Plans or specified in the Contract . .
Cut joint filler for expansion joints to the full depth of the ditch pavement . .
Materials To construct riprap and slope pavement provide materials that meet the following .
C. Reinforced Concrete Slope Pavement Construct reinforced concrete slope pavement of Class A concrete meeting .
Equipment Provide wooden or metal tamps of sufficient weight and number to properly compact the slopes on which the riprap or slope pavement is to be placed .
Foundation Preparation Immediately before constructing riprap or slope pavement trim the slopes or ground surface within reasonably close conformity to the lines and grades shown on the Plans or as directed by the Engineer and thoroughly compact the slopes or ground surface using hand or mechanical tamps .
Score or saw the slope pavement for a depth of inch on foot centers both ways or as directed by the Engineer .
Use a inch preformed expansion joint filler wherever the slope pavement abuts a portion of the bridge substructure .
Unless otherwise specified the Department will not measure or pay for reinforcement in slope pavement but will consider the costs thereof as included in the price bid for slope pavement .
Where concrete median barrier is installed on concrete pavement the joints in the barrier and pavement shall coincide .
Description This work consists of furnishing erecting and maintaining all construction warning signs barricades flexible drum channelizing units temporary pavement markings and other traffic control devices in accordance with the provisions of the current edition of the MUTCD including all addenda or as shown on the Plans or as directed by the Engineer for the purpose of safely directing traffic through construction zones .
Temporary Pavement Marking Material Unless otherwise specified the material for pavement marking line shall be either temporary pavement marking tape or reflectorized paint with raised reflective pavement markers placed as shown on the Plans .
Mount portable interim signs a minimum of foot above the level of the pavement edge and at the height recommended by the manufacturers crashworthy testing requirements .
Mount the bottom of all interim signs at least feet above the level of the pavement edge when the signs are used for longterm stationary operations as defined by Section G. of the MUTCD .
finish roller pavement marking etc .
These other actions shall be in addition to the deductions for nonperformance of traffic control. . Pavement Marking Removal Remove conflicting pavement markings in a manner acceptable to the Engineer to prevent confusion to vehicle operators .
Remove final surface pavement markings by sand blasting water blasting or acceptable grinding methods that will cause the least possible damage to the pavement .
Remove intermediate surface pavement markings by sand blasting or water blasting or other approved methods that will cause the least possible damage to the pavement .
The following methods are acceptable for removing intermediate surface pavement markings sand blasting using air or water high pressure water steam or superheated water or mechanical devices such as grinders sanders scrapers scarifiers and wire brushes .
At no cost to the Department repair damage to the pavement or surface resulting from pavement marking removal using methods and materials .
Do not remove an existing pavement marking by painting over with black paint or asphalt .
When the method of removal causes sand or other material to accumulate on the pavement remove the residue as the work progresses . .
Temporary Centerline and Lane Marking Unless otherwise specified install temporary pavement marking as follows .
Provide inch wide pavement marking line as shown on the Plans for projects that will have traffic maintained overnight .
For temporary pavement line markings on intermediate layers of pavement use reflective tape reflectorized paint and raised pavement markers or a combination thereof as shown on the Plans or as required by the Engineer and install to permanent standards before dark hours .
Preserve established nopassing zones if any on the existing pavement if nopassing zones have not previously been established establish them before beginning the work .
Maintain pavement markings at no additional cost to the Department until they are covered by the subsequent paving course or the Project is accepted . .
It will not be necessary to remove pavement markings except for markings that convey conflicting or incorrect information to the traveling public .
Temporary pavement marking line as described for Painted Pavement Marking Line in .
regardless of whether the lines are painted taped markings or raised pavement markers or a combination of the above as shown on the Plans or as required by the Engineer except that Removable Pavement Marking Line will be measured by the linear foot of installed line . .
Unless otherwise specified the Department will not separately measure or pay for traffic cones removal of pavement marking and flaggers as these items will be considered incidental to the lump sum item Traffic Control .
Basis of Payment The Department will pay for accepted quantities complete in place at the contract prices as follows Item Pay Unit Traffic Control Lump Sum Portable Barrier Rail Linear Feet Portable Impact Attenuator Each Signs Square Feet Vertical Panels Square Feet Flexible Drums Each Temporary Barricades Type Linear Feet Removable Pavement Marking Description Linear Feet The lump sum payment for Traffic Control is full compensation for providing Temporary Workzone Lighting and all equipment labor and materials and for furnishing flaggers and traffic cones and for removing conflicting and incorrect pavement markings as required until Project completion .
Unless shown on the Plans do not excavate trenches in existing pavement or surfaced shoulders to install conduit .
If it is necessary to place a conduit under an existing pavement install the conduit by jacking or other approved means with galvanized rigid steel conduit or schedule PVC conduit .
When the Plans specifically allow excavation of a trench through an existing pavement or surfaced shoulder restore the pavement andor surface and base to their original condition .
Extend the encasement of conduit under roadway pavements or surfaces to the outer edges of the surfaced or paved shoulders or foot beyond the outer edge of the sidewalk or foot beyond the outer edge of the curb when no shoulder or sidewalk is indicated .
If it is necessary to install a cable under an existing pavement or surfaced shoulder install conduit when specified in accordance with the applicable provisions of .
The removal and satisfactory disposal of existing pavement surface and base required to install conduit and for restoring the base pavement and surface to their original condition . .
When the curb is to be placed on an existing pavement thoroughly clean the area receiving the curb of all dirt and other objectionable matter .
No side forms will be required for machine placed curb but where the curb is laid on an existing pavement that does not have a smooth grade the Engineer may require use of a x inch angle iron or other approved apparatus as a track so that the finished curb will have a smooth and true line and grade .
Where the curb is to abut an existing structurewall or is placed at the extreme edge of pavement use a machine that is capable of placing the curb within inch of the structurewall or pavement edge .
Description This work consists of furnishing and supplying pavement markings in accordance with these Specifications and the latest revision of the MUTCD including establishing and locating nonpassing zones as well as providing the layout of paint striping preformed plastic pavement markings raised reflective pavement markers snowplowable reflective pavement markers and thermoplastic pavement markings .
Plastic pavement markings may be either preformed or thermoplastic unless otherwise specified .
Thermoplastic Pavement Marking Furnish and apply thermoplastic pavement marking material meeting .
by the screed extrusion or ribbon dispenser methods or spray thermoplastic pavement marking material meeting .. As an alternate the Contractor may apply preformed thermoplastic marking material for stop bars cross walks legends or directional arrows .
inches and be fused to the pavement by the heat of a torch .
Apply the material to the pavement by either the screed extrusion method or the ribbon dispenser method .
Before beginning application ensure that the pavement temperature is a minimum of F and rising .
Suspend application if the pavement temperature falls below F. Thoroughly clean all surfaces to be marked of all dust dirt grease oil and all other foreign matter before applying the striping .
The pavement marking material when formed into traffic stripes shall be readily renewable by placing an overlay of new material directly over old markings of the same material .
Offset longitudinal lines at least inches from longitudinal joints of Portland cement concrete pavements .
To ensure optimum adhesion of thermoplastic applied on all Portland cement concrete pavements apply a bindersealer material as recommended by the thermoplastic manufacturer .
Regardless of the application methods and procedures or pavement types replace all pavement markings that fail to comply with these Specifications or fail to adhere to the pavement for one year after installation at no cost to the Department. . b. Spray Thermoplastic Marking .
Before applying the pavementmarking material remove all dirt glaze grease and all other material that would reduce the adhesion of the paint to the pavement .
The bindersealer material shall form when applied with conventional mobile paint spraying equipment a continuous film over the pavement surface that will dry rapidly and adhere to the pavement surface .
Include all costs including materials associated with application of the binder sealer in the unit bid price for the spray thermoplastic pavement markings .
Install the pavementmarking material in a molten state by the spray method at a minimum temperature of F and a maximum temperature of F. Scorching or discoloration of material is cause for rejection by the Engineer .
Do not apply the pavementmarking materials when air and pavement surface temperatures are below F or when the surface of the pavement contains evidence of moisture .
When the plans specify mil markings apply the pavement marking material at a thickness of not less than .
inch. . Place the pavementmarkings with adequate dropon glass spheres in accordance with the above requirements uniformly applied to ensure adequate nighttime reflectivity .
Do not allow traffic onto or allow vehicles to cross newly applied pavement markings until they are sufficiently dry .
Remove and replace portions of the pavement markings damaged by passing traffic or from any other cause at no additional cost to the Department. . Raised Reflective Pavement Markers To bond markers to the pavement use an epoxy listed on the Departments QPL and that is approved by the marker manufacturer or a hot bituminous adhesive conforming to the requirements specified below .
Do not install markers over joints in rigid pavements. . Furnish pavement markers of a type listed on the Departments QPL .
Install the markers when the pavement is dry and the pavement temperature is no less than F. Clean the portion of the highway surface to which the marker is to be bonded by the adhesive of all dirt curing compound grease oil moisture loose or unsound layers paint and all other material that would adversely affect the bond of the adhesive .
Perform cleaning by blast cleaning on Portland cement concrete and old bituminous pavements .
Blast clean new bituminous pavement where in the Engineers judgment the surface contains an abnormal amount of asphalt or the surface is contaminated with dirt grease paint oil or other material that would adversely affect the bond of the adhesive .
Heat the adhesive to between and F and apply it directly to the pavement surface from the melterapplicator by either pumping or pouring .
Remove excessive adhesive squeeze out from the pavement and immediately remove adhesive on the exposed surfaces of the markers .
Remove adhesive from exposed faces of pavement markers according to manufacturers recommendations .
Remove all solvent from the equipment tanks and lines before the next use of the melter. . Snowplowable Reflective Pavement Marker Contour the pavement at each snowplowable marker location to match the bottom of the marker casting .
Accompany each shipment of adhesive with a written statement from the adhesive manufacturer certifying that the material furnished conforms to the recommendations of the marker manufacturer and stating the minimum temperature at which the adhesive can be satisfactorily mixed and applied. . Preformed Plastic Pavement Markings Apply preformed plastic pavement markings on clean dry surfaces free of dirt and foreign matter .
Only apply markings when the pavement temperature is at least F. Should the plastic require activators for the adhesive or various special coatings for different pavement surfaces include the cost of the activator or special coatings in the unit price of plastic .
Furnish with each package of reflectorized pavement marking materials complete instructions and specifications for applying pavement marking materials to pavement surface .
Install the reflectorized pavement marking materials according to the vendors specifications .
Use an adhesion promoting primer when recommended by the pavement marking manufacturer .
Establish guides to mark the lateral location of pavement markings as shown on the Plans or as directed by the Engineer .
Application of Painted Pavement Markings Apply paint with a spraytype machine capable of satisfactorily applying the paint under pressure through a nozzle that sprays directly upon the pavement at a rate not to exceed feet per minute .
Air blast device for cleaning the pavement ahead of the painting operation .
For the following operations the Engineer will not require large automatic spray application machinery meeting the preceding requirements provided the Contractor selects pavement marking equipment capable of producing a uniform acceptable finished product consistent with the Plans and Specifications .
Installation of temporary pavement markings . .
Installation of permanent pavement markings on projects having a total length of feet or less . .
Installation of permanent pavement markings on an individual project segment having a total length of feet or less on an intermittent project .
Clean the pavement surface before placing any pavement marking material .
Locate and place temporary markings on final pavement surfaces so as to underlie or coincide with the permanent pavement markings .
Do not apply any paint to areas of pavement when moisture remains on the surface or when wind conditions may cause a film of dust to be deposited on the line areas after these areas have been prepared for painting .
Apply paint to appear as clearly delineated lines with minimal crookedness and waviness giving due consideration to the contours and roughness of the pavement .
Removal of Painted Markings Remove painted pavement markings where specified or directed by the Engineer .
Do not remove existing painted pavement markings by painting over them with black paint or asphalt .
When the method of removal causes sand or other material to accumulate on the pavement remove the residue as the work progresses .
Remove painted markings by methods that cause the least possible damage to the pavement .
Repair damage to the pavement or surface caused by pavement marking removal as directed by the Engineer and at no cost to the Department .
G. Raised Reflective Pavement Markers and Snowplowable Reflective Pavement Markers The Department will count the number of each type of pavement markers installed as directed and accepted .
Adhesives will be considered incidental to the installation of raised reflective pavement markers and snowplowable reflective pavement markers . .
As an exception to the above where the Work covered by the Contract is limited exclusively to the resurfacing of an existing pavement including projects involving the milling off of a portion of the existing pavement prior to the laying down of new asphalt cement concrete layers the Department will pay the entire lump sum price for the item of Mobilization less the retainage provided for in Title TCA with the first partial pay estimate paid on the Contract provided the amount bid for Mobilization does not exceed of the total amount bid for the Contract .
At the end of each days work and at all other times when construction operations are suspended remove all equipment and other obstructions from that portion of the roadway used by public traffic and park a minimum of feet from the edge of pavement unless otherwise protected by guardrail bridge rail or barriers installed for other purposes .
Removing and Replacing Improvements Replace or reconstruct with the same kind of materials as found on the Work improvements such as sidewalks curbs gutters Portland cement concrete and asphalt concrete pavement bituminous surfacing base material and all other improvements removed broken or damaged by the Contractor .
Before removing the sidewalk and pavement material use an abrasive type saw to cut to a minimum depth of inches the outline of all areas to be removed in Portland cement concrete sidewalks and in all pavements .
Set covers level with the pavement or with the curb or sidewalk grade or with the surrounding ground as required .
Lay conduits to a depth of inches below subgrade but not less than inches below pavement grade except when approved by the Engineer conduit may be laid at a depth of not less than inches below top of curb when placed in back of the curb .
Place steel conduit or Schedule PVC conduit under existing pavements by approved jacking or drilling methods .
Do not disturb pavements without the Engineers approval .
Conduct a functional test to demonstrate that each part of the system functions as specified or intended herein. . Test all detector loops and leads before and after they are sealed in the pavement to ensure there are no shorts to ground in the system and to ensure that the loop plus leadin inductance is within the operating range of the detector .
Make the holes vertical regardless of the slope or grade of the pavement surface . .
The Department will measure saw slot for detection loop leads from the conduit entry at the face of curb or edge of pavement and along the route of the leadin to the detection loop .
Total payment is full compensation for all materials labor equipment and incidentals necessary to produce a completely operative and finished installation of a traffic signal or traffic signal system as shown on the Plans and as specified herein including restoration of pavements sidewalks and appurtenances damaged or destroyed during construction and tests .
For Portland cement concrete base and pavement furnish coarse aggregate in two sizes Size No .
manufactured within the specified limits of .. Coarse aggregate in Portland cement concrete pavements for finished riding surfaces of travel lanes including mainline pavements and ramps shall consist of Size No . .
Aggregate for Mineral Aggregate Base and Surface Courses Provide crushed stone crushed slag crushed or uncrushed gravel or crushed or uncrushed chert that may be blended with crushed recycled concrete or screened reclaimed asphalt pavement RAP together with material such as manufactured sand or other fine materials that are either naturally contained or added as needed to conform to these Specifications .
The Contractor may use recycled concrete aggregate or reclaimed asphalt pavement at a maximum rate of by weight for Type A aggregate provided the combined aggregate blend meets all the requirements specified below .
The Contractor may use recycled concrete aggregate or reclaimed asphalt pavement at a maximum rate of by weight for Type B . aggregate provided the combined aggregate blend meets all the requirements specified below .
Aggregate for AggregateCement Base Course Provide coarse aggregate composed of sound tough durable fragments of crushed stone crushed slag crushed or uncrushed gravel or crushed or uncrushed chert which may be blended with crushed recycled concrete or screened reclaimed asphalt pavement RAP and fine aggregate composed of natural or manufactured sand and siltclay or other finely divided mineral matter .
The Contractor may use recycled concrete aggregate or reclaimed asphalt pavement RAP at a maximum rate of by weight provided the combined aggregate blend meets all the requirements specified above .
B. Sealing Longitudinal and Transverse Joints and Random Cracks in PCC Pavement To seal longitudinal and transverse joints and random cracks in Portland cement concrete pavement use one of the following materials as shown on the Plans .
Hot poured elastic type sealant meeting the requirements of .. A. . Silicone sealant having a low modulus silicone that is specially manufactured to seal Portland cement concrete pavements joints .
General Requirements Provide pigmented binder formulated to allow for application by spray equipment when heated to F maximum and applied on bituminous or Portland cement concrete pavements .
For pavement markings use beads that are clear transparent colorless glass smooth and spherically shaped free of milkiness pits or excessive air bubbles and that conform to the requirements specified herein .
F in accordance with ASTM D. f. Drying Time Field The paint shall dry to a notracking condition in minutes when applied at mil wet film thickness with a bead application rate of pound per gallon of glass spheres per gallon of binder when the pavement temperature is between and F and the relative humidity is not exceeding .
Composition Provide retroreflective pavement marking material of an alkydmaleic based thermoplastic material consisting of homogeneously mixed pigments filler resins and glass beads .
The thermoplastic material shall be readily applicable at temperatures between F and F from the approved equipment to produce lines and symbols of the specified thickness above the pavement surface. . B .
Provide retroreflective pavement marking material that meets the requirements specified in .
with the following exceptions a. Spray thermoplastic pavement marking material shall conform to the requirements specified in Table .. Table .
Use drop on glass beads that may be applied at the specified application rates and that are capable of flowing freely through dispensing equipment in any weather suitable for pavement marking application .
d. The maximum elapsed time after application at which normal traffic will leave no impression or imprint on the new stripe shall be seconds when the air and road surface temperature is approximately F F. e. The applied stripe shall remain free from tack and shall not lift from the pavement under normal traffic conditions within a road temperature range of to F. f. The stripe shall maintain its original dimensions and placement .
The container of pavementmarking material shall weigh approximately pounds .
. . Preformed Plastic Pavement Marking Materials Provide preformed plastic pavement marking material selected from the Departments QPL. . Raised Reflective Pavement Markers Provide raised reflective pavement markers listed on the Departments QPL and classified as follows Type OneColor Reflective Markers Twoway Traffic Type OneColor Reflective Markers OneWay Traffic Type TwoColor Reflective Markers Oneway Traffic .
Index INDEX Abbreviations Accelerators for concrete Acceptance Final Project Addendum definition of Additives Antistrip for asphalt Concrete Silicone for asphalt Warm mix asphalt Adjusted guardrail Admixtures Airentraining Portland Cement Concrete Advertisement definition of Aggregate Application double surface treatment Asphalt treated permeable base for aggregatecement base course for asphaltic concrete surface courses hot mix for bituminous plant mix surface course cold mix for concrete for concrete for double bituminous surface treatment for hot bituminous seal coat for lean concrete base for lightweight concrete for mineral aggregate base and surface course for mortar for plant mix base and leveling courses hot mix for Riding Surfaces for sandasphalt surface course for slurry seal and microsurface for underdrains Mineral aggregate base course Sizes Stockpiling Index Test methods Aggregate underdrains Aggregatecement base course Agricultural limestone Air content Airentraining admixtures Altered Items Altered Quantities Aluminum for signs Amendment definition of Ammonium nitrate Anchor bolts Sign support Traffic signal Anchorages Posttensioned steel Posttensioned Tendons PostTensioned Tendons Angles connections Annealing Application temperature bituminous seal coat Applied textured finish for concrete Arch rings stone masonry Artifacts Asphalt Acceptance of asphalt mix Aggregate feed Batch plants Continuous mix plants Contractor Quality Control Hauling equipment Heating Material transfer device Mix composition Mixer Mixing time Pavement samples Pavers Preparation of aggregate Preparation of asphalt cement Rollers Silos or surge bins Storage Index Storage bins or silos Surge system Testing Thermometer Warm mix Asphalt cement Asphalt Concrete Surface Asphalt curb machine Asphalt Paving Mixing Surface preparation Surface requirements Temperature limitations Asphalt Plant Aggregate bins Aggregate control Aggregate feed Bituminous control Dryer Dryer drum Dryer feeder Dust collector Field Laboratory Plant requirements Safety requirements Scales Screens Storage system requirements Surge system requirements Thermometer Warm mix modifications Weigh box or hopper Asphaltic concrete curb hot mix Authority of Inspectors of the Engineer Automatic controls asphalt screed Award Cancellation of Contract Award Definition of Back walls Brick masonry Index Stone masonry Backfill Flowable fill Major structures Material Barbed wire Barricades Bars for posttensioning Bars lacing Base Course AggregateCement Definition of Mineral aggregate Batching concrete Bearing pads elastomeric Bearing plates bronze Bents timber structures Bid opening Bid Schedule Bidder definition of Bituminous cold mix Bituminous material Bituminous mixing plant Bituminous plant mix base Bituminous plant mix pavements Bituminous plant mix surface cold mix Bituminous seal coat Blasting Bolt holes for signs for steel structures Bolts Connections for steel structures High strength High strength connections Ribbed Testing Timber structures Turned Unfinished Bond contract definition of Borrow Excavation Borrow material Index Borrow Pits Box Bridge definition of Box Culverts Backfilling Excavation Foundation preparation Box section precast concrete Braces stock fence Bracket arms for light standards Brick laying Brick masonry Bricks Clay or shale Concrete Sewer Bridge deck sealant Application Weather limitations Bridge expansion joint systems Bridge railing Bridge seats Brick masonry Stone masonry Bridge definition of Bridges Backfilling Excavation Foundation preparation Removal Building brick Buildings removal Buried ground wire Burlap Cable Identification Markers Underground Calcium chloride Calendar Day Calibration asphalt aggregate Camber Care of sod Cast iron pipe Index Cast steel Castings Gray iron Malleable Castings and fittings Castinplace concrete piles Catchbasins Cement Bulk Hydraulic Portland Storage Cement Application Aggregate cement Soil cement Cement concrete ditch paving Cement concrete sidewalks driveways and median pavement Chain link fence Fittings and hardware Gates Top rail Change Directive Change Order definition of Changes Differing Site Conditions Eliminated Items Extra Work Notification by Contractor Significant Changes in the Character of Work Suspensions Channel Excavation Chemical additives Claims Against the Department Appeal Process Claim Certification Department Decision Informal Claim Meeting Submission of Classification Riprap Stone masonry Clay or shale bricks Index Clay pipe Cleanup final Coal rights to Coarse aggregate for asphalt surface hot mix for concrete for plant mix base and leveling course Codes electrical Cofferdams Cold mix bituminous Column supports cantilever signs Combined aggregate grading Combined grading for asphalt surface hot mix Commissioner Compaction Aggregate cement base AggregateLimeFly Ash Base Course Asphalt paving Cold mix Conditioning aggregate base Mineral aggregate base Mineral aggregate surface Soil cement Compensable Delay Costs Completion Time Composition Asphalt curb Asphalt mixes Asphalt surface Cold mix Concrete Air tests Bedding material Classification Consolidation Curing Defective Drum mixing speed Finishing Forms Heated Joints Mixing Index Mixing limitations Mixing time Mobile mixer Placement Proportioning Protection Quality Assurance Reinforcement Reinforcement placement Retempering Slip forming temperature Temperature Test specimens Trucks Under water Vibrating Concrete curing compound Concrete masonry units Concrete median barrier Concrete parapet Concrete Pavement Acceptance testing Batching plant Concrete batching Conditioning base Consolidation of concrete Construction joints Construction of base Curing Final concrete finish Final strikeoff Finishing Floating Forms Hand finishing Joints Machine finishing Materials handling Mixers Pay factors Proportioning Quality control Index Setting forms Spreading and finishing equipment Subgrade preparation Surface testing Thickness Vibrators Concrete pipe Nonreinforced Reinforced Concrete Plant Bins Hoppers Scales Concrete Structures Conditioning mineral aggregate base Conductors Conduit Backfilling Direct burial Encased Metallic Nonmetallic rigid On structures Steel fittings Testing Trenches Conformity with Plans and Specifications Connection angles Construction change Construction Joints Contract Award See Award Default Definition of Execution Failure to Execute Intent of Payment and Performance Bond Subletting Termination Contract Change See Changes Contractor Definition of Index Duties of Legal Responsibilities Responsibilities for Work Control cabinets Control center Control strips asphalt paving Controllers Cooperation Between Contractors with Utilities Railroads and Pipelines Coordination of Plans and Specifications Copings Brick masonry Stone masonry Copper sheet for flashing Corner posts stock fence Corrugated metal pipe Countersinking timber structures Cribs Critical Path Critical Path Method Cultivating landscape Culvert Excavation Removal Curb Concrete base Removal Curb and gutter Curb machine asphalt Curing Aggregate cement base AggregateLimeFly Ash Base Course Asphalt curb Concrete Concrete curb and gutter Ditch paving Double surface treatment Polymer modified concrete Sidewalk median pavement and driveways Soil cement Steam method Curing compound concrete Index Current test Curving steel beams and girders Cut Slopes Cutting metal for signs Dampproofing materials Date completion definition of Day calendar definition of Defective concrete Defective Material Definitions Delays Compensable Delay Costs Concurrent Excusable Compensable Excusable NonCompensable Liquidated Damages Delineators Density Aggregate cement base Asphalt pavement Conditioning mineral aggregate base Embankment Soil cement Department definition of Detectors traffic signal Detour definition of Differing Site Conditions Disadvantaged Business Enterprise definition of Disposal of debris Disputes See Claims Distributor bituminous material Ditches Double surface treatment Surface preparation Dowels Drag wire Drain tile Drainage Structures removal Dressing Driveways concrete Driving Piles Drum speed concrete mixer Drums temporary traffic control Index Ducts Dust Control Early entry sawing Earth for curing concrete Edging at forms and concrete joints Elastomeric bearing pads Electrical codes Eliminated Items Embankment Compaction Formation of Preparation for Stability of Emulsified Asphalt Application double surface treatment End walls pipe Engineer Authority of Definition of Entrained air Environmental Protection Equipment Alternative Equipment Definition of Movement of Operation of Erection Fence Guardrail Monuments and markers Steel Erosion Control Erosion control blanket Establishment of plants Establishment of sod Examination of the Site Excavation Borrow Box Culvert Bridges Channel Classification Dry excavation bridges Index Major structures Pipe Pipe Culvert Protection of Road and drainage Rock excavation bridges Sewer Shaping and dressing Slides Unsuitable material Use of excavated material Wet excavation bridges Excess Material Expansion joints Driveways Median pavement Sidewalks Explosives Extra work Eyebars Fabric for stock fence Fabrication of signs Fabrication steel structures Falsework Falsework Removal Federal Aid Provisions Fence Chain link Erection Gates Posts Stock Fertilizer Field connections Structural Steel Field laboratory Asphalt plant Field Offices Filter cloth Filter cloth underdrains Final Acceptance Final Payment Fine aggregate for asphalt surface hot mix Index for concrete for mortar for plant mix base and leveling course hot mix Finishing Aggregate cement base AggregateLimeFly Ash Base Course Asphalt mixes Concrete base Concrete median barrier Concrete curb and gutter Ditch paving Driveways Median pavement Sidewalk Soil cement Fittings chain link fence Flaggers Flashing Arrow Board Flashing school signals Flashing copper sheet Flexible Delineator Posts Flocculants Flowable Fill Fly ash Fog Sealing Force Account Force account definition of Force working for cast in place prestress concrete Forgings steel Forms Concrete Ditch paving Driveways Median pavement Metal concrete forms Permanent bridge deck forms Removal Sidewalks Surface treatment Foundation fill material Foundation preparation Monuments and markers Pipe Index Riprap Sewer Foundations Light standards Sign supports Gates Fence Water Geosynthetics Geotextile Grade control automatic Grass seed Gray iron castings Ground cover planting Ground Granulated Blast Furnace Slag Grounding material Grounding resistance test Grout Grouting Cast in place tendon duct Precast prestressed concrete Guardrail Adjusted Adjustment Dismantling Hardware Metal Post installation Posts Removal Reset Timber Guy wires for light standards Guying trees Hammers Calibration tests Diesel for concrete piles for steel piles for steel shells for timber piles Gravity Hardware guardrail Index Hay for curing concrete HazardousToxic Waste Heated concrete Hemp gaskets High early strength concrete High mast light standards High Strength Bolts Highmast light standards Highway signing Highway definition of Holes Accuracy of punched and drilled holes steel structures Accuracy of Reamed and Drilled Holes Drifting steel structures Drilled for steel structures Punched for steel structures Reamed or drilled Holidays definition of Hydrated lime Hydraulic cement HydroDemolitionBlasting Inlet pipes Inoculants for legumes Inspection Reinspection Source or Plant Inspection of plants Inspector definition of Inspectors Authority and Duties of Duties of Instructions to bidders definition of Inverts Joining pipe Joint fillers preformed Joint materials Joint mortar Joint sealants Joints Abutting steel structures Aggregate cement base AggregateLimeFly Ash Base Course Asphalt paving Index Concrete Concrete median barrier Concrete pavement Construction Ditch paving Expansion Finishing Inserts longitudinal Sawed Sealing Sewer Soil cement Transverse Jute mesh application Laboratory definition of Lacing bars Lamps Landscape planting Landscape planting season Lane closure restrictions Laws Laying brick Laying pipe Lead pig Legal Rights Waiver of Letter of Credit definition of Leveling concrete Liability Insurance Liability of Public Officials Licenses Light standards Lighting Lighting assembly strength test Lighting materials Lime Stabilization Application of lime Compaction and finishing Curing Extra depth stabilization Final mixing Mixing and mellowing Preparation of existing surface Index Lime Treatment Lime hydrated Liquidated Damages Litter Load Restrictions Longitudinal Joints Loss on ignition test bituminous material Luminaires Machined riprap Maintenance Aggregate cement base Bituminous seal coat Cold mix During Construction Mineral aggregate base Prime coat Soil cement Traffic Major and Minor Items definition of Major Structures Backfilling Excavation Foundation preparation Malleable castings Manhole steps Manholes Manholes catchbasins inlets and pipe endwalls Markers Markers cable Marking steel Masonry mortar Masonry stone Masonry units concrete Match marking steel structures Material Defective Quality of Material Guaranty Material Transfer Devices MTD Materials Definition of Certification Handling Index Information Local Sources Notice of Arrival Notice of Source Right to Materials Found on the Project Sampling Testing and Inspection Storage Measurement Mechanical mixer aggregate cement base Median barrier concrete Median pavement Metal beam rail Metallic conduit Metallic pipe MicroSurfacing Mineral Aggregate Base Mineral aggregate surface Mineral filler Miscellaneous materials Mixer Asphalt Mineral aggregate base Polymer modified concrete Mixing Aggregate cement base Asphalt paving Asphalt surface Cold mix Concrete Concrete curb and gutter Lime Fly Ash Aggregate Mix Mineral aggregate base Paint Polymer modified concrete Soil cement Mixing plant Aggregate cement base Mixing time concrete Mobilization of forces supplies and equipment Modified Class A concrete Moisture susceptibility test bituminous material Moisture embankment Monuments Mortar masonry Index Mowing Mulch Mulching Night Work Lighting Nonmetallic pipe Nonmetallic rigid conduit Nonreinforced concrete pipe Notice to contractors definition of Nut rotation steel structures Oakum gaskets Obstruction removal Opening to traffic Concrete pavement Concrete structures Outlet pipes Overhead sign supports Overhead wire installation Packaging signs Paint Application for pavement marking for signs for steel structures Mixing Storage Paint primer inorganic zinc silicate Paint system for steel structures Painting Application of paint Field painting Metal Pipe drains Protection of traffic from paint Repainting existing steel structures Shop painting Steel piles Steel shells Structural Steel Surface preparation Timber structures Parapet concrete Partial Completion Partial Payment Index Patents Pavement Removal Restoration Pavement markers Pavement marking Painted Removal Temporary Thermoplastic Pavement structure definition of Pavers asphalt mix Pay item definition of Payment Altered Quantities Compensable Delay Costs Eliminated Items Extra Work Final Payment NonRecoverable Costs Partial Payment Scope of Stockpiled Materials Payment and Performance Bond Payrolls Perforated concrete pipe Performance tests lighting Performance promptness of Period of establishment landscape Permits Navigable Waters Pest Control Photoelectric relay Pig lead Pile drivers Piles Bearing value Castinplace Conditioning treated timber piles Cutoffs Driving Extensions Handling Index Load tests Order list Penetration Precast splices Storage Structural steel Test piles Timber Treated Timber Untreated timber Piling Classification Pin Clearances Pin connections Pin Holes Pins and Rollers Pipe Bedding material Bridge railing Cast iron Clay Metallic Nonmetallic Removal Removed and relaid Steel Vitrified clay Pipe connections sewer Pipe Culverts Backfilling Excavation Foundation preparation Pipe culverts and storm sewers Pipe drains Pipe end walls Pipe laying Culverts and Storm Sewers Sewer Pipe removal Pipe underdrains Placing Asphalt curb Index Concrete curb and gutter Plans Conformity with Coordination Definition of Plant Establishment Planting season Plants Ball and burlap Container grown Final acceptance Grades Health Inspection Names Quality Replacement Storage and heelingin Plastic pavement marking cold applied Plastic tubing Plate cut edges Plates Bent Web Pointing stone masonry PolishResistant Aggregates Pollution Control Air SWPPP Water Polymer modified concrete Curing Placing Consolidating Finishing Reconstruction Texturing Portable Barrier Rail Portable Impact Attenuators Portland cement concrete base Portland Cement Concrete Pavement See Concrete Pavement Post installation guardrail Posts Guardrail Signs Index Stock fence Posttensioned prestressed cast in place concrete Posttensioning precast concrete Precast concrete box sections Precast concrete piles Precastprestressed concrete Precoated galvanized pipe Preconstruction Conference Preformed joint fillers Preformed plastic pavement markers Prequalification Prequalification definition of Presplitting Prestressing methods Prestressing cast in place concrete Pretensioning precast concrete Prime coat Application of prime Cover material Surface preparation Project Sign Project acceptance of Project definition of Proportioning Concrete pavement LimeFly AshAggregate Mix Polymer modified concrete Portland cement concrete base Precast concrete Proposal Consideration of Delivery of Preparation of Public opening Rejection of Withdrawal of Proposal form definition of Proposal Forms Proposal guaranties Return Proposal guaranty definition of Proposal definition of Protection Asphalt curb Index Bituminous seal coat Concrete Concrete curb and gutter Concrete pavement Ditch paving Forest HazardousToxic Waste Lakes Reservoirs Prime coat Prestressing steel Seeding Sidewalk median pavement and driveways Streams Traffic from paint Waterproofing Pruning shrubs Pruning trees Public Convenience Pugmill Pull boxes Pulverizing soil cement Punched holes QPL definition of Quantities Railroads cooperation with Rainhart Profilograph Raised pavement markers Reamed Holes Reconstruction soil cement Recycled Asphalt Pavement Recycled Asphalt Shingles Reflective pavement markers Reflective sheeting Application for signs Reflectorization of signs Reinforced concrete pipe Reinforcement for prestressing Reinforcing bar for concrete structures Splicing Substitution Index Relaying pipe Relays Removal of guardrail Removal of pavement marking Repainting steel structures Reset guardrail Restoration Retarder for concrete Rideability RightofWay Riprap Classification Machined Riprap and slope pavement Road definition of Roadbed definition of Roadside development definition of Roadside Maintenance Roadside definition of Roadway and structure lighting Roadway definition of Rock Cuts Rock Drilling bridges Rollers asphalt Rolling Bituminous seal coat Double surface treatment Roughness Index Rubber gaskets Rust inhibitor prestressing steel Safety Employee Health and Safety Program Public Sampling Asphalt mix Resampling Sandbag Berms and Channel Plugs Sanitary Provisions Sanitary sewers Sawed joints Scales Asphalt Schedule Critical Path Method Index Screed asphalt Sealants Bridge deck Joint Sealing joints Seasonal limitations Seed grass Seedbed Seeding Seeding repair Seedling planting Select material for soilcement Service connection Service poles Sewer brick Sewer joints Shaping Mineral aggregate base Shells steel Shipping steel Shop assembling steel structures Shop Drawings Shop inspection Shop painting signs Shotcrete Preconstruction Test Panels Production Test Panels Proportioning Quality Control and Acceptance Test Panel Curing and Testing Shoulder Shoulder definition of Shrub Planting Pruning Setting Sidewalk Concrete Removal Sign posts Sign support foundation Signal heads Signing Index Signing materials Signs Accessories Borders Fabrication Flat sheet signs Legends Multiple panel signs Paint Silicone additive Silk screening signs Silting Slope pavement Slope paving Slump Slump precastprestressed concrete Slurry Seal Snowplowable reflective pavement markers Sod Care Establishment Material Placement Removing and storing for resetting Repair Weather limitations Sodium chloride Soil Cement Base Special provisions definition of Specifications Conformity with Coordination Definition of Spiking timber structures Splices electrical conductor Splicing material for light wire Spread footings Spreading Aggregate bituminous seal coat AggregateLimeFly Ash Base Course Asphalt mixes Cement aggregatecement base Cement soil cement base Index Mineral aggregate base Stability embankments Stakes Stakes Lines and Grades Standard Specifications definition of Staples State definition of Station Steam curing concrete Steel Cast Corrosion resistant for signs Forgings Pipes Shells Stainless for signs Steel plate for cold working Steel Structures Assembling Erection Fabrication Full size test of steel members Identification Misfits Shop assembling Steps manhole Stiffeners Stock fence Stockpile payment Stockpiled Materials Stockpiling aggregate Stone Masonry Arch rings Back walls Bridge seats Classification Copings Pointing Stone laying Top walls Storm sewers Straightedge testing Concrete pavement Index Strand cable Straw for curing concrete Street definition of Stress Relieving Stress transfer Stressing requirements precastprestressed concrete Stringers timber structures Stripping test bituminous material Structural removal Structural steel Structural steel bridge railing Structural steel piles Structural timber Structure Excavation Structure excavation for pipes Structures Concrete Minor Steel Stumps Subcontractor definition of Subgrade Checking Compaction Construction and preparation Drainage and protection Preparation soil cement Treatment lime Subgrade preparation Curb and gutter Ditch paving Driveways Median pavement Sidewalks Subgrade definition of Substructure definition of Superintendent definition of Superstructure definition of Supplemental Specification definition of Supports Overhead signs Traffic signal Surety definition of Index Surface preparation Asphalt concrete Double surface treatment for paint Prime coat Signs Slurry seal and microsurfacing Tack coat Waterproofing Surface requirements Asphalt base Asphalt paving Asphalt surface Cold mix Mineral aggregate base Surface tolerance Aggregate cement base Concrete base Survey Suspending pipe drains Suspension temporary Suspensions Swampy areas Switches Tack coat Application Surface preparation Taxes Temperature Asphalt Bituminous material double surface treatment Tack coat Temporary pavement marking Temporary structures Temporary supports for structural steel Temporary traffic control Temporary traffic control plan Tendons prestressing Tension wire chain link fence Termination Convenience Default Without Fault Index Terms See Definitions Test piles Testing Field Laboratory Retesting Texture coat for concrete Thermoplastic pavement marking Thickness Aggregate cement base AggregateLimeFly Ash Base Course Asphalt base Concrete base Mineral aggregate surface Soil cement Threads for bolts and pins Tie bars Tile drain Timber Grades Piles Rail Untreated Timber protection Timber Structures Concrete pedestals Erection Flooring Framing Mud sills Painting Posts for bents Sills Stringers Time contract definition of Time project completion Tolerance Concrete base Concrete pavement thickness Precastprestressed bridge units Soil cement Ton Top rail chain link fence Tops of walls Index Brick masonry Stone masonry Topsoil for landscape plants Stripping stockpiling and placing Traffic Aggregate cement base On soil cement Opening Sections of a Project to Traffic Actuated Controllers Traffic cones Traffic signal coordination Traffic signal supports Traffic signals Transfer of stress Transformer base Transverse Joints Treated Permeable Base Treated timber Tree Planting Pruning Setting Staking Wrapping Trees removed Tremie Trimming Truck Scales Truss rods chain link fence Turnbuckle chain link fence Unacceptable Work Unauthorized Work Undercutting Underdrains Aggregate Aggregate with pipe Filtercloth Underground cable Underground Storage Tanks Underwater concrete Unsuitable Material Unsuitable Soil Index Untreated timber Utilities cooperation with Value Engineering Change Proposal Vibrating concrete Vitrified clay pipe Voltage test Warm Mix Asphalt Process Equipment Washers for timber structures Water for concrete Water crossings Water for curing concrete Water gates Water reducer high range for concrete accelerator for concrete for concrete retarder for concrete Water Well Abandonment Watering landscape Waterproofing Waterstops Waterstops Watertightness sanitary sewers Weather limitations sod Web plates Weep holes Weighing of steel members Welded wire reinforcement Welds Wheel Guards Wire assemblies for posttensioning Wire installation overhead Wire strand seven wire for prestressed concrete Wire ties chain link fence Wire Barbed Wiring Wood light poles Work Methods Work Order Work definition of Work extra definition of Index Workers Working days Working Days Working drawing definition of Working Drawings Wrapping trees Yard lumber Zinc inorganic paint system
