Contractors may submit value engineering proposals that propose changes in the basic design of a bridge or a pavement except for pavement and shoulder type .
When it is to the advantage of the Commission projects involving pavement may be opened to traffic as soon as the surface has been sufficiently cured even though the shoulders and other items of work may not be completed .
The contractors movement of equipment and vehicles over bridges and pavements within the limits of the project will be subject to the load limit regulations for highways as prescribed by state statutes in effect when the movement occurs and the contractor shall acquire special permits from the Commission prior to the movement of any such equipment or vehicles with a gross weight in excess of the load limits permitted by statute .
Special permits will not be required for the movement of construction equipment over any part of a bridge or pavement that is constructed or rehabilitated in the contract .
e Adequate provisions shall be made to prevent marring of the pavement surface or the loss of surface texture .
f Portland cement concrete pavement shall have achieved the strength required for opening to all traffic .
g Adequate provisions shall be made to assure uniform load distribution at the edges of the pavement .
Movement of equipment over bridges or pavement not constructed under the contract but located within the limits of the contract will be subject to all requirements of this section and a special permit will be required .
.. Track or crawlertype equipment having a gross weight of pounds or less evenly distributed over the treads may be moved over bridges not posted for lesser loads or over rigidtype pavements without special permits .
Crawlertype equipment having a gross weight in excess of pounds will not be permitted on bridges or rigid type pavements unless authorized by the engineer .
.. Track or crawlertype equipment that is subject to unequal distribution of weight such as cranes and paving mixers and which have a gross weight in excess of pounds but less than pounds may be operated upon bridges not posted for lesser loads and rigid type pavements provided special precautions satisfactory to the engineer are taken to distribute the weight evenly over the treads .
Equipment and vehicles with steel lugs will not be permitted to operate directly on bridges or pavements at any time .
When it is required that material from roadway or borrow excavation be hauled across existing pavement the contractor may move the material across the pavement with equipment that results in overweight loading provided the following requirements are met at the contractors expense a The contractor and the engineer shall select the location or locations where the crossing over the existing pavement is to be made .
The width of the crossing shall be clearly marked on the pavement by painted lines and the contractors equipment will be required to operate within the limits of the marked crossing .
Return to Table of Contents b The contractor shall obtain written permission including the description of the location of the crossing from the engineer prior to movements of overweight loads across the existing pavement .
c The existing pavement shall be kept open at all times for highway traffic except for short periods of time when individual pieces of equipment are crossing the pavement .
The pavement shall be kept reasonably free from earth or other material during hauling operations and shall be cleaned off and kept clean during periods when no hauling across the pavement is in progress .
d The pavement and shoulders within the crossing area shall be maintained by the contractor in a condition satisfactory to the engineer .
e The contractor shall provide signs and flaggers to direct traffic when hauling across the pavement .
f If any hauling across the pavement is done at night the contractor shall provide adequate lighting to illuminate the crossing .
g If the existing pavement at the crossing is to be used in place after the contract is completed the contractor shall upon completion of the hauling operations remove the existing shoulders pavement and base between the limits of the crossing and replace the pavement with the same type width and thickness of shoulders pavement and base existing prior to the beginning of hauling operations .
h The contractor shall construct and maintain all necessary bypasses or temporary connections required for the proper handling of traffic during removal and replacement of the pavement in the crossing area .
During construction hours equipment material and vehicles utilized in construction of the project will only be permitted on shoulders medians or pavements where the locations are closed to traffic properly signed and occupied by ongoing construction operations unless otherwise approved by the engineer .
Except in cases of emergency construction equipment material and vehicles will not be permitted on pavements or shoulders being utilized by traffic .
If the contract specifies time periods the contractor will not be permitted to perform work construction equipment or vehicles shall not enter or leave the construction area via the pavements handling traffic nor be operated on the pavements handling traffic within the construction area during the restricted time periods .
During nonconstruction hours construction equipment material and vehicles will not be permitted within feet of the edge of the pavement or shoulders carrying traffic unless the equipment material and vehicles are located in a properly protected area an offsite storage area or as otherwise directed by the engineer. . Bridges over Navigable Waters .
A project will be considered significantly complete when all necessary signing pavement markings in accordance with Sec guardrail signals all permanent traffic control devices and other safety appurtenances have been installed and are operational .
pavement use in .
Removal of pavement curb gutter sidewalk and other similar improvements and where a portion of such improvements are to be left in place shall be to an existing joint or to a joint sawed full depth .
At locations shown on the plans where piling is to be driven existing pavement sidewalks footings foundations walls and all other types of removal items shall be completely removed for a sufficient distance to permit piles to be driven .
Removal of improvements shall include removing all drainage structures pavement surfacing and base courses curb gutter sidewalks house walks steps retaining walls foundation walls columns footings concrete floors cisterns catch basins uncontaminated storage tanks manholes drainage and sewer pipes water and gas main pipes signs fences scattered or piled bricks stones broken masonry rubbish debris outdoor advertising signs etc .
This work shall consist of removing and disposing of designated residual material pavement pump islands all storage tanks and piping excavation and disposal of uncontaminated and contaminated soil as required obtaining the necessary regulatory permits backfilling the excavated areas with uncontaminated soil after clean up levels have been achieved and any incidental work or material required to complete the job .
Removal of concrete pavement and concrete base course will be paid for in accordance with Sec ..
If the specified or proposed surfacing consists of a rigid or flexibletype pavement the top consolidated rock layer for the full width between roadbed slopes shall be finished to the same limits as shown on the plans for undergrading in rock cuts .
If rigid pavement is to be constructed without an aggregate base the material requirements of Sec a or b shall govern the construction of the area between the bottom of the pavement and the top of the top consolidated rock layer .
Any embankment necessary outside the limits of the pavement shall be constructed of suitable earth or as otherwise specified in the contract. . Compaction of Embankment and Treatment of Cut Areas with Moisture and Density Control .
A surface parallel to the pavement slope inches below the bottom of the pavement or lowest base course shall be temporarily exposed for the full width between roadway inslopes .
Reimbursement will be limited to modified areas the width of the pavement and shoulders plus inches on each side .
Removal of concrete pavement and concrete base course will be paid for in accordance with Sec The earthwork for obliteration including bituminous surfacing will be included as linear grading .
The moisture content of the top inches of the finished subgrade at the time the base is placed or at the time pavement is placed if no base is provided under the pavement shall be no less than the minimum specified for compacting in Sec If the moisture content has not been maintained the subgrade shall be scarified wet to the required moisture content and compacted .
Care shall be taken in forming the crown and shaping the subgrade to ensure that the specified thickness of pavement will be attained .
The finished concrete pavement subgrade at the time of paving shall be moist but sufficiently firm to resist rutting or deforming under construction traffic . .
Normal concrete pavement consolidation equipment such as vibrators or vibrating pans will be considered adequate provided the mixture can be satisfactorily compacted .
This work shall consist of furnishing and placing select rock material in the top or inches of the subgrade for use as a base to provide pavement support and drainage as shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer. . Material .
Broken sound concrete pavement and composite pavements may be used provided the ratio of the longest dimension measurement to thickness does not exceed and provided there is no excessive exterior steel mesh that would affect compaction .
Milled crushed or chunked forms of bituminous pavement shall not be used .
Small thin amounts adhering to broken concrete pavement will be permitted .
Types and aggregate base used for shoulders adjacent to rigid or flexible type pavement including pavement resurfacing shall be simultaneously deposited and spread on the subgrade .
Aggregate shall not be deposited on the pavement and bladed or dozed into place .
If available the contractor may substitute bituminous pavement cold millings or crushed recycled concrete in lieu of aggregate base for any temporary surface regardless of the type or thickness of aggregate shown on the plans .
The contractor shall maintain at the contractors expense the required density and surface condition of any portion of the completed aggregate base until either the prime coat or a succeeding course or pavement is placed .
When bituminous Return to Table of Contents pavement cold millings or recycled crushed concrete are substituted for aggregate base payment will be made for the aggregate base quantity provided in the plans regardless of whether millings recycled crushed concrete or the aggregate base is used .
Payment will be considered full compensation for hauling of millings cold milling operations and all other material or labor necessary to substitute bituminous pavement millings for aggregate base .
If equipment to be weighed is of such length that all axles can not be weighed simultaneously a level area of concrete or bituminous pavement shall be provided permitting those axles not on the scale platform to be on the pavement during the weighing operation .
Without specific contract designation an approved commercial mixture may be used in lieu of plant mix bituminous pavement or base course mixtures for work that is considered temporary construction and is to be maintained at the contractors expense .
Bituminous mixtures shall not be placed on any wet surface or frozen pavement .
The bottom of the trench shall in no case be less than inches below the surface of the existing pavement .
At least one lane of the existing pavement and the adjacent shoulder shall be kept open to traffic at all times during construction except for short intervals when the movement of the contractors equipment will seriously hinder the flow of traffic .
For roadways constructed under traffic no pavement edge differential shall be left in place for more than seven days unless approved by the engineer .
The minimum density of all traveled way pavement within inches of a longitudinal joint shall be no less than .
The joints in the final surface layer shall be at the lane lines of the traveled way except that the placement width shall be adjusted such that pavement marking shall not fall on a longitudinal joint .
Remove and Replace aWhen adjustments are necessary the lower percent of the contract unit price of either the pavement or joint density adjustment will apply. . Quality Assurance.Acceptance tests for gradation deleterious content and asphalt content will be performed by the engineer at a minimum rate of one independent sample per QC samples .
The finish of the pavement surface shall be substantially free from waves or irregularities and shall be true to the established crown and grade .
The pavement shall be thoroughly tested for smoothness by profiling or straightedging in accordance with Sec . .
If the contractors work has obliterated existing pavement marking on resurfacing projects open to through traffic the pavement marking shall be replaced at the contractors expense in accordance with Sec . .
The accepted quantities of plant mix bituminous pavement and base course will be paid for at the contract unit price for each of the pay items included in the contract .
Bituminous mixtures shall not be placed when either the air temperature or the temperature of the surface on which the mixture is to be placed is below F or on any wet surface or frozen pavement .
No pavement edge differential shall be left in place for more than seven days without written approval from the engineer .
The longitudinal joint shall be at the lane lines of the traveled way except that the placement width of bituminous surface may be adjusted such that temporary raised pavement markers will not fall on a longitudinal joint .
Except for a single surface layer the total pavement thickness shall be maintained when the substitute mixture layer is reduced as allowed in Sec .
A tack coat is required on all existing pavement and shoulder surfaces that will be overlaid with a bituminous mixture .
A tack coat is also required between all lifts of bituminous pavements placed within the driving and turn lanes unless otherwise specified in the contract .
For pavements having a width of to feet inclusive the asphaltic concrete pavement shall be laid in lanes approximately one half the full width of the completed pavement and the full width shall be completed as soon as practical .
Unless otherwise permitted a single lane of any course shall not be constructed to a length that can not be completed to full width of the pavement the succeeding operating day .
For pavements greater than feet wide single lane width construction shall be limited to one days production and completion to full width shall be accomplished as soon as practical .
Uneven pavement shall be left in place for no more than seven days unless approved by the engineer .
Removal of pavement to be in accordance with this specification shall be at the contractors expense .
Sec mixtures used for surfacing medians and similar areas shoulders adjacent to rigid or flexible pavement and shoulders adjacent to resurfaced pavement shall be compacted to the specified densities for the mixture .
The minimum density of all traveled way pavement within inches of a longitudinal joint including the pavement on the traveled way side of the shoulder joint shall not be less than .
The placement width shall be adjusted such that pavement marking shall not fall on a longitudinal joint. . Quality Control .
The finish of the pavement surface shall be substantially free from waves or irregularities and shall be true to the established crown and grade .
The pavement surface shall be thoroughly tested for smoothness by profiling or straighedging in accordance with Sec . . General Requirements .
If the contractors work has obliterated the existing pavement marking on resurfacing projects open to through traffic the pavement marking shall be replaced in accordance with Sec .
If shown on the plans existing drain basins shall be filled to the top of the lip with plant mix bituminous base course or asphaltic concrete from the pavement edge to the edge of the shoulder .
A blowup will be considered that area where excessive expansion has resulted in distress to the existing pavement .
Blowups occurring after the application of the tack coat shall be repaired by the contractor by removing the distressed concrete and replacing the pavement in accordance with Sec . .
The final driving surface area for the full depth of the pavement will be used as the area for all underlying bituminous lifts and will not include the additional quantity needed to construct the slope .
Final measurement of the completed pavement will not be made except for authorized changes Return to Table of Contents during construction or where appreciable errors are found in the contract quantity .
Where required measurement of the pavement complete in place will be made to the nearest .
Final measurement of the completed pavement will be based on the field established plan quantity except for authorized changes during construction .
Measurement of the pavement complete in place will be made to the nearest .
Each sawed sample shall consist of a single piece of the pavement of the size designated by the engineer but no larger than inches square .
Total thickness samples for new full depth asphalt pavements shall be obtained after all bituminous construction is completed on the project and shall be taken at locations specified by the engineer .
For the purpose of determining the constructed thickness of full depth pavement cores shall be taken at random intervals in each traffic lane at the rate of one core per feet or increment thereof or at any other locations as may be determined by the engineer and measured in accordance with AASHTO T . Sections of any asphaltic concrete determined to be .
No payment will be made for any costs incurred by the contractor in correcting pavement deficient in thickness .
Each core is representative of the pavement thickness for a distance extending onehalf the distance to the next core measured along centerline or in the case of a beginning or ending core the distance will extend to the end of the pavement .
Payment for obtaining and delivering samples of compacted mixture from the pavement and replacing the surface will be made per sample at the fixed price specified in Sec .
The contract unit prices for asphaltic concrete pavement will be considered full compensation for all materials entering into the construction of the pavement and for the cost of the smoothness testing and correction .
Positive weight measurement of reclaimed asphaltic pavement shall be by use of belt scales in accordance with Sec .. System Interlocks .
The aggregate feed system reclaimed asphaltic pavement feed system if recycling is permitted mineral filler or hydrated lime or both if specified and the asphalt flow shall be interlocked by a blending system which will automatically regulate the asphalt binder mineral filler hydrated lime and reclaimed asphaltic pavement flow and shall cause synchronized corrections for variations in aggregate flow .
Safe adequate and convenient facilities shall be provided for calibrating or verifying the asphalt binder mineral filler hydrated lime reclaimed asphaltic pavement and the aggregate nonsetback registers .
galsy in the field based upon the existing pavement condition .
Seal coat shall only be placed when the ambient temperature and the temperature of the pavement on which it is to be placed is above F. Temperatures shall be obtained in accordance with MoDOT Test Method TM .
Any bituminous material applied on adjacent Portland cement or asphaltic concrete pavements curbs bridges or any areas not specified to be sealed shall be removed by the contractor at the contractors expense .
f A pavement treatment having complete aggregate coverage with full adherence to the roadway .
All pavement marking shall be removed maintained and compensated for in accordance to Sec .
The distributor truck shall pull the broom assembly to sweep and spread the emulsion uniformly on the surface and into the cracks of the pavement .
The scrub seal emulsion shall not be placed on any wet surface or when the ambient temperature or the temperature of the pavement on which the mixture is to be placed is below F. Temperatures shall be obtained in accordance with MoDOT Test Method TM .
A damp pavement surface may be acceptable for placement if free of standing water and favorable weather conditions are expected to follow .
The screed shall have the ability to crown the pavement at the center and shall have vertically adjusted extensions to accommodate the desired pavement profile .
The engineer may make adjustments to the spray rate based on the existing pavement surface conditions and the recommendations of the polymer modified emulsion membrane manufacturer .
The engineer will determine the acceptable extent of fracturing at the edge of the pavement from the rolling operation .
New pavement shall not be opened to traffic nor shall any roller sit idle on the pavement until the rolling operation is complete and the material has been cooled below F. Bituminous Mixing Plants .
This work shall consist of the placement of a Polymer Modified Emulsion Membrane prior to a bituminous overlay of hot asphaltic concrete pavement .
The Polymer Modified Emulsion Membrane shall be spray applied immediately prior to the application of the hot asphaltic concrete pavement so as to produce a homogeneous surface in accordance with Secs or .
The asphaltic concrete pavement shall be placed in accordance with Secs or except as modified herein .
No wheel track or other part of the paving machine or any hauling equipment shall come in contact with the Polymer Modified Emulsion Membrane before the asphaltic concrete pavement mixture is applied .
The Engineer may make adjustments to the application rate based upon the existing pavement surface conditions and the recommendations of the Polymer Modified Emulsion Membrane supplier however the application rate shall be within .
This work shall consist of preparing and sealing all working transverse and longitudinal cracks in bituminous pavement as shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
Sealant shall not be placed when the pavement is wet or when the ambient or pavement temperature falls below F. The contractor shall furnish to the engineer the manufacturers recommendations for mixing and application including temperature restrictions and shall prepare and apply the crack sealant in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
The reservoir shall be slightly overfilled and excess material squeegeed with a V or Ushaped squeegee level to the adjoining surface pavement forming a wipe zone to inches wide .
The accepted quantity of pavement crack sealing will be paid for at the contract unit price .
This work shall consist of preparing and resealing all existing transverse and longitudinal joints and working transverse and longitudinal cracks in Portland cement concrete pavement PCCP as shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
The sealant shall not be placed when the pavement is wet or when the ambient or pavement temperature falls below F. The contractor shall furnish to the engineer the manufacturers recommendations for mixing and application including temperature restrictions and shall prepare and apply the crack sealant in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
The reservoir shall be slightly larger than the existing crack with a minimum size of inch wide x d deep where d is the thickness of the pavement .
Any excess material shall be removed from the pavement surface .
The accepted quantity of pavement crack sealing will be paid for at the contract unit price .
This work shall consist of preparing and filling all cracks in bituminous pavement as shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
Filler material shall not be placed when the pavement is wet or when the ambient or pavement temperature falls below F. The contractor shall furnish to the engineer the manufacturers recommendations for mixing and application including temperature restrictions and shall prepare and apply the crack filler material in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
The crack shall be slightly overfilled and excess material squeegeed with a V or Ushaped squeegee level to the adjoining surface pavement forming a wipe zone to inches wide .
The accepted quantity of pavement crack filler will be paid for at the contract unit price .
Filler material shall not be placed when the pavement is wet or when the ambient or pavement temperature falls below F. The contractor shall furnish to the engineer the manufacturers recommendations for mixing and application including temperature restrictions and shall prepare and apply the crack filler material in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
Any excess material shall be removed from the pavement surface .
The accepted quantity of pavement crack filler will be paid for at the contract unit price .
Ground Granulated Blast Furnace Slag Fly Ash Cement Concrete Admixture Concrete Tinting Material Water aRegardless of the gradation of the coarse and fine aggregate used in concrete for pavement or base the aggregate shall meet the quality requirements of coarse and fine aggregate for concrete pavement .
Manufactured sand produced from limestone or dolomite shall not be used in Portland cement concrete for driving surfaces such as bridge decks pavements and full depth shoulders .
The mixed concrete shall meet the uniformity requirements specified above before any concrete may be used for pavement or structures .
d Concrete pavements .
When Type A waterreducing admixture is added to pavement concrete for paving purposes a reduction of cement up to lbs per cubic yard will be permitted .
The use of calcium chloride or other approved accelerating admixtures in concrete mixtures will not be permitted except in concrete used for pavement repair in accordance with Sec . .
This work shall consist of constructing a Portland cement concrete base or pavement with or without reinforcement as specified shown on the plans or directed by the engineer. . Material .
Concrete base or pavement may be constructed by the use of sliding form methods .
The concrete shall be consolidated and finished by a slipform paver designed to spread consolidate and shape the concrete in one complete pass of the machine in such a manner to provide a smooth dense and homogeneous pavement in conformance with the plans and specifications .
No apparent slumping of the concrete shall occur within inches of the pavement edge .
Auxiliary equipment shall be available at all times as follows a A minimum of one footbridge designed to be readily transportable and having no contact with the concrete base or pavement .
Low areas of treated bases shall be filled only with concrete integral with the pavement .
For all contracts having a total of no more than square yards of concrete base course and concrete pavement combined manual batching methods will be permitted .
Honeycomb in the concrete base or pavement edge may be cause for rejection of the concrete .
Tie bars required at longitudinal construction joints shall be positioned before concrete base or pavement consolidation .
The surface of the pavement shall be of uniform texture and to the proper grade and typical section .
mm shall require diamond grinding of the pavement represented by this sublot to attain the necessary texture .
All testing of the surface texture shall be completed no later than the day following pavement placement .
Tool marks on the pavement shall be eliminated by brooming or dragging the surface .
In doing this the rounding of the corner of the pavement shall not be disturbed .
The contractor shall indent station numbers into all pavement immediately following the final finishing operations and before the concretes final set .
Equations in stationing Return to Table of Contents shall also be marked in the pavement .
On undivided pavement the station numbers shall be on the left side of the pavement with respect to the ascending stationing and shall be on the pavement edge unless an integral curb is involved in which case the numbers shall be placed on the face of the curb .
On divided pavement station numbers shall be placed on the median side of each pavement .
The numbers shall be placed facing the centerline of the pavement or the centerline of each pavement in the case of divided pavements .
c For pavement lanes less than feet long .
d For pavement lanes less than feet wide .
e For bridge approaches and pavement to first expansion joint .
Expansion joints shall extend for the full crosssection of the concrete pavement .
The joints shall be sealed in accordance with Sec Upon removal of the forms any struts or fins of concrete extending across the joint shall be removed to the full width of the joint and the full thickness of the concrete base or pavement .
Transverse construction joint shall be located feet from the last contraction joint Construction joints shall be constructed perpendicular to the top surface and the centerline of the concrete base or pavement .
The final joint shall conform to the crosssection of the pavement .
For intersections and irregular pavement joints shall be sawed at locations as approved by the engineer .
Any pavement with random cracking not controlled by dowels or tie bars shall be either removed and replaced using dowels or tie bars as appropriate to the nearest controlled joint or repaired with some other method approved by the engineer at the contractors expense .
The pavement shall have a plan thickness of inches or greater .
Sawed or formed expansion joints shall be sealed with joint sealing material before the pavement is opened to any traffic including construction traffic .
Any excess material shall be removed from the pavement surface .
After the free water has left the pavement surface the entire surface shall be sealed by spraying with a uniform application of white pigmented membrane curing material .
The contractor shall provide satisfactory equipment to ensure uniform mixture and coverage of curing material without loss on the pavement at the rate of not less than one gallon for each square feet .
If rain falls on the newly coated pavement before the film has dried sufficiently to resist damage or if Return to Table of Contents the film is damaged in any other way the contractor shall apply additional curing material to the affected portions .
Forms shall be removed carefully to avoid damage to the concrete base or pavement .
Any trench excavated for the forms shall be entirely backfilled so water will not stand next to the concrete base or pavement . .
The pavement surface shall be thoroughly tested for smoothness by profiling or straightedging as indicated in Sec . .
The concrete base and pavement shall not be opened for low volume light construction traffic until the concrete has attained a minimum compressive strength of psi .
The concrete base and pavement shall not be opened to all types of traffic until the concrete has attained a minimum compressive strength of psi and all sawed joints that have opened more than ¼ inch are sealed .
Acceptance will be based on the following criteria being met a Test results indicating the concrete base or pavement meets the specification requirements b Contractor following the approved Quality Control Plan QCP c Favorable comparison between the contractors quality control tests and the engineers quality assurance tests .
A sample shall be taken from the finished concrete consisting of a inch diameter core for concrete bases or pavements less than inches thick and a inch diameter core for concrete bases or Return to Table of Contents pavements inches or greater .
If the contractor elects to diamond grind to improve smoothness or surface texture in accordance with Sec and then pavement thickness determination will be made after all smoothness correction has been completed .
Testing shall include but not necessarily be limited to deleterious content coarse aggregate absorption thin or elongated pieces entrained air content slump pavement thickness and compressive strength .
For pavements with a plan thickness below inches the following shall apply a QC shall determine compressive strength at a frequency of no less than one per square yards .
Sampling location will be determined by the engineer using random sampling procedures in accordance with ASTM D b QC shall determine pavement thickness of the fresh concrete at a frequency of no less than one per square yards .
QA will determine the pavement thickness of the fresh concrete at least once per square yards .
Final measurement of the completed pavement will not be made except for authorized changes during construction or where appreciable errors are found in the contract quantity .
Where required measurement of the Portland cement concrete base and pavement complete in place will be made to the nearest square yard .
The contract unit price for Portland cement concrete base and pavement will be considered as full compensation for all material including reinforcement dowels dowel supports tie bars and any other items entering into the construction of the traveled way pavement or Portland cement concrete shoulders and for the cost of QC testing and smoothness testing .
The accepted quantities of Portland cement concrete pavement will be paid for at the contract unit price with proper allowance made for any deductions for deficiency in thickness compressive strength smoothness or marred surface .
Concrete mix shall be within the specified limits for compressive strength pavement thickness slump air content gradation deleterious and thin and elongated .
Payment for each mix type will be made at percent of the contract unit price if compressive strength is equal to or greater than psi and the pavement thickness is not deficient by more that percent of the plan thickness .
For pavements with a plan thickness below inches the following shall apply a QLA and PWL will not be required b Concrete mix shall be within the specified limits for compressive strength pavement thickness slump air content gradation deleterious and thin and elongated .
Return to Table of Contents c Payment will be made at percent of the contract unit price if compressive strength is equal to or greater than psi and pavement thickness is not deficient by more than percent of the plan thickness ..
Approach slabs shall be constructed of pavement concrete or an approved Class B concrete mixture or asphaltic concrete .
This work shall consist of placement and preparation of base material and the construction of concrete approach pavement in accordance with these specifications as shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer. . Material .
Approach pavement shall be constructed of pavement concrete or an approved Class B concrete mixture .
Concrete approach pavement and shoulders shall be constructed in accordance with Sec .
Concrete approach pavement will not require sealing with a concrete sealer .
Final measurement of the completed concrete approach pavement will not be made except for authorized changes during construction or where appreciable errors are found in the contract quantity .
Where required concrete approach pavement areas including shoulders will be measured to the nearest square yard .
The accepted quantity of concrete approach pavement will be paid for at the contract unit price and will be considered full compensation for Type A Curb all labor equipment and material to complete the described work .
The BCOA pavement shall be in accordance with Sec except as modified herein .
The BCOA pavement shall consist of a fiber reinforced concrete pavement placed over a prepared asphalt surface .
Unless otherwise specified on the plans the minimum BCOA pavement thickness shall be inches .
The maximum aggregate size shall be no more than onethird the thickness of the BCOA pavement .
The contractor shall not make any mix design changes during placement of the BCOA pavement without prior approval from the engineer .
Prior to placing the BCOA pavement the surface shall be thoroughly cleaned of all vegetation dirt mud and other objectionable material .
The asphalt surface temperature shall not exceed F at the time of BCOA pavement placement .
At the time of placement of the BCOA pavement there shall be no puddled water or other contamination to prevent bonding of the BCOA to the asphalt surface .
Provided no loose foreign material is tracked onto the surface trucks used for transporting concrete may drive on the pavement being overlaid and concrete may be deposited directly in front of the concrete spreader .
Return to Table of Contents The BCOA pavement shall be free of fiber balls when placed .
The BCOA pavement shall be placed in a uniform thickness on a final grade that has been established by other means such as cold milling .
The surface finish of the BCOA pavement shall be in accordance with Sec .
The joints shall be spaced equidistant longitudinally and transversely and at a distance approximately equal to twelve times the specified BCOA pavement thickness with the following exceptions .
Slight adjustments may be made in the joint spacing to equalize the longitudinal joints between pavement cast edges .
All sawed BCOA pavement units shall be square except as necessary in pavement width transitions .
Joint spacing for any adjustments shall not exceed one foot more than times the specified BCOA pavement thickness .
The engineer may require the contractor to replace BCOA pavement where cracking occurs due to late sawing at the contractors expense .
BCOA pavement shall not be opened to all types of traffic until the concrete has attained a minimum compressive strength of psi .
cubic yard for material incorporated into the BCOA pavement .
Measurement for placing BCOA pavement will be computed to the nearest .
The thickness of the BCOA pavement will be determined by the average caliper measurement of cores in accordance with AASHTO T . For the purpose of determining the constructed thickness of the pavement cores will be taken at random intervals in each traffic lane at the rate of one core per feet or increment thereof .
Each core will represent the pavement thickness for a distance extending onehalf the distance to the next core measured along the centerline .
In the case of a beginning or ending core the distance shall extend to the end of the pavement section .
Final measurement of the complete UTW pavement will not be made Return to Table of Contents except for authorized changes during construction or where appreciable errors are found in the contract quantity .
Measurement for cold milling bituminous pavement for removal of surface will be made in accordance with Sec ..
Reimbursement for any additional concrete incorporated into the BCOA pavement will be in accordance with Sec .. and shall not exceed the unit contract price .
The plan quantity for the placement of BCOA pavement will be paid for at the contract unit price for BCOA pavement per square yard .
No direct payment will be made for surface preparation following cold milling of the bituminous surface or furnishing labor equipment reinforcement and other materials to place finish texture cure and saw the joints in the BCOA pavement .
If any core measurement of thickness is deficient the contractor may remove and replace the pavement at the contractors expense or leave the pavement in place and receive the following deductions in payment Deficiency in Thickness Deductions Percent of Contract Unit Price to inch None Over inch The above deductions will be applied to a section of pavement feet long and will include the entire paved width for a specific pass .
Deductions for deficient thickness or damaged pavement may be entered on any estimate after the information becomes available .
Any pavement that is replaced shall be of a satisfactory quality and thickness that when accepted by the engineer will be included in the pay quantity .
No payment will be made for any costs incurred in the removal of the deficient pavement .
Removal of pavement shall be from the edge to a longitudinal joint or between longitudinal joints and on each side of the deficient measurement until no portion of the exposed cross sections is more than inch deficient except that there shall be no less than linear feet of pavement removed .
If there remains less than feet of acceptable pavement between the section that has been removed and a transverse contraction expansion or construction joint the contractor shall remove the pavement to the joint at the contractors expense .
Any adjustments in payment as a result of the profilograph index or pavement thickness deficiency of the BCOA pavement will be made to the unit contract prices for furnishing BCOA concrete per cubic yard and placing BCOA pavement per square yard .
For this purpose the volume of BCOA pavement placed per cubic yard price will be adjusted to a square yard price based on the plan BCOA pavement thickness .
Payment for cold milling bituminous pavement for removal of surface will be made in accordance with Sec SECTION .
This work shall consist of placing an interlayer material on an existing concrete pavement and constructing an unbonded concrete overlay in accordance with the details and locations shown on the plans .
The eightinch overlays are constructed similarly to new concrete pavement in terms of joint spacing and use of dowel bars and tie bars .
All procedures and material for the unbonded overlay shall be in accordance with Sec including QCQA and PWL provisions for nonreinforced concrete pavement except the strength pay factor will account for percent of the total pay factor .
Any transverse expansion joints in the existing pavement shall be specifically marked and identified as such .
Provided no loose foreign material is tracked onto the surface trucks used for transporting concrete may drive on the pavement being overlaid and concrete may be deposited directly in front of the concrete spreader .
The minimum depth of the sawed joints shall be onethird the pavement thicknesss and the width of the joint shall be inch maximum .
The concrete pavement shall not be opened to all types of traffic until the concrete has attained a minimum compressive strength of psi .
including QCQA and PWL provisions for concrete pavement except the following shall apply Minimum Thickness .
The profile shall be submitted to the engineer and include edge of pavement and centerline elevations at foot intervals in tangent sections and foot intervals in curve sections .
Final measurement of the completed pavement will not be made except for authorized changes during construction or where appreciable errors are found in the contract quantity .
Any adjustments in payment as a result of the profilograph index or pavement thickness deficiency of the unbonded concrete overlay will be made to the contract unit price for furnishing concrete and placing unbonded concrete overlay each for the segments involved .
This specification covers the maturity method as a nondestructive means of determining inplace concrete strength for pavement or structural applications .
For pavement and pavement repairs temperature sensors shall be embedded at approximately middepth and inches from the edge of pavement .
with a minimum of one in the last feet of pavement Pavement Repairs sensor per patches with a minimum of one sensor in the last patch Structural A minimum of one sensor at the end of the pour with three others sensors available to be placed as directed by the engineer .
Once the maturity index according to the temperature monitored cylinder is achieved which corresponds to the maturity index desired for the first critical action such as opening pavement to traffic or removing formwork three cylinders shall be tested for compressive strength .
This work shall consist of placing a continuous pipeaggregate edge drain under the edge of new pavement as shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
If a pipeaggregate pavement edge drain is used on a pavement rehabilitation project the contractor shall not install the drain until all pavement repair and required undersealing have been completed in the area where the edge drain is to be placed .
Under new pavement pipeaggregate pavement edge drains shall be lined with geotextile and wrapped .
The trench for pipeaggregate pavement edge drains shall be lined and wrapped with a geotextile as shown on the plans .
If the inspection reveals crushed or compressed pipe separated joints obstructions within the pipe that prohibit the passage of the camera head rips or cracks in the pipe wall or longitudinal sags which allow silt to collect or water to stand in more than half the pipe depth repair or replacement of the deficient portions of outlet or longitudinal pipe and the repair of the pavement which is damaged by improper installation of the drain or the repair of deficient portions of the drain shall be performed at the contractors expense .
This work shall consist of furnishing and installing geocomposite pavement edge drain at the locations shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
The contractor shall not install the drain until after all pavement repairs and required undersealing have been completed in the area where the edge drain is to be placed .
The drain shall be placed against the pavement side of the trench and shall be held in place while backfill is placed to a compacted height of inches one inch using a vibratory wheel or plate compactor with a rated impact force of approximately pounds .
Measurement of geocomposite pavement edge drain will be made to the nearest linear foot along the centerline of the drain center to center of fittings and junctions .
Accepted quantities of geocomposite pavement edge drain will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot .
Pipeaggregate pavement cross drains shall be noncontinuous and will typically be installed laterally beneath the pavement to improve localized drainage problems .
Porous backfill shall extend a minimum distance of shoulder line to shoulder line of flexible pavements and a minimum of inches outside of each edge of rigid pavement .
This work shall consist of installing a drain laterally across a pavement using a trench geotextile lining and Grade or Grade drainage aggregate .
This work shall consist of furnishing and installing outlet pipes and splash pads for pipeaggregate pavement edge drain geocomposite pavement edge drain and structural underdrain when fourinch plastic pipe is used at the locations shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
Outlet connections to pipeaggregate pavement edge drains shall be with wye connectors or degree elbows as shown on the plans .
Construction of aggregate drains shall be after completion of granular base courses on new pavement or at least two weeks prior to shoulder work or pavement repair during pavement rehabilitation .
The bottom of the trench shall be no higher than the bottom of pavement or granular base .
The trench shall be smooth firm and furnish a clean exposure to the pavement bottom or granular base course .
Where required measurement of aggregate drains will be made to the nearest linear foot along the centerline of the drain from the edge of pavement to the end of the trench top .
Delineator reflector colors shall correspond with pavement marking .
Where guardrail divides opposing lanes of travel the delineators shall have retroreflective sheeting on both sides corresponding to adjacent pavement markings .
Guardrail located on two lane roads shall have retroreflective sheeting on both sides corresponding to the adjacent pavement markings .
Concrete median strips shall consist of paved median strips laid over and tied to a previously constructed pavement. . Material .
Concrete median strips shall be attached to the pavement with tie bars as shown on the plans .
Longitudinal joints between the median and curb or median and adjacent concrete pavement shall be constructed of either nonextruding preformed joint material or one layer of commercially available pound roll roofing .
Forms for curved form lines shall be provided in a manner similar to that required for setting forms for concrete pavement in Sec .
After finishing concrete shall be cured in the same manner as required for concrete pavement except transparent membrane shall be used in lieu of pigmented membrane .
This work shall consist of curb constructed on the edge of concrete pavement as shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
All material shall be in accordance with Division Material Details and specifically as follows Item Section Concrete Curing Material Material for Joints Integral curb shall be constructed of concrete conforming to that required for concrete pavement except coarse aggregate in accordance with the gradation requirements of Sec may be used .
The curb shall be an integral part of the supporting concrete pavement .
The curb may be placed immediately after all pavement finishing operations have taken place and before the pavement has taken initial set or tie bars may be set in the freshly finished pavement to serve ultimately as a tie between the pavement and the curb which may be constructed later .
The pavement surface within this relatively short distance shall be roughened throughout the area to be covered by the curb .
Forms for curved form lines shall be provided in a manner similar to that required for setting forms for concrete pavement in Sec .
Curing shall be accomplished in the same manner as required for concrete pavement except transparent membrane shall be used .
Joints of preformed material shall be placed through the curb and into each underlying transverse pavement joint to the full depth of the joint in the pavement .
Where tie bars are set in freshly finished pavement surface and membrane curing is used on the pavement care shall be taken to avoid spraying the membrane on the protruding tie bars or the area on which the integral curb is to be placed .
One of the other curing methods allowed in accordance with Sec shall be used for curing this area of the pavement .
This work shall consist of measuring the smoothness of the final pavement surface .
The following pavement types shall comply with this specification a Multilift asphalt construction contained in Secs and .
b Concrete pavement construction contained in Secs and .
Length of pavement shall be defined in the following increments for the purpose of smoothness acceptance a Section A section is a days paving and shall begin and terminate at the construction joints .
mile of total profilable pavement .
Profiling will not be required for the following exceptions a Bridge decks bridge approach slabs and concrete approach pavements .
Return to Table of Contents b Pavement on horizontal curves with centerline radius of curve less than feet and pavement within the superelevation transition of such curves .
Any pavement surface not measured with an inertial profiler shall be measured with a foot straightedge .
The engineer also has discretion to use a straightedge for spot checking pavement that had been measured with an inertial profiler .
Any variations in the longitudinal direction exceeding inch in feet on shoulders and inch in feet on all other pavements shall be marked for correction in a manner approved by the engineer .
These construction procedures apply to pavement treatments described in Sec .
An area of localized roughness ALR is any length of pavement with a continuous foot average IRI measured in the right wheel path that exceeds the maximum threshold set in Table .
Satisfactory longitudinal grinding is acceptable as the final surface of the corrected pavements .
All corrective work shall be completed prior to determination of pavement thickness .
The final surface texture of corrected pavement shall be comparable to adjacent sections that do not require correcting .
Satisfactory longitudinal grinding is acceptable as the final surface of the corrected pavements .
All corrective work shall be completed prior to determination of pavement thickness .
These construction procedures apply to pavement treatments described in Sec .
These construction procedures apply to pavement treatments described in Return to Table of Contents Sec .
Prior to performing any surface work or pavement repairs the contractor shall profile the right wheel path in accordance with TM .
The final surface texture of corrected pavement shall be comparable to adjacent sections that do not require correcting .
The following basis of payment procedures shall apply to all pavement treatments described in Sec .
Table shall be used for all pavements having a final posted speed greater than mph except multilift overlays less than or equal to inches on routes with AADT less than or equal to and multi treatment overlays on routes with AADT less than or equal to .
Table shall be used for pavements having a final posted speed of mph or less and multilift overlays less than or equal to inches on routes with AADT less than or equal to and multitreatment overlays on routes with AADT less than or equal to at any posted speed .
Constantwidth acceleration and deceleration lanes shall be considered as mainline pavements .
The following basis of payment procedures shall apply to all pavement treatments described in Sec .
Any segment with an initial IRI less than or equal to inches per mile that has an IRI greater than inches per mile after placement of the overlay shall be paid at percent of the contract unit price for pavement but no correction shall be required .
A minimum deduction of percent of the contract unit price of the paving quantities will be made for marred surface areas as defined in Sec The deduction will be applied to an area of pavement extending from edge of the pavement to a longitudinal joint or between longitudinal joints in that section of pavement affected .
The contract unit price for pavement will be considered as full compensation for all items entered into the construction of the pavement including the cost of smoothness testing .
The surface of the paved slope shall have a broom or burlap drag finish and shall be cured in the same manner as required for concrete pavement except that transparent membrane shall be used in lieu of pigmented membrane .
This work shall consist of performing full depth pavement repair partial depth pavement repair retrofitting dowel bars or cross stitching pavement at locations as shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer. . Material .
.. All pavement repair subsequent to sawing or removal of any pavement shall be accomplished in the same day except as follows .
Any damage caused to the pavement due to pre sawing such as edge spalling shall be repaired by the contractor at the contractors expense .
When stringlined the surface of the repaired area shall not vary more than ⅛ inch per feet from a straight line between the surface of the existing pavement on each side of the repaired area regardless of whether the repair is to be resurfaced or not .
.. Any damage to the existing pavement joints and cracks adjacent to the pavement repair caused by the contractors operation shall be repaired at the contractors expense .
Full depth pavement repairs shall consist of removing specified areas of existing variable thickness Portland cement concrete pavement and subsequent bituminous overlays and replacing the removed material with nonreinforced Portland cement concrete as shown on the plans .
Specified areas of full depth pavement repair shall be saw cut full depth around the perimeter of the patch prior to removal except that cuts along the shoulder line may be waived by the engineer when the pavement can be removed without damage to the shoulder .
The full depth of the pavement shall be removed without mechanically breaking in place and with a minimum disturbance of sound base .
All full depth pavement repairs exceeding feet in length shall be constructed with tie bars along the longitudinal centerline joint in accordance with Sec .
Equipment designed to drill multiple holes simultaneously will only be allowed provided such equipment causes no damage to existing pavement .
All material proportioning airentraining mixing and transporting of concrete shall be in accordance with Sec as applicable to pavement concrete .
If the concrete pavement has been previously resurfaced the repair area shall be filled with Portland cement concrete to the surface of the existing bituminous overlay even when the existing surface is to be removed by milling unless contract provisions allow the milling to occur prior to the pavement repair operation .
When the concrete pavement requires all milled areas to be resurfaced in the same work day prior to opening the pavement to traffic pavement repairs identified after milling will be marked for future repair and the area shall be resurfaced as planned for that work day .
No additional lifts of hotmix asphalt will be allowed until the marked pavement is repaired .
The pavement repair shall be performed in accordance with Sec Immediately after finishing and as soon as marring of the concrete will not occur the entire surface of the newly placed concrete shall be cured in accordance with one of the following methods .
If the existing pavement has been or is to be resurfaced an asphalt emulsion shall be applied at a rate of .
Return to Table of Contents If the existing pavement surface is concrete and will not be resurfaced curing shall be in accordance with Sec .
Accepted quantities of full depth pavement repair will be paid for at the contract unit price for each of the pay items included in the contract .
Class A partial depth pavement repair shall consist of repairing spalled areas or reestablishing joints or cracks in concrete pavement .
This work shall be performed on concrete pavements that have not been resurfaced and are either not to be resurfaced as part of the contract work or the resurfacing is to be less than inches thick .
If dowel bars are structurally damaged during the removal process if the concrete below one half of the slab depth is unsound or damaged during removal or if the area indicates pumping movement of the subbase or structural pavement failure full depth pavement repair shall be performed in accordance with Sec .. .. Material .
Milling may be performed either across lanes or parallel to the pavement centerline .
If excessive concrete is removed or dowel bars are damaged to the extent to require full depth pavement repair the cost for the repair shall be at the contractors expense .
If during the removal of material for partial depth pavement repair the pavement constituted full depth pavement repair in accordance with Sec removal operations shall cease at that location .
The contractor may conduct full depth pavement repair at that time or temporarily patch the area and perform full depth pavement repair at a later date .
If the location is opened to traffic prior to the full depth pavement repair all loose material shall be removed and either a bituminous material approved by the engineer or a concrete mixture in accordance with Sec .. shall be used to patch the location .
When placing a partial depth pavement repair directly against a transverse joint or crack a compressible insert shall be placed against the joint or crack to form a bond breaker between the patch material and joint or crack .
When placing a partial depth pavement repair directly against the centerline or an adjacent lane joint a compressible insert a thin polyethylene strip no less than ⅛ inch thick or asphalt impregnated roofing felt shall be placed along the joint prior to placing the patching material .
When placing a partial depth pavement repair along a lane and shoulder joint the repair edge shall be formed if the shoulder is either soil aggregate or bituminous material .
At locations where repairs include existing pavement joints both longitudinal and transverse the initial reestablishment of the joint in the plastic concrete shall be accomplished with an approved preformed joint filler and shall be made to the same width as the existing joint .
The material insert shall be placed into the existing joint or crack to a minimum depth of one inch below the bottom of the repair shall extend the full length of the joint or crack and shall extend to the top of the proposed pavement profile .
Bonding material shall be applied in a thin even coat shall cover the entire area including the repair walls shall overlap the pavement surface and shall be in accordance with the following .
If the epoxy sets prior to placement of the concrete the hardened epoxy material shall be removed and the pavement repair area shall be cleaned in accordance with Sec When grout is used mortar shall be in accordance with Sec except it shall consist of equal parts of cement and sand .
If the grout dries prior to placing the concrete the dried or hardened grout shall be removed and the pavement repair area shall be cleaned in accordance with Sec For elastomeric concrete the bonding material properties and application shall be in accordance with manufacturer recommendations .
Repair material shall be finished to match the cross section of the existing pavement .
After finishing the repair shall be appropriately textured to approximate the texture of the existing pavement .
Return to Table of Contents Opening to Traffic.Traffic shall not be permitted on the repaired pavement until the patch material has attained a minimum compressive strength of psi but shall be a minimum of two hours after placement or the time recommended by the manufacturer .
All pavement repairs will be sounded by the engineer prior to acceptance .
If sounding indicates unsound material the entire pavement repair shall be removed to the limits designated by the engineer and replaced by the contractor at the contractors expense .
Any material removed beyond the repair area designated by the engineer due to the removal methods used by the contractor will not be included in the measurement for pavement repair .
If an area designated for partial depth pavement repair requires full depth pavement repair in accordance with Sec measurement for material removed as part of the partial depth pavement repair work at that location will be made to the nearest square yard .
The accepted quantities for Class A partial depth pavement repair will be paid for at the contract unit price for each of the pay items included in the contract .
Full depth pavement repairs required due to negligence by the contractor will be at the contractors expense .
All other full depth pavement repairs will be paid for in accordance with Sec ..
Class B partial depth pavement repair shall consist of removing areas of unsound concrete or bituminous material to a maximum depth of one half of the concrete pavement thickness and replacing the unsound material with an approved bituminous mixture .
If dowel bars are structurally damaged during the removal process if the concrete below one half of the slab depth is unsound or damaged during removal or if the area indicates pumping movement of the subbase or structural pavement failure full depth pavement repair shall be performed in accordance with Sec .
The material used for Class B partial depth pavement repairs shall be either the bituminous surface mix specified in the contract for resurfacing the existing pavement or a bituminous commercial mix in accordance with Sec ..
Return to Table of Contents If during the removal of material for partial depth pavement repair the pavement constitutes full depth pavement repair in accordance with Sec removal operations shall cease at that location .
The contractor may conduct full depth pavement repair at that time or the contractor may temporarily patch the exposed area in accordance with Sec and perform full depth pavement repair at a later date .
Measurement of Class B partial depth pavement repairs for removing material will be made to the nearest square yard .
Any material removed beyond the repair area designated by the engineer due to the removal methods used by the contractor will not be included in the measurement for pavement repair .
If an area designated for partial depth pavement repair requires full depth pavement repair in accordance with Sec measurement for material removed as part of the partial depth pavement repair work at that location will be made to the nearest square yard .
The accepted quantities for Class B partial depth pavement repair will be paid for at the contract unit price for each of the pay items included in the contract .
Full depth pavement repairs required due to improper means and methods by the contractor will be at the contractors expense .
All other full depth pavement repairs will be paid for in accordance with Sec ..
Class C partial depth pavement repair shall consist of performing repairs in asphalt pavements including composite pavements that have an asphalt surface .
This work includes removal of unsound pavement to the depth specified on the plans or as directed by the engineer and replacement with an approved asphalt mixture .
All unsuitable pavement shall be removed by milling or other method approved by the engineer .
For composite pavements the repair may extend into the underlying concrete pavement if deterioration is found at that depth .
For pavements that will Return to Table of Contents receive a final overlay the final compacted surface of the repair shall be level with or not more than ¼ inches above the surrounding pavement .
For composite pavements this removal includes both asphalt and concrete material .
The accepted quantities for Class C partial depth pavement repair will be paid for at the contract unit price of the pay items included in the contract .
The material shall be capable of remaining in a vertical position and tight to all edges during placement of the repair material to prevent the concrete backfill from flowing into the existing crack and pavement voids .
Two saw cuts shall be made in the pavement to outline the longitudinal sides of each dowel bar slot .
The slots shall be sawed to a depth and length that allows the center of the dowel to be placed at middepth in the pavement slab .
Equipment shall not cause damage to the existing pavement .
All saw slurry shall be removed from the slot and pavement .
If pneumatic hammers or other equipment used during concrete removal operations cause damage to pavement that is to remain the concrete removal operations shall be discontinued and shall not resume until the contractor has taken corrective measures .
The pneumatic hammer will not be permitted to break through the concrete and if this occurs a full depth pavement repair shall be conducted at the contractors expense .
Blasting operations shall not damage the surrounding pavement .
After the construction of a slot the pavement shall not be opened to traffic until all six retrofit dowel bars are in place cured and the work is completed at that location .
The bars shall vary no more than ¼ inch from the pavement surface and shall be parallel to the centerline of the pavement .
Bars shall be firmly centered in the slot at the midpoint of the pavement slab .
When in place the insert shall extend from the bottom of the slot to the surface of the pavement with half the dowel length extending on each side of the insert .
Traffic shall not be permitted on the repaired pavement until the rapid set concrete patching material has attained a minimum compressive strength of psi but shall be a minimum of hours or the time recommended by the manufacturer .
The work shall consist of repairing longitudinal pavement cracks by pinning the pavement slabs together with a series of alternating tie bars .
.. Construction Requirements At each crossstitch location holes shall be drilled at a degree angle to the pavement surface starting a variable distance from the longitudinal joint in a direction perpendicular to the crack .
The pavement surface shall have all excess epoxy removed and have a flush finish .
Traffic shall not be permitted on the repaired pavement until the epoxy bonding material has cured in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
A minimum vertical clearance of feet shall be maintained from the edge of pavement to the bottom of the flashing arrow panel .
Station numbers will not be required in the pavement when placed on the concrete traffic barrier .
Delineator reflector colors shall correspond with pavement marking .
Where permanent concrete traffic barrier divides opposing lanes of travel the delineators shall have retroreflective sheeting on both sides corresponding to adjacent pavement marking .
This work shall consist of the elimination of pavement edge differential. . Material .
At the contractors option elimination of pavement edge differential may be accomplished by either conducting operations in such a manner that traffic is exposed to no more than a twoinch differential by constructing a wedge shaped slope adjacent to the pavement edge or by furnishing and installing temporary concrete traffic barrier in accordance with Sec .
.. Wedge slope material shall be removed and the pavement edge returned to a vertical face prior to placement of adjacent shoulder or pavement material .
Where required measurement will be made to the nearest linear foot along each edge of pavement for all locations actually treated .
The accepted quantity of pavement edge treatment will be paid for at the contract unit price for the units constructed .
Payment will be considered full compensation for all labor equipment and material to construct maintain replace remove and dispose of pavement edge treatment .
This work shall consist of furnishing installing maintaining and removing temporary and permanent pavement marking as shown on the plans as specified herein or as directed by the engineer. . General .
.. All roadways open to traffic shall have either temporary or permanent pavement markings .
Temporary pavement marking may be used in lieu of permanent marking for no more than days after completion of final paving operations or in the case of pavement markings placed in rumble strips for no more than days after completion of rumble strips except as otherwise allowed in Sec .. All pavement marking shall be in accordance with the latest edition of the MUTCD and the FHWA Standard Highway Signs at the time of the bid opening .
.. All pavement marking shall be uniform in appearance with crisp welldefined edges and shall be uniform in width and thickness .
.. Longitudinal pavement marking shall not be placed on longitudinal joints .
The contractor will be responsible for the protection of all liquid pavement marking until the pavement marking has reached a notrack state as determined by the engineer .
.. Damage to pavement marking as a result of the contractors operations including resurfacing of shoulders shall be repaired or replaced at the contractors expense .
.. All pavement marking shall be installed in accordance with this specification and all manufacturers recommendations .
When surface preparation is required the area prepared shall be inch wider than the final pavement marking and shall meet the requirements of Sec The method of surface preparation shall not cause structural damage to the pavement and shall meet the approval of the engineer .
When the contractor obliterates existing pavement markings by cold milling grinding resurfacing or for any other operation the contractor shall at the contractors expense provide and maintain temporary pavement marking in accordance with the plans and as specified in Sec. . until permanent pavement markings are in place .
The contractor shall place temporary or permanent pavement markings on all open lanes of traffic at the completion of each daily operation prior to leaving the work zone unattended .
Pavement marking shall be replaced in the same configuration as the previously existing pavement marking unless otherwise shown on the plans or directed by the engineer .
Any temporary pavement marking damaged displaced or missing before the final pavement marking is installed shall be replaced at the contractors expense within two hours upon notification from the engineer .
If temporary pavement marking is to be in place for more than the time limit specified in Sec .. the engineer may require that temporary paint be placed and maintained at the contractors expense .
For temporary marking durations of less than two weeks and when removal of the temporary marking is not required temporary nonremovable pavement marking tape may be used as specified in Sec Temporary Pavement Marking for Traffic Pattern Changes ..
The contractor shall place temporary pavement markings for bypasses lane shifts narrow lanes and other traffic pattern changes as shown on the plans .
The contractor shall install and maintain temporary pavement marking until the permanent marking material has been placed as specified in the contract .
For temporary pavement marking of traffic pattern changes on the final driving surface that will require subsequent removal of the temporary markings temporary removable pavement marking tape shall be used as specified in Sec .. unless otherwise shown on the plans or approved by the engineer .
This work shall consist of furnishing and placing temporary pavement marking paint at locations shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
The type of paint used for temporary pavement marking shall be standard waterborne except that high build waterborne may be used in lieu of standard waterborne at no additional cost to the Commission .
Temporary pavement marking material paint and glass beads shall be in accordance with Division Material Details and specifically as follows Item Section Standard Acrylic Waterborne Pavement Marking Paint Type P DropOn Glass Beads .
Temporary paint may be used as temporary pavement markings for the duration of the project .
Retrorefletivity shall be maintained as specified in Sec at the contractors expense for as long as the temporary pavement marking paint is in place .
After cutting the rumble the remaining portion of the temporary paint line is considered sufficient temporary pavement marking until the permanent line can be placed .
When temporary pavement marking paint is used on the final driving surface and durable pavement marking is to be used for the permanent marking all temporary paint shall be removed prior to applying the durable pavement marking .
Removal shall be in accordance with Sec Return to Table of Contents When temporary pavement marking paint is used on the final driving surface and paint is to be used for the permanent marking all temporary paint shall be installed in the same location and in the same sequence as the final pavement marking such that no temporary pavement marking will be visible after the final pavement marking is installed .
Any temporary pavement marking that remains visible after final pavement marking shall be removed at the contractors expense .
All equipment for application of pavement marking paint shall be as specified in Sec ..
This work shall consist of furnishing placing and maintaining temporary removable pavement marking tape at locations shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
All temporary removable pavement marking tape within the project limits shall be maintained by the contractor at the contractors expense in a manner approved by the engineer .
This work shall consist of furnishing placing and maintaining temporary non removable pavement marking tape at locations shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
Temporary nonremovable pavement marking tape shall be installed according to the manufacturers recommendations .
This work shall consist of providing installing maintaining and removing retroreflective temporary raised pavement markers TRPMs on roadway lane lines centerlines or edge lines as shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
Cold weather pavement marking paint is described as cold weather waterborne paint or cold weather acrylic copolymer fast drying paint that is manufactured for use within the weather limitations specified herein .
Cold weather pavement marking paint may only be used for temporary pavement marking or as a substitute for standard waterborne paint when approved by the engineer at no additional cost to the Commission .
Cold weather pavement marking paint shall not be used as a permanent pavement marking in lieu of high build waterborne paint or any durable pavement marking .
Cold weather paint shall not be used except when the ambient air temperature and pavement surface temperature is greater than F but less than F. The pavement surface temperature and ambient air temperature shall be ascending from F before striping operations begin .
Cold weather pavement marking shall not be applied if the weather forecast for the eight hour period immediately following final application includes precipitation or temperatures below F. Material .
Cold weather pavement marking paint and glass beads shall be in accordance with Division Material Details and specifically as follows Item Section Type P DropOn Glass Beads .. Acrylic Copolymer Fast Dry Pavement Marking Paint Cold Weather Waterborne Pavement Marking Paint Construction Requirements .
Cold weather pavement marking paint shall be applied to a wet thickness of no less than mils .
The mil thickness shall be increased as needed to account for the porosity of the pavement to achieve a target bead embedment of .
Final measurement of temporary pavement marking paint temporary removable tape temporary nonremovable tape and temporary raised pavement markers will not be made except for authorized changes during construction or where appreciable errors are found in the contract quantity .
No measurement will be made for any temporary pavement markings regardless of type when used as temporary pavement marking due to obliteration of existing markings as defined in Sec Measurement of temporary pavement marking paint temporary removable marking tape and temporary nonremovable marking tape when required will be measured per linear foot .
The accepted quantity of temporary pavement marking paint temporary removable tape temporary nonremovable tape and temporary raised pavement markers will be paid for at the contract Return to Table of Contents unit price for each of the pay items included in the contract .
No payment will be made for any temporary pavement markings regardless of type when used as temporary pavement marking due to obliteration of existing markings as defined in Sec SECTION .
When installing permanent pavement marking the contractor shall match the pavement marking sequence on the roadway just in advance of the project limits in order to provide a seamless and continuous marking from old to new pavement for future striping operations .
If the permanent pavement marking can not be placed according to these specifications and the road is to be opened to traffic with no permanent pavement marking in place the contractor shall at the direction of the engineer place and maintain temporary pavement marking at the contractors expense .
The contractor shall remove collect and properly dispose of all temporary pavement marking and place the permanent pavement marking according to these specifications and as directed by the engineer .
The surface on which permanent pavement marking is to be placed shall be clean dry and free of all debris laitance curing compound and any other contaminants that may hinder the adhesion of the system to the surface .
Permanent pavement marking shall not be applied in damp conditions or if there is any evidence of surface moisture on the pavement .
Prior to the installation of durable pavement markings any preexisting pavement markings shall be removed to prepare the surface for the new application .
This work shall consist of furnishing and placing waterborne pavement marking paint and dropon glass beads in accordance with these specifications at locations shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
Material for application of pavement marking paint shall be in accordance with Division Material Details and specifically as follows Item Section DropOn Glass Beads .
Return to Table of Contents All equipment shall be designed for pavement marking and shall be maintained in such a condition to properly and evenly apply marking paint and dropon glass beads per these specifications .
The pavement surface temperature and air temperature shall be determined by the contractor each day prior to the pavement marking operation and at any other time deemed necessary by the engineer .
For waterborne paint applications the pavement surface temperature and ambient air temperatures shall be above F and rising before marking operations may begin .
The mil thickness shall be increased as needed to account for the porosity of the pavement and to achieve a target bead embedment of .
The mil thickness shall be increased as needed to account for the porosity of the pavement and to achieve a target bead embedment of .
This work shall consist of furnishing and placing durable pavement marking lines in accordance with manufacturers recommendations at locations shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
The pavement marking shall only be applied during dry weather and on dry pavement surfaces .
The pavement surface temperature and ambient air temperature shall be in accordance with the material manufacturers recommendations throughout the application and during the specified time for curing of the material .
A copy of the manufacturers installation instructions shall be provided to the engineer prior to the intersection pavement marking preactivity meeting .
Arrows words and symbols shall be white and may be formed from one piece or multiple pieces of preformed pavement marking material or a durable liquid marking method specifically designed for intersection marking .
Acceptance for durable intersection pavement markings shall be in accordance with Sec except that a night time visual inspection will be made in lieu of measurement of retroreflectivity .
Final measurement of permanent pavement marking will not be made except for authorized changes during construction or where appreciable errors are found in the contract quantity .
Where required measurement of inch inch inch inch and inch pavement marking will be made to the nearest linear foot .
Where intermittent lines are specified deductions will be made for the gaps in pavement marking .
The accepted quantity of permanent pavement marking lines and intersection markings will be paid for at the contract unit price for each of the pay items included in the contract except as specified in Sec Payment for permanent pavement marking lines shall be adjusted based on retroreflectivity measurements per Sec Return to Table of Contents SECTION .
Dropon glass beads shall be mechanically applied to the pavement marking directly behind the material application guns .
The glass beads shall be applied in a manner that prevents the glass bead from rolling and covering the surface of the glass bead with pavement marking material .
The application shall result in approximately embedment of the glass beads into the pavement marking .
of surface area of pavement marking material .
of surface area of pavement marking material in order to achieve desired wet reflectivity characteristics .
The cost of providing and placing glass beads is included in the cost of pavement marking paint and durable pavement marking. . Quality Control and Quality Assurance .
The contractor shall control and monitor the quality of the work for all temporary and permanent pavement markings and removal .
The contractor shall ensure paint and bead applications meet all contract requirements by conducting quality control QC evaluations including but not limited to calibration of the paint and bead application guns for the predetermined striping speed before beginning pavement marking operations periodic verification of wet mil thickness periodic measurement of line width monitoring of the bead application rate and visual inspections of the bead embedment distribution and retention .
Initial QC evaluations shall be conducted at the start of each pavement marking operation each day as well as at the start of marking on each type of pavement surface .
Air and surface temperatures shall be checked in accordance with Sec at the start of each day prior to beginning pavement marking operations .
All applicable QC measures in Sec shall also apply to durable pavement markings as well as any additional QC measures included in the manufacturers recommendations .
Temporary raised pavement markers shall be monitored and maintained in place as specified in the Missouri Standard Plans for Highway Construction .
Measurement of retroreflectivity of the pavement markings shall be done by the engineer .
The engineer will measure the average retroreflectivity of pavement markings with a meter geometry mobile retroreflectometer for each .
At the engineers discretion such as for small quantities of permanent pavement markings or for any quantity of temporary pavement marking the engineer may use a hand held retroreflectometer in accordance with MoDOT Test Method TM to measure retroreflectivity .
Return to Table of Contents Measurement of retroreflectivity will not be done within the first fourteen days following completion of all pavement marking .
The contractor is responsible for ensuring the pavement markings are clean and protected from damage prior to measurements being taken .
Any failed retroreflectivity readings due to unclean pavement markings or for other surface damage shall not be grounds for dispute of the readings .
The engineer will notify the contractor of any pavement markings that fail to meet acceptance .
Reasons for failure could include but are not limited to failed retroreflectivity readings incorrect color incorrect location poor alignment poor adherence to the pavement surface insufficient thickness width or length and insufficient bead embedment .
Once notified by the engineer of any failed permanent pavement markings the contractor shall repair or replace the failed areas within days at no cost to the commission .
After acceptance of the permanent pavement markings by the engineer the contractor shall be released from further performance responsibility except for latent defects .
mile segment of permanent painted and durable pavement marking lines have been completed and corrected when necessary to a level that meets or Return to Table of Contents exceeds all acceptance criteria payment adjustments will be applied to each .
mile segment for final retroreflectivity readings in accordance with Sec When a subsequent measurement of retroreflectivity is necessary due to corrective work and the meter geometry mobile retroreflectometer is needed to perform the subsequent measurement the actual cost to the Commission to perform the subsequent measurement will be deducted from the payment made to the contractor for pavement marking .
This work shall consist of all necessary operations for removal of existing pavement marking lines and intersection markings as shown on the plans or directed by the engineer .
All pavement marking designated for removal regardless of the type of existing marking shall be completely removed to the satisfaction of the engineer with minimal damage to the pavement .
The pavement surface shall not be left scarred to such an extent that in the opinion of the engineer the obliterated area is misleading to motorists .
Any excess damage or scarring of the pavement shall be repaired at the contractors expense .
Where required measurement for the removal of pavement markings will be made to the nearest linear foot per inches of width .
Measurement will not be made for removal of pavement marking within the limits of a bypass roadway or other roadway to be obliterated at the completion of the project .
The accepted quantity of pavement marking removal will be paid for at the contract unit price for each of the pay items included in the contract .
This work shall consist of removing or texturing the surface of existing pavement and bridge decks as shown on the plans .
The term pavement as used in Sec will be considered reference to the paved portion of the highway within the limits of construction including bridge decks. . Construction Requirements .
The pavement surface shall be removed or textured to the depth width grade and cross slope shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
The equipment will not be required to have an automatic grade leveling and slope control device or a means of removing and discharging millings from the pavement unless specified otherwise .
Any necessary pavement marking in the transition areas shall be as directed by the engineer and at the contractors expense .
The temporary asphalt wedge shall be in the opinion of the engineer of sufficient length and texture to provide a smooth transition from the existing pavement or bridge surface to the cold milled surface .
If an alternate route can not be provided deployment of the signs shall be located in advance of the milled area to allow motorists to safely negotiate the section of milled pavement .
This work shall consist of coldmilling the existing pavement surface to the depth profile and cross slope shown on the plans and removing and disposing of the milled material .
The equipment for milling and removing the pavement surface shall be capable of removing a thickness of bituminous or concrete material to the specified depth and providing a uniform profile and cross slope .
The equipment shall also have an effective means of removing cuttings from the pavement and discharging them into a hauling unit all in one operation as the pavement is milled .
Except for cold milling of depth transitions sections and butt joints all pavement that is cold milled for the purpose of resurfacing shall receive the first lift of resurfacing during the same day or night work shift as the cold milling operation .
The roadway pavement surface shall be removed and planed around and over manholes utility valves and drainage appurtenances within the limits of the work as directed by the engineer .
Spalled areas presenting a hazard shall be repaired using an approved bituminous pavement .
Care shall be exercised not to damage existing concrete pavement .
The concrete pavement surface may be scarified as shown on the plans or approved by the engineer .
The contractor shall provide pavement marking as shown on the plans through the limits of the milled surfaces in accordance with Sec .
Where required measurement for removal of the existing pavement surface will be computed to the nearest square yard .
No direct payment will be made for loading hauling stockpiling or disposing of milled material repairing spalled areas placing and removing temporary wedges providing temporary pavement marking or performing other items incidental to completion of this work .
This work shall consist of finetooth coldmilling to improve the profile cross slope or texture of an existing pavement surface as shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
Equipment for profiling texturing and removing the pavement surface shall be in accordance with Sec .
Removing millings from the pavement and discharging the millings into a hauling unit may be individual operations .
The texture produced for the finished pavement shall be a uniform surface with longitudinal striations .
The pavement surface shall be removed and milled around and over appurtenances such as manholes utility valves and drainage features within the limits of the work as directed by the engineer .
The final milled pavement surface shall be smoothly transitioned at all appurtenances located in the pavement to maintain an acceptable profile .
Any other pavement marking removed by the contractors operations shall be replaced with temporary pavement marking in accordance with Sec except when permanent pavement marking is specified in the contract .
Prior to installation of permanent pavement marking all joints and cracks shall be cleaned and sealed with hotpoured elastic type concrete joint sealer in accordance with Sec .
Where required measurement for coldmilling of the existing pavement surface will be computed to the nearest square yard .
The accepted quantity of coldmilling of existing pavement surface will be paid for at the contract unit price for each of the pay items included in the contract .
No direct payment will be made for loading hauling stockpiling or disposing of milled material repairing spalled areas temporary pavement marking or other items incidental to completion of the work .
This work shall consist of grinding concrete pavement to provide good riding characteristics a surface texture and proper drainage .
Pavement undersealing or pavement repair if required shall be completed prior to any grinding .
The cross slope of the pavement shall be as shown on the plans and shall have no depressions or misalignment of slope greater than inch in feet when measured with a foot straightedge placed perpendicular to the centerline .
Substantially all of the pavement surface shall be textured .
Extra depth grinding to eliminate minor depressions in order to provide texturing on percent of the pavement surface will not be Return to Table of Contents required .
The grinding process shall produce a final pavement surface that is true to grade and uniform in appearance with a longitudinal line type texture .
Solid residue shall be removed from the pavement surface before any residue is blown by traffic action or wind .
Any centerline or lane line markings removed by the contractors operations shall be replaced with temporary pavement marking material in accordance with Sec unless permanent pavement marking material is specified in the contract .
Prior to installation of permanent pavement marking material all joints and cracks shall be cleaned and sealed if specified in the contract .
The pavement shall be cleaned prior to opening to traffic as directed by the engineer .
Prior to performing any grinding work but after completion of all pavement repairsthe contractor shall provide a control International Roughness Index IRI per pavement segment as defined in Sec .. b from the right wheel path of each lane being diamond ground in accordance with TM .
Depressed pavement areas due to subsidence or other localized causes and areas where the maximum cut at mid panel or a fault restricts further grinding will be excluded from testing with the inertial profiler when approved by the engineer .
The contractor will not be allowed to make corrective grinding to increase the percent of pay when the final IRI is in accordance with Sec On pavement segments where corrections are necessary additional profiles shall be made to verify that the corrections have produced an average final profile in accordance with Sec The engineer shall use the ProVAL software program to compute IRIs in accordance with TM .
Measurement will be based upon the full pavement lane width .
No deduction will be made for gaps within the pavement lane to avoid striping raised pavement markers manholes or other structures .
The accepted quantity of ground pavement surface will be paid for at the contract unit price for diamond grinding concrete pavement .
Payment will be considered full compensation for all labor equipment material and incidentals to complete this work including hauling and disposal of grinding residue and cleaning the pavement prior to opening to traffic .
This work shall consist of grinding new Portland cement concrete pavement to provide good riding characteristics and surface texture .
When diamond grinding is used as the final texturing for new Portland cement concrete pavement concrete paving shall be in accordance with Sec except as follows .
No diamond grinding shall be done until the pavement has attained a strength sufficient to be opened to all types of traffic .
The final pavement surface from the grinding process shall be in accordance with Sec All grooves and adjacent passes shall be parallel to each other and the roadway with no variation .
No direct payment for diamond grinding new concrete pavement will be made .
Diamond grinding new concrete pavement will be considered as part of the work paid for under the contract unit price for Portland concrete pavement in accordance with Sec .
All areas of asphalt and pavement markings shall be removed .
Preparation of the surface shall produce a surface relief equal to International Concrete Repair Institute ICRI surface preparation level or or ASTM E pavement macrotexture depth of .
This work shall consist of stabilizing Portland cement concrete pavement by furnishing hauling and pumping high density polyurethane or asphalt cement under the concrete slab .
This work shall be completed after any required pavement repair and prior to the placement of any new overlay material .
psi Volume Change max. . percent Curing Rate percent of compressive strength within minutes after injection The material shall be hydrophobic in the materials component reaction such that the injected product is not significantly compromised by soil moisture or free water under the pavement When requested by the engineer pumping units in service shall perform a product density test by injecting a sample of the units polyurethane material into a test cylinder of known volume .
inch or pavement cracked as a result of the undersealing Return to Table of Contents will be unacceptable .
The drill holes shall be filled flush with the pavement surface using a material to match the existing surface .
Injection nozzles shall prevent leakage during injection and shall be removed at completion of the injection or driven into the injection hole to a minimum depth of inches below the pavement surface .
Any excessive material on the pavement surface shall be removed from the area and the holes shall be sealed with polyurethane material or in accordance with Sec The pavement shall not be open to traffic until a minimum of minutes after pumping operations have ceased .
The pavement shall not be open to traffic until a minimum of minutes after pumping operations have ceased .
Measurement of testing for deflection will be per joint crack or pavement repair patch per traffic lane in which testing is performed .
This work shall consist of injecting high density polyurethane or cementitious grout under a sunken section of concrete pavement and raising it back to the correct profile for an acceptable ride and positive drainage .
inch over the accepted profile or pavement cracked as a result of the slab jacking will be unacceptable .
Traffic shall not be permitted on the undersealed pavement until three hours after the end of pumping operations and after all drill holes have been plugged .
Measurement of testing for deflection will be per joint crack or pavement repair patch per traffic lane in which testing is performed .
Rumble strips shall be milled into bituminous and concrete pavements to produce a neat and uniform finish .
Any damage to the pavement or pavement marking resulting from the contractors operations shall be repaired or replaced to the satisfaction of the engineer by the contractor at the contractors expense .
Any asphalt pavement damaged by the sealer will result in removal and replacement at the contractors expense .
b Pipe used for storm sewers under the influence of a pavement section or future anticipated influence of a pavement section which has a ADT or greater shall be Group A pipe .
The inspection shall be performed no sooner than days after the completion of the finished grade when not below pavement and after the completion of the aggregate base when any portion of the culvert pipe is below pavement .
The roadway embankment shall be placed and compacted to the required density to a minimum elevation of one foot below the bottom of the pavement base material .
This work shall consist of furnishing and installing reinforced concrete pipe culvert gaskettype or steel pipe by horizontal boring methods underneath existing pavements at locations shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
The grout shall extend into the annular space between the existing culvert and pipe liner for a minimum distance of inches from the face of the pipe to a flexible grout stop comprised of flexible foamed polyethylene pavement joint backer rod or other material approved by the engineer .
Luminaires shall be mounted feet above the pavement unless otherwise shown on the plans .
.. Cable shall be pulled with a minimum of dragging on the ground or pavement .
A slot for the installation of induction loop cable shall be sawed in the pavement as shown on the plans .
The conduit opening at the end of the leadin slot and any drilled conduit holes in the pavement shall be sealed with a pliable duct sealant prior to the application of loop sealant .
The bottom of the video camera shall be mounted a minimum of feet above the pavement .
After the loop slots are cut into the pavement the surface shall be thoroughly cleaned and all loose debris shall be removed .
If conduit in median is specified the conduit shall be placed on the existing pavement prior to construction of the raised median .
Cable shall be pulled with a minimum of dragging on the ground or pavement .
.. Coarse aggregate for concrete pavement or base course shall be crushed stone or porphyry .
Coarse aggregate for Portland cement concrete pavement base and approach slabs for bridges that is not produced from the Burlington Keokuk Cedar Valley formerly Callaway or Warsaw limestone formations which is obtained from sources in the following areas shall have a maximum top size of ¾ inch a State of Kansas Iowa and Nebraska .
This specification covers a multicomponent epoxy or polyester bonding agent to be used in anchoring epoxy coated dowel bars in concrete for pavement repair .
This specification covers all temporary pavement markings permanent pavement markings and dropon glass beads .
Acrylic copolymer fast dry pavement marking paint shall be capable of receiving and holding glass beads for producing retroreflective pavement marking .
These specifications cover waterborne traffic paint for application on bituminous or Portland cement concrete pavements by departmentowned spray equipment at application temperatures of to ºF to ºC .
Temporary removable pavement marking tape shall be capable of being removed and shall leave no objectionable or misleading image or damage to the pavement after removal .
The tape shall be applied to an x inch panel per instrument recommendation for pavement marking tape and measured in accordance with MoDOT Test Method TM at prescribed CEN geometry .
panel per instrument recommendation for pavement marking tape and measured in accordance with MoDOT Test Method TM at prescribed CEM geometry .
The marker base shall have affixed a pressuresensitive adhesive protected by a release paper for application to the pavement surface .
When required per Sec a protective sleeve that prevents contamination of the reflective faces during pavement surface treatment operations shall be affixed to each marker in a minimum of two locations .
Standard acrylic waterborne pavement marking paint shall be capable of receiving and holding glass beads for producing retroreflective pavement marking .
Acrylic waterborne pavement marking paint shall be capable of receiving and holding glass beads for producing retroreflective pavement marking .
Epoxy pavement marking material shall not contain toxic heavy metals .
The material shall be twocomponent percent solids and formulated and tested to perform as a pavement marking material with glass beads applied to the surface .
The pavement marking material shall have a high degree of adhesion to the concrete surface such that there is a percent concrete failure when tested in accordance with ACI Appendix A ..
Polyurea pavement marking material shall not contain toxic heavy metals .
It shall be two components percent solids and formulated and tested to perform as a pavement marking material with glass beads applied to the surface .
The pavement marking material shall have a high degree of adhesion to the concrete surface such that there is a percent concrete failure when tested in accordance with ACI Appendix A ..
The pavement marking material shall be shipped to the job site in strong substantial containers .
Cold applied preformed pavement marking tape shall consist of a mixture of polymeric material and pigments with beads distributed throughout the crosssectional area and with a reflective layer of glass beads embedded in the surface .
A primer may be required to precondition the pavement surface .
The tape shall be applied to an x inch panel per instrument recommendation for pavement marking tape and measured in accordance with MoDOT Test Method TM at prescribed CEN geometry .
If ceramic elements are used in the pavement marking the ceramic elements shall have a minimum index of refraction of .
The material shall be solid formulated and tested to perform as a pavement marking material with glass beads uniformly throughout the marking .
The pavement marking material shall have a high degree of adhesion to the pavement surface .
The sealer shall not reduce the bond of pavement markings or reduce the skid resistance of the surface being sealed .
The temporary loops shall have selfadhesive rubberized asphalt backing which shall bond to the pavement .
The mounting height of the slipfitter above the pavement and the pole design numbers will be specified by numbers following the pole type designation .
The interconnecting fourconductor cable and leadin cable shall be suitable for installation in a inch wide pavement sawed slot .
Cured sealant shall retain permanent flexibility to F be temperature stable and ensure the integrity of the loop detector installation from to F. The loop sealant shall adhere to the roadway pavement and resist the effects of weather including freezethaw cycles deicing chemicals salts gasoline and motor oils such that the operation of the detector is not affected .
Roller Compacted Concrete RCC is an optional method to be used in constructing A and A shoulders or mainline pavement up to inches thick in lieu of conventional PCCP or HMA placement .
RCC may be used as designed in the plans for mainline pavements greater than inches .
RCC shall be constructed with any combination of equipment that will produce a pavement meeting the requirements for mixing transporting placing compacting finishing and curing as provided in this specification. . Mixing Plant The mixing plant shall be capable of producing RCC to the proportions defined by the final approved mix design and within the specified tolerances .
RCC mainline pavement shall meet the smoothness criteria of Sec ..
Concrete control joints shall be constructed at foot intervals in RCC mainline pavement .
Control joint spacing for RCC shoulders adjacent to HMA or composite pavement shall be a minimum of foot intervals .
RCC shoulders adjacent to existing PCC pavement shall have control joints located to match the joints of the adjacent pavement .
For all other PCC joint spacing the RCC control joints shall match the adjacent PCC pavements joints or cracks not to exceed a foot interval .
The RCC shoulder pavement may be opened to light traffic after one day and opened to unrestricted traffic after days .
The RCC mainline pavement may be opened to light traffic at psi and opened to unrestricted traffic at psi. . Material Acceptance. . Quality Control Testing .
Testing shall include but not necessarily be limited to deleterious content aggregate gradation coarse aggregate absorption thin or elongated pieces pavement thickness and density .
A Quality Control Plan QCP for RCC mainline pavement and shoulders will be required as per Sec .
QC shall determine the density of the RCC shoulder and mainline pavement at a frequency of no less than one per square yards .
The contractor shall determine thickness of the RCC shoulder and mainline pavement by testing the fresh concrete .
QC shall determine the thickness of the RCC mainline pavement and shoulders at a frequency of no less than one per square yards .
Final measurement of the completed pavement will not be made except for authorized changes during construction or where appreciable errors are found in the contract quantity .
Where required measurement of the RCC mainline pavement and shoulders complete in place will be made to the nearest square yard .
Sec for smoothness pay factor adjustments will apply to the final RCC mainline pavement surface .
The contract unit price for A or A shoulders or mainline pavement will be considered as full compensation for all materials equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to satisfactorily complete the work .
Adjustments will be made to the payments due the Contractor for any plant mix bituminous base plant mix bituminous pavement plant mix bituminous surface leveling asphaltic concrete pavement and ultrathin bonded asphalt wearing surface that contains performance graded PG asphalt binder when it has been determined that the Monthly Asphalt Index for the month prior to placement of the asphalt mixture has fluctuated from the Monthly Asphalt Index for the month the project was let .
An approved longitudinal shoulder wedge system shall be used to create a beveled edge at the edge of pavement for a roadway without a paved shoulder or at the edge of shoulder for pavement with a paved shoulder up to and including feet in width. . Construction Requirements .
A project on only one pavement of a dual divided facility will require only one sign .
The temporary asphalt wedge shall be in the opinion of the engineer of sufficient length and texture to provide a smooth transition from the existing pavement or bridge surface to the cold milled surface .
Delete Sec and substitute the following Except for cold milling of depth transition sections and butt joints all pavement that is cold milled for the purpose of resurfacing shall receive the first lift of resurfacing during the same day or night work shift as the cold milling operation .
