This report can be located on the CT Department of Transportation website Connecticut DOT Qualified Product List Report RECLAIMED CONCRETE AGGREGATE Reclaimed waste consisting of crushed and graded concrete removed from pavements structures or buildings .
RECLAIMED WASTE Debris from the demolition of buildings structures and pavements residue from incineration and recycled glass .
Acceptable material shall include concrete bituminous concreteglass ceramics brick pavement subbase and base courses and clinker from resource recovery plants .
ROADBED The graded portion of a highway including portions within the top and side slopes that has been prepared as a foundation for the pavement structure and shoulders .
Conc.bituminous concrete CAPWAPCAse Pile Wave Analysis Program CBcatch basin CCAchromated copper arsenate CCM Pipe or CCMPcoated corrugated metal pipe CICUcontroller interface communications unit CLLCUclosed loop local coordination unit CLMUclosed loop master unit CMSChangeable Message Sign Conc.concrete CPE Pipe or CPEPcorrugated plastic or polyethylene pipe CPScentipoise second CWI Certified Welding Inspector .. Errata January Errata July cwt.hundredweight or pounds DCdirect current dist.distillation DMTDivision of Materials Testing DTIDirect Tension Indicator EWendwall est.estimated excexcavation fijacking tension FRCFiberglass Reinforced Composite f cspecified minimum compressive strength at a specified age f cirequired strength at time of transfer gagauge or gage GsaApparent specific gravity GsbBulk specific gravity HASPHealth and Safety Plan HMAhot mix asphalt or bituminous concrete HRBRockwell B Scale hardness HRCRockwell C Scale hardness Hzhertz IMCintermediate metal conduit IPinternet protocol I.P.S.iron pipe size IWRCindependent wire rope core JMFjob mix formula KDkiln dried KDATkiln dried after treatment kip pounds ksfkips per square foot LCDLiquid Crystal Display LEDlightemitting diode LRFDLoad Resistance Factor Design l.s.lump sum mbffoot board measure MBRmetal beam rail Mgal gallons MHmanhole MLSIMajor Lump Sum Item MPTMaintenance and Protection of Traffic N.C.National Coarse NDTnondestructive testing Pavt.pavement PCBCprecast concrete barrier curb PCCPortland Cement Concrete PEpolyethylene Perf .
CPEPPerforated Corrugated Plastic or Polyethylene Pipe pfmd.preformed PROMprogrammable read only memory psfpounds per square foot psipounds per square inch psprestressed PVCpolyvinyl chloride PwaPercent water absorbed QCPFAQuality Control Plan for Fine Aggregate RAPreclaimed asphalt pavement RCReinforced Concrete RCCEReinforced Concrete Culvert End RC Pipe or RCPReinforced Concrete Pipe RFCRequest for Change RFIRequest for Information RMCrigid metal conduit SDsystem detector SDRStandard Dimension Ratio ratio of pipe diameter to wall thickness sec.second sol.soluble sp .
.. Load Restrictions a Vehicle Weights This subarticle will apply to travel both on existing pavements and pavements under construction .
If at any time during the prosecution of the Project the Contractor substantially completes a unit or portion of the Project such as but not limited to a structure an interchange a building a portion of a site a branch circuit in highway illumination that has been in satisfactory and continuous operation for a period of at least days or a section of road or pavement then to the extent that said portions stability and integrity are not dependent upon the completion of other Contract work the completed unit or portion of the Project may be opened to vehicular or pedestrian traffic under the provisions of .. or to railroad aircraft pedestrian or other traffic or to occupancy at the direction of the Engineer .
This report can be located on the CT Department of Transportation Website Connecticut DOT Qualified Products List Report RECLAIMED CONCRETE AGGREGATE Reclaimed waste consisting of crushed and graded concrete removed from pavements structures or buildings .
RECLAIMED WASTE Debris from the demolition of buildings structures and pavements residue from incineration and recycled glass .
Acceptable material shall include concrete bituminous concrete glass ceramics brick pavement subbase and base courses and clinker from resource recovery plants .
ROADBED The graded portion of a highway including portions within the top and side slopes which have been prepared as a foundation for the pavement structure and shoulders .
Conc.bituminous concrete CAPWAPCAse Pile Wave Analysis Program CASCoating Applicator Specialist CBcatch basin CCAchromated copper arsenate CCM Pipe or CCMPcoated corrugated metal pipe Errata January Errata July CICUcontroller interface communications unit CLLCUclosed loop local coordination unit CLMUclosed loop master unit CMSChangeable Message Sign Conc.concrete CPE Pipe or CPEPcorrugated plastic or polyethylene pipe CPScentipoise second CWI Certified Welding Inspector cwt.hundredweight or pounds DCdirect current dist.distillation DMTDivision of Materials Testing DTIDirect Tension Indicator EWendwall est.estimated excexcavation fijacking tension FRCFiberglass Reinforced Composite f cspecified minimum compressive strength at a specified age f cirequired strength at time of transfer gagauge or gage GsaApparent specific gravity GsbBulk specific gravity HASPHealth and Safety Plan HMAhot mix asphalt or bituminous concrete HRBRockwell B Scale hardness HRCRockwell C Scale hardness Hzhertz IMCIntermediate Metal Conduit IPinternet protocol I.P.S.Iron Pipe Size IWRCIndependent Wire Rope Core JMFjob mix formula KDKiln Dried KDATKiln Dried After Treatment kip pounds ksfkips per square foot LCDLiquid Crystal Display LEDlightemitting diode LRFDLoad Resistance Factor Design l.s.lump sum mbffoot board measure MBRmetal beam rail Mgal gallons MHmanhole MLSIMajor Lump Sum Item Errata January July January MSDSMaterial Safety Data Sheets MPTMaintenance and Protection of Traffic N.C.National Coarse NDTnondestructive testing Pavt.pavement PCBCprecast concrete barrier curb PCCPortland Cement Concrete PEpolyethylene Perf .
CPEPPerforated Corrugated Plastic or Polyethylene Pipe pfmd.preformed PROMprogrammable read only memory psfpounds per square foot psipounds per square inch psprestressed PVCpolyvinyl chloride PwaPercent water absorbed QCPFAQuality Control Plan for Fine Aggregate RAPreclaimed asphalt pavement RCReinforced Concrete RCCEReinforced Concrete Culvert End RC Pipe or RCPReinforced Concrete Pipe RFCRequest for Change RFIRequest for Information RMCRigid Metal Conduit SDsystem detector sec.second sol.soluble sp .
Facilities Construction Load Restrictions a Vehicle Weights This subarticle will apply to travel both on existing pavements and pavements under construction .
The removal and placement of frozen material shall be at the sole expense of the Contractor. . Topsoil shall be excavated within pavement and shoulder limits at grade points and to an elevation feet below finish grade and elsewhere as directed .
In all cases the use of topsoil in constructing embankments shall be restricted to locations where the surface of the underlying material is dry its distance above the free water surface at the time of filling is more than feet and its distance below finish pavement grade is more than feet. . Excavation of Rock When rock is encountered it shall be excavated to the slope lines and depths indicated on the plans .
Freedraining material shall meet the requirements of M In fills where the top of the proposed pavement will be less than feet above an existing flexible pavement and the existing pavement is not required to be removed it shall be scarified as directed by the Engineer .
In fills where the top of the proposed pavement will be less than feet above an existing concrete pavement including all bituminous resurfacing thereon the concrete pavement .. shall be removed .
In fills where the top of the proposed pavement will be between and feet above an existing concrete pavement the concrete pavement shall be broken in such a manner that complete fractures are obtained .
When present pavement not in cut or fill is removed as called for on the plans or directed the area shall be backfilled with a suitable earth material which shall be free from admixture of subsoil refuse stumps roots rocks brush weeds and other material which will prevent the formation of a suitable seed bed .
Wherever portions of existing concrete pavement are to be removed such removals shall be made to neat lines .
Where no break or joint exists in the concrete pavement at the line of delineation a kerf at least inches but no more than inches deep shall be made in the concrete with an approved concrete cutting saw .
Concrete pavement remaining in place shall have vertical edges and that portion below the kerf shall be reasonably smooth .
Wherever portions of existing bituminous concrete pavement are to be removed they shall be removed to neat lines as shown on the plans or as directed by the Engineer .
Where the delineated limits of the areas in which such bituminous surfaces are to be removed are adjacent to existing bituminous concrete pavement that is to remain in place the line of delineation shall be cut by a method approved by the Engineer .
Also measured for payment will be the volume of earth moved in cutting or plowing of steps on steep slopes as described in .. and the removal of existing flexible pavement where shown on the plans or ordered by the Engineer .
Existing concrete pavement and concrete base over s.y .
The work of scarifying existing pavement will not be measured for payment but the cost shall be considered as included in the general cost of the Contract .
The work of cutting concrete pavement will be measured for payment by the number of linear feet of saw cut made with an approved concrete saw to the lines delineated by the Engineer on the concrete pavement .
The cutting of bituminous concrete pavement will be measured for payment by the number of linear feet of cut made by an approved method to the lines delineated on the plans or as directed by the Engineer .
Bituminous parking areas are considered as bituminous concrete pavement .
The work materials tools equipment and labor incidental to the disposal of unsuitable excavated material or breaking concrete pavement will not be measured for payment .
The removal of concrete pavement or concrete base will be paid for at the Contract unit price per square yard for Removal of Concrete Pavement including any bituminous surfacing material immediately thereon .
The removal of all pavement or pavement bases other than concrete will be paid for at .. the Contract unit price per cubic yard for Earth Excavation .
The work of cutting concrete pavement will be paid for at the Contract unit price per linear foot for Cut Concrete Pavement including any bituminous surfacing material immediately thereon which price shall include all materials equipment tools and labor incidental thereto .
The work of cutting bituminous concrete pavement will be paid for at the Contract unit price per linear foot for Cut Bituminous Concrete Pavement which price shall include all materials equipment tools and labor incidental thereto .
All costs incidental to breaking concrete pavement will be considered as being included in the general cost of the Contract .
Rock in Trench Rock insofar as it applies to trench excavation shall be defined as rock in definite ledge formation boulders or portions of boulders cement masonry structures concrete structures reinforced concrete pipe Portland cement concrete pavement or base of c.y .
Wherever portions of existing concrete pavement that would otherwise remain in place must be removed in conjunction with trench excavation such removals shall be made to neat lines .
The areas in which such concrete pavements are to be removed will be delineated by the Engineer before such work is done .
Where no break or joint exists in the concrete pavement at the line of delineation a full depth cut shall be made in the concrete with a concrete cutting saw approved by the Engineer .
Concrete pavement remaining in place shall have vertical edges .
Wherever the concrete pavement to be removed has been overlaid with bituminous concrete and the adjacent bituminous concrete pavement is to remain in place the bituminous pavement shall be removed to a neat line that is foot beyond the neat line for the concrete pavement removal .
Wherever portions of existing fulldepth bituminous concrete pavement are to be removed in conjunction with trench excavation they shall be removed to neat lines .
Where the limits of the areas in which such bituminous pavement is to be removed are adjacent to existing bituminous concrete pavement that is to remain in place the limits shall be cut by a method approved by the Engineer .
The work of cutting concrete pavement and cutting bituminous concrete pavement will be measured in accordance with .. Basis of Payment This work will be paid for at the Contract unit price per cubic yard for Trench Excavation feet feet Deep Trench Excavation feet feet Deep Trench Excavation feet feet Deep or Trench Excavation feet feet Deep as the case may be .
When it becomes necessary in the opinion of the Engineer to install sheet piling for the support of existing facilities pavement utilities or for other constraints the sheeting items will be paid in accordance .. with . . or ..
Payment for the work of Cut Concrete Pavement and Cut Bituminous Concrete Pavement will be made in accordance with .. except that the cut made in the bituminous concrete overlay foot beyond the neat line for concrete pavement removal is not included under Cut Concrete Pavement and will be paid for as Cut Bituminous Concrete Pavement .
SUBGRADE .. Description The area upon which the pavement structure and paved .. Errata January shoulders are placed including the shoulder base courses and subbase shall be known as the subgrade .
This is the plane coincident with the bottom of the subbase and the edge of pavement as shown on the plans and crosssections or as ordered by the Engineer .
It shall be checked and approved by the Engineer prior to placing any pavement structure and shoulders thereon .
.. Method of Measurement Payment lines for formation of subgrade will be coincident with the outside edges of the pavement or where paved shoulders are constructed with the outside edges of the shoulder .
Payment for formation of subgrade will not be allowed for work at private drives in areas where traffic bound gravel is constructed or in areas where existing pavement is used as a base for resurfacing .. with bituminous concrete .
When no item for Formation of Subgrade appears in the proposal the cost of this work shall be included in the Contract unit price for the pavement item or items involved .
The compacting and binding operation shall begin at the outside edges overlapping the shoulders for a distance of not less than inches and progress towards the middle parallel with the centerline of the pavement .
During the hauling and placing operations the Contractor shall immediately remove any material dumped or spilled on the shoulders or pavement .
CONCRETE FOR PAVEMENT .. Description .. Materials .. Construction Methods .. Method of Measurement .. Basis of Payment .. Description This pavement shall consist of Portland cement concrete with or without reinforcement in accordance with the lines grades thickness and typical cross section as shown on the plans .
.. Materials The materials for this work shall meet the requirements for concrete pavement under M ..
The plastic properties for concrete pavement shall meet the requirements for standard mix properties as specified in .. a .
The finished grades shall be maintained in a smooth and compacted condition until the pavement is placed. . Slip Form Paving When slip form paving the subgrade or the surface of the subbase over which the tracks of the slip form paver will travel shall not vary more than inch from the grade established by the Engineer .
Frequent starting and stopping of the paver shall be kept to a minimum. . Placement Where concrete is to be placed adjoining a previously constructed lane of pavement and hauling units and mechanical equipment will be operated upon that previously constructed lane of pavement that lane shall have attained the strength specified for opening the pavement to vehicular traffic .
Placing Reinforcement If mechanical means are used to place pavement reinforcement or pavement fabric the mechanical placement equipment shall be capable of positioning the reinforcement or fabric within the tolerances specified .
When reinforced concrete pavement is placed in layers the entire width of the bottom layer shall be struck off and consolidated to such length and depth that the sheet of fabric or bar mat may be laid full length on the concrete in its final position without further manipulation .
Work bridges or other devices necessary to provide access to the pavement surface for the purpose of finishing straightedging and making corrections as hereinafter specified shall be provided by the Contractor .
b Finishing at Joints The concrete adjacent to joints shall be compacted or firmly placed without voids or segregation against the joint material under and around all load transfer devices joint assembly units and other features designed to extend into the pavement .
e Final Finish When all irregularities have been removed and the edges of the slabs and joints given their initial edging the pavement shall be subjected to the following stage texturing treatment i. Dragging with Burlap The burlap shall be at least feet wide and a length of feet greater than the width of the lane or lanes being placed .
When not in use the burlap shall not be allowed to rest on the pavement .
Texturing with Tines As soon as possible after the pavement surface has been dragged with the burlap mechanical equipment shall be used to texture the surface with deep transverse grooves .
The equipment shall consist of a selfpropelled device capable of applying a textured finish transverse to the centerline of the pavement .
The tined grooving shall extend from edge to edge of the pavement and shall be perpendicular to the centerline of the pavement .
f Edging at Forms and Joints After the final finish but before the concrete has taken its initial set the edges of the pavement along each side of each slab and on each side of transverse expansion joints formed joints transverse construction joints and emergency construction joints shall be worked with an approved tool and rounded to the radius required by the plans .
Tie bars shall be coated with epoxy meeting AASHTO M . When shown on the plans and when adjacent lanes of pavement are constructed steel side forms shall be used which will form a keyway along the construction joint .
Longitudinal formed joints shall consist of a groove or cleft extending downward from and normal to the surface of the pavement .
The longitudinal joint shall be sawed within hours of placement and before any other equipment or vehicles are allowed on the pavement .
Preformed joint filler shall be furnished in lengths equal to the pavement width or equal to the lane width .
c Transverse Contraction Joints Transverse contraction joints shall consist of planes of weakness created by forming or cutting grooves in the surface of the pavement and when shown on the plans shall include transfer assemblies .
Sawed contraction joints shall be created by sawing grooves in the surface of the pavement of the dimensions and at the spacing and lines shown on the plans with an approved concrete saw .
e Load Transfer Devices Load transfer devices shall meet the requirements of M f Sealing Joints Joints shall be sealed as soon after completion of the curing period as feasible and before the pavement is opened to traffic including the Contractors equipment .
The seals shall be installed in a compressed condition and shall at time of placement be below the level of the pavement surface by approximately inch .
When concrete is being placed and the air temperature may be expected to drop below o F a sufficient supply of straw hay grass or other suitable blanketing material shall be provided along the work and any time the temperature may be expected to reach the freezing point during the day or night the material so provided shall be spread over the pavement to a sufficient depth to prevent freezing of the concrete .
For the sides of concrete pavement exposed after removal of the forms and for areas where the use of selfpropelled equipment is not practical approved handheld spray bars delivering a fine even spray may be used and the compound shall be drawn from a tank equipped with an approved device to prevent settlement or by a method which will prevent settlement .
If rain falls on the newly coated pavement before the film has dried sufficiently to resist damage or if the film is damaged in any other way the Contractor shall be required to apply a new coat of material to the affected areas equal in curing value to that specified for the original coat .
The Contractor shall have on the Project sufficient approved cover sheet or cotton mats for the protection of the pavement in case of rain or breakdown of the spray equipment .
b Moist Curing After the surface of the concrete has been given its final finish .. it shall be protected by covering it with moist mats of the size and quality specified in M These mats shall be laid longitudinally over the surface of the finished pavement by unrolling from the supported roll so as not to bring an excessive weight upon or to mar the new surface of the pavement .
On removal of the forms the edges shall be covered down to the bottom of the pavement .
C. Protection of Pavement The Contractor shall protect the pavement and its appurtenances against public traffic and traffic caused by his own employees and agents until the pavement is opened to traffic .
Any damage to the pavement occurring prior to the opening of the pavement to traffic by the State shall be repaired or the pavement replaced .
SurfaceTestProfilographandCorrection The finished surface of all mainline pavement shall be tested and corrected to a smoothness as described herein .
Mainline pavement is defined as all pavement for traffic lanes and climbing lanes but excluding concrete base acceleration and deceleration lanes and all taper sections pavement widening shoulders and side street returns .
The surface smoothness of pavement not classified as mainline pavement shall be determined by the Surface Test straightedge as described hereinafter .
The smoothness of the pavement surface will be determined by using a California Type Profilograph over each designated lane to develop a Profile Index .
The profile will terminate feet from each pressure relief joint or existing pavement which is joined by the new pavement .
Pavement profiles will be taken feet from and parallel to each edge of pavement for pavement placed at a foot width or less .
When pavement is placed at a greater width than feet the profile will be taken feet from and parallel to each edge and at the approximate locations of each planned longitudinal joint .
During the initial paving operations either when starting up or after a long shut down period the pavement surface will be tested with the profilograph as soon as the concrete has cured sufficiently to allow testing .
Once the initial pavement smoothness paving methods and paving equipment are acceptable to the Engineer the Contractor may proceed with the paving operation .
Subsequent to the aforementioned initial testing daily profiles of each days paving will be run as soon as possible preferably during the next working day following placement of the pavement .
A days paving is defined as a minimum of linear feet of fullwidth pavement placed in a single day .
For the purpose of determining pavement sections where corrective work or pay adjustments will be necessary the pavement will be evaluated in .
The final texture of the concrete pavement shall be such that texture appearance and skid resistance are comparable to adjacent sections that do not require corrective work .
All corrective work shall be completed prior to determinations of pavement thickness . .
Surface Test Straightedge and Corrections As soon as the concrete has hardened sufficiently the pavement surface except as specified herein above for mainline pavement shall be tested by the Contractor with an approved foot straightedge placed both transversely and longitudinally to the centerline at sufficient intervals to check the surface profile .
Correction of surface irregularities and resulting surface finish shall meet the requirements specified herein for mainline pavement .
E. Flexural Testing of Concrete The flexural strength of the concrete pavement shall be monitored by the evaluation of compressive strength cylinders .
F. OpeningtoTraffic Vehicular traffic shall be excluded from the pavement until sufficient curing has taken place .
The pavement shall be opened to traffic with the attainment of a compressive strength of psi .
Any damage to the pavement from traffic or any other causes occurring prior to acceptance of this Contract shall be repaired by the Contractor at its own expense .
In order to expedite the opening of a pavement or part thereof to traffic the Engineer may direct the Contractor to supply a concrete with a higher cement factor or to substitute TYPE III Portland Cement for the type being used .
If the Contractor wants to increase the early strength of the pavement in order to facilitate its plan for the paving sequence substitution of TYPE III Portland Cement or use of a concrete with a higher cement factor may be allowed .
.. Method of Measurement It is the intent of these specifications that the pavement shall be constructed strictly in accordance with the thickness and widths shown on the plans .
mile section according to the following table AVERAGE PROFILE INDEX CONTRACT UNIT PRICE ADJUSTMENT Inches per mile per .mile section Percentage of pavement unit bid price to over to over to over to over to over to over to over to over see below When the average Profile Index exceeds inchesmile per .
The unit bid price adjustment will be computed using the designed thickness of Portland Cement pavement or as adjusted under This unit bid price adjustment will apply .. to the total area of the .
No payment will be made for any pavement which has an average profile index in excess of inchesmile until corrective work has been completed by the Contractor and the pavement reprofiled to verify that the average Profile Index has been reduced to inchesmile or less .
Determination of Pavement Thickness The pavement thickness shall be measured after surface correction is completed .
The thickness of fixed form pavement shall be determined by using measurements or elevations or both obtained by the Contractor and submitted to the Engineer prior to the placement of concrete .
The thickness of slip form pavement will be determined by average caliper measurements of cores tested in accordance with AASHTO T . For the purpose of establishing an adjusted unit price for pavement units to be considered separately are defined at lineal feet of pavement in each traffic lane starting at the end of the pavement bearing the smaller station number .
of pavement or fraction thereof in the unit .
In calculating the average thickness of the pavement measurements that are in excess of the specified thickness by more than .
inch the actual thickness of the pavement in this area will be determined by taking additional cores at not less than foot intervals parallel to the centerline in each direction from the affected location until in each direction a core is found that is not .. deficient by more than .
Determination of Adjusted Payments After the thickness of pavement has been determined on the basis of core measurements as hereinbefore described the following rules for payment shall be applied .
Where the average thickness of pavement is deficient in thickness by more than .
When the thickness of pavement is deficient by more than inch the Engineer will determine whether the area of such deficiency will be left in place or replaced in accordance with the provisions of All additional work required and any delay to the Contractors operation as a result of these specifications will not be cause for additional compensation for an extension of time .
On all sections of pavement which have to be removed the Contractor shall bear the entire cost of the initial construction and the removal of the pavement including all concrete reinforcement steel and joint material .
Measured for payment hereunder will be only the items of construction entering into the replacement of the concrete pavement to the specified thickness .
Concrete for Pavement The quantity of concrete included under this item will be the number of cubic yards of accepted concrete for pavement contained in the theoretical computed volume of the pavement having the required thickness and widths but subject to adjusted proportional payment or nonpayment as stated hereinbefore . .
Fabric or Bar Mat Reinforcement This material will be measured by the number of square yards of completed and accepted reinforced concrete pavement. . Transverse Expansion Joint This material will be measured by the number of linear feet of completed and accepted transverse expansion joint. . Contraction Joint This material will be measured by the number of linear feet of completed and accepted contraction joint .
.. . Longitudinal Joint Support Assembly This material will be measured by the number of joint support assemblies actually incorporated in the completed and accepted concrete pavement .
.. Basis of Payment Payment for the concrete pavement will be made as follows .
The transporting and testing of beams and cylinders will be done by the Department without expense to the Contractor. . Reinforcement The reinforcement for the concrete pavement will be paid for at the Contract unit price per square yard of pavement for Mat Reinforcement for Concrete Pavement complete in place which price shall include all materials equipment tools labor and work incidental thereto . .
Type III Portland Cement When such material is substituted for other Portland Cement at the direction of the Engineer in order to expedite the opening of pavement to traffic it will be paid for at the actual unit cost per barrel to the Contractor for the quantity actually incorporated in the pavement less the actual unit cost per barrel to the Contractor for an equal quantity of the Portland Cement so replaced which cost shall include all equipment labor storage transportation and work incidental to its inclusion in the concrete and incorporation in the finished pavement .
Course A lift or multiple lifts comprised of the same bituminous concrete mixture placed as part of the pavement structure .
Density Lot All material placed in a single lift and as defined in Disintegration Wearing away or fragmentation of the pavement .
Transitions for Roadway Surface Transitions shall be formed at any point on the roadway where the pavement surface deviates vertically from the uniform longitudinal profile as specified on the plans .
The Contractor shall inspect the newly placed pavement for defects in the mixture or placement before rolling is started .
Where hand spreading is permitted the mixture shall be placed by means of suitable shovels and other tools and in a uniformly loose layer at a thickness that will result in a completed pavement meeting the designed grade and elevation .
Any pavement exceeding these limits shall be subject to an adjustment or removal .
b Area Where the width of the lift exceeds that shown on the plans by more than the specified thickness of each lift the longitudinal limits of such variation including locations and intervals of the measurements will be documented by the Engineer for use in calculating the adjustment in c Delivered Weight of Mixture When the delivery ticket shows that the truck exceeds the allowable gross weight for the vehicle type the quantity of tons representing the overweight amount will be documented by the Engineer for use in calculating an adjustment in accordance with Transverse Joints All transverse joints shall be formed by sawcutting a sufficient distance back from the previous run existing bituminous concrete pavement or bituminous concrete driveways to expose the full thickness of the lift .
A thin uniform coating of tack coat shall be applied to the pavement immediately before overlaying and be allowed sufficient time to break set prior to any paving equipment or haul vehicles driving on it .
These allowances will not relieve the Contractor from meeting pavement compaction requirements .
Surface Requirements The pavement surface of any lift shall meet the following requirements for smoothness and uniformity .
The pavement surface under the wedge joint must have an application of tack coat material .
The joint seal material shall be applied in accordance with the manufacturers recommendation so as to provide uniform coverage and avoid excess bleeding onto the newly placed pavement . .
Temperature and Seasonal Requirements Paving including placement of temporary pavements shall be divided into seasons InSeason and Extended Season .
Paving during Extended Season shall not commence until the Engineer has approved the plan. . Density Testing of Bituminous Concrete Using Core Samples This procedure describes the frequency and the method the Contractor shall use to obtain pavement cores for acceptance from the Project .
The bituminous concrete fill shall be compacted to inch above the finished pavement .
All such core samples shall be extracted and filled using the procedure outlined in The results from the dispute resolution cores shall be added to the results from the acceptance cores and averaged for determining the final inplace density value. . Corrective Work Procedures Any portion of the completed pavement that does not meet the requirements of the specification shall be corrected at the expense of the Contractor .
If pavement placed by the Contractor does not meet the specifications and the Engineer requires its replacement or correction the Contractor shall a Propose a corrective procedure to the Engineer for review and approval prior to any corrective work commencing .
The proposal shall include Limits of pavement to be replaced or corrected indicating stationing or other criteria that are readily distinguishable .
b Perform all corrective work in accordance with the Contract and the approved .. corrective procedure. . Protection of the Work The Contractor shall protect all sections of the newly finished pavement from damage that may occur as a result of the Contractors operations for the duration of the Project .
Prior to the Engineers authorization to open the pavement to traffic the Contractor is responsible to protect the pavement from damage. . Cut Bituminous Concrete Pavement Work under this item shall consist of making a straightline cut in the bituminous concrete pavement to the lines delineated on the plans or as directed by the Engineer .
liquid content e Density Adjustment The quantity of bituminous concrete measured for payment in a lift of pavement specified to be inches or greater may be adjusted for density .
The installation and removal of a bond breaker and the removal and disposal of any temporary transition formed by milling or with bituminous concrete pavement will not be measured for payment. . Cut Bituminous Concrete Pavement The quantity of bituminous concrete pavement cut will be measured in accordance with .
The installation and removal of a bond breaker and the removal and disposal of any temporary transition formed by milling or with bituminous concrete pavement is included in the general cost of the work . .
The cutting of bituminous concrete pavement will be paid in accordance with .. for Cut Bituminous Concrete Pavement. . Material for tack coat will be paid for at the Contract unit price per gallon for Material for Tack Coat . .
PRESSURE RELIEF JOINT .. Description Work under this item shall consist of constructing in the new or existing reinforced concrete pavement a pressure relief joint composed of a bituminous concrete pavement course on a bituminous concrete base course .
The pressure relief joint shall be constructed on the prepared subbase in accordance with these specifications and in accordance with the lines grades compacted thickness pavement class and cross sections shown on the plans .
There will be no payment for cutting concrete pavement and bituminous concrete pavement removal of concrete pavement and bituminous concrete pavement additional subbase and compaction of subbase but the cost thereof shall be considered in the general cost of the pressure relief joint .
Extensions shall not be used on catch basins or drop inlets at pavement low points or where adjacent curbing is being raised .
Conversion of catch basins to catch basins of the type specified or to manholes as the case may be will be measured for payment as a unit including excavation cutting of pavement removal and replacement of pavement pervious material backfill and all necessary alterations to the walls and furnishing and setting the frame and grate or cover whichever applies .
When resetting tops frames and covers there will be no measurement for excavation cutting removal and replacement of pavement pervious material and backfill .
Catch Basins Junction Boxes and Manholes having a depth of not over feet .. will be paid for at the Contract unit price each for Junction Box Catch Basin of the type specified or Manhole of the type specified complete in place which price shall include all materials equipment tools and labor incidental thereto. . Catch Basins Junction Boxes and Manholes having a depth of more than feet will be paid for at the Contract unit price each for Catch Basin Over Feet Deep Junction Box Over Feet Deep or Manhole Over Feet Deep of the type specified complete in place which price shall include all materials equipment tools and labor incidental thereto. . Drop Inlets will be paid for at the Contract unit price each for Drop Inlet of the type specified complete in place which price shall include all materials equipment tools and labor incidental thereto. . Reset Units will be paid for at the Contract unit price each for Reset Manhole Reset Catch Basin or Reset Drop Inlet of the type specified respectively complete in place which price shall include excavation pervious material backfill cutting of pavement removal and replacement of pavement structure and all materials equipment tools and labor incidental thereto except that when the work requires reconstruction greater than feet measured vertically then the entire cost of resetting the unit will be paid for as extra work in accordance with the provisions of .
Conversion of drainage structures will be paid for at the Contract unit price each for Convert Catch Basin to Type Catch Basin Convert Catch Basin to Manhole or Convert of Manhole to Catch Basin complete in place which price shall include excavation cutting of pavement removal and replacement of pavement pervious material backfill all alterations to existing catch basin or manhole all materials .. including catch basin frame and grate of the type specified or manhole frame and cover all equipment tools and labor incidental thereto .
As an alternative tining may be achieved using a machine designed specifically for tining or grooving concrete pavements .
A longitudinal joint shall be provided if the concrete backfill is placed adjacent to a concrete pavement .
In addition if Temporary Slotted Drain Pipe is required as shown on the plans the Contract unit price shall include the removal and disposal of the pipe and concrete backfill including excavation and all materials tools equipment and labor incidental thereto to permit the construction of the permanent structures or pavement .
BITUMINOUS CONCRETE CURBING .. Description Bituminous concrete curbing shall consist of machine laid bituminous concrete constructed on the pavement to the dimensions and details shown on the plans or as ordered and in accordance with the specifications .
In addition the curbing shall be constructed in accordance with the following requirements Prior to the arrival of the mixture on the Project Site the surface of the pavement where the curbing is to be constructed shall be cleaned of all loose and foreign material .
Rock in so far as it applies to Rock in Pole Excavation shall be defined as rock in definite ledge formation boulders or portions of boulders cement masonry structures concrete structures or Portland cement concrete pavement which has a crosssectional area that exceeds of the crosssectional area of the designed pier hole .
BITUMINOUS CONCRETE FOR PATCHING .. Description The work under this item shall consist of the temporary patching of any pavement surfaces or pedestrian passways which have become rutted broken damaged or otherwise unserviceable and at such other locations as the Engineer may designate .
During hauling and spreading operations the Contractor shall immediately remove any material dumped or spilled on the shoulders or pavement .
The unit prices shall include all materials equipment tools labor transportation operations and all work incidental thereto including the removal of guy wires hose and tree support stakes after the initial establishment period except that payment for excavation of solid ledge rock concrete pavement and boulders cubic yard in volume or greater will be made under .
Cleanup shall include but not be limited to the removal of all debris from the turf establishment operations on the shoulders pavement or elsewhere on adjacent properties publicly and privately owned . .
ROCK EXCAVATION FOR PLANTING .. Description When solid ledge rock concrete pavement or boulders c.y .
in size or greater are encountered in the planting area the Contractor shall notify the Engineer who will determine whether the rock or concrete pavement shall be removed or the plant or plants relocated .
Rock or concrete pavement as defined herein shall not be removed without the permission of the Engineer .
.. Materials Vacant .. Construction Methods When rock or concrete pavement removal is approved by the Engineer the plant pit diameter shall be feet greater than the diameter of the ball of earth or root spread of the plant and the depth of the pit shall be the same as when the excavation is made in earth .
.. All unsuitable material resulting from rock or concrete pavement excavation even if beyond the payment lines and all breakage and slides shall be removed and disposed of as directed .
.. Method of Measurement The measurement for payment of the quantity of ledge rock concrete pavement or boulders c.y .
.. Basis of Payment Payment for the removal of ledge rock concrete pavement or boulders c.y .
The Contractor shall also provide such safety measures pavement markings warning devices and signs as deemed necessary to safeguard and guide the traveling public through detours ordered by the Engineer included in the approved scheme for maintenance of traffic or as shown on the plans .
This price shall include all costs for labor equipment and services involved in the erection maintenance moving adjusting cleaning relocating and storing of signs barricades drums traffic cones and delineators furnished by the Contractor as well as all costs of labor and equipment involved in the maintenance of traffic lanes and detours except for pavement markings ordered or included in the approved scheme for maintenance of traffic .
For slope limits pavement edges gutter lines etc .
Further the Contractor shall provide and maintain reference stakes at foot intervals immediately prior to and during the formation of subgrade and the construction of subsequent pavement layers .
For roadways where the existing pavement markings need to be reestablished or grooved markings are to be used Prior to any resurfacing or obliteration of existing pavement markings the Contractor and a representative of the Engineer must establish and document pavement marking control points from the existing markings .
The Contractor shall provide and maintain reference stakes or markings at foot intervals immediately off the edge of pavement so that the Contractor will later be able to reestablish the existing pavement markings and necessary line stripe grooving limits .
The Contractor shall also provide and maintain additional reference stakes andor markings at any point where there is a change in pavement markings so that the Contractor will later be able to reestablish the existing pavement markings and grooving limits .
For nonlimited access roadways On nonlimited access roadways the Contractor may need to adjust the final locations of the pavement marking or grooving limits in light of a need to accommodate pedestrian and bicycle traffic .
Prior to any resurfacing or obliteration of existing pavement markings the Contractor the Engineer and a representative from the Division of Traffic Engineering must establish and document pavement marking control points from the existing marking and grooving limits as .. Errata July described above .
.. Excavation and Miscellaneous Work All cuts in pavement sidewalk surfaces and concrete aprons shall be done in a neat and workmanlike manner so as to cause the least possible damage .
All excavation shall be closed and sidewalks pavements and landscaping restored at each intersection prior to opening any other intersection unless the Engineer otherwise .. approves it .
Rock insofar as it applies to trenching and backfilling shall be defined as rock in definite ledge formation boulders or portions of boulders cement masonry structures concrete structures reinforced concrete pipe Portland cement concrete pavement or base of c.y .
It shall also include the encasement of conduit or cable in sand grading and placement of topsoil fertilizing seeding and mulching and the removal and reconstruction of bituminous concrete and granite curbing riprap crushed stone pavement or bituminous concrete sidewalk structure of all disturbed areas within the maximum trenching limits shown on the plans .
Where trenching in bituminous concrete sidewalk or paved areas the trench shall be sawcut and backfilled to within the depth from the surface required to replace the removed sidewalk or pavement structure which shall then be replaced .
It shall also include all sand encasement backfilling grading seeding fertilizing mulching cleanup and disposal of surplus material sawcutting sidewalks and paved areas as well as furnishing and installing curbing riprap crushed stone topsoil sidewalk pavement or structure as the case may be .
Any pavement or bituminous concrete sidewalk replaced beyond the maximum trench limits as shown on the plans and approved by the Engineer will be paid for at the Contract unit price for the material being used or as extra work if no unit price has been established .
Rock in so far as it applies to Rock in Foundation Excavation shall be defined as rock in definite ledge formation boulders or portions of boulders cement masonry structures concrete structures or Portland cement concrete pavement which has a crosssectional area that exceeds of the crosssectional area of the designed foundation hole .
Gravel will be measured in accordance with .. Basis of Payment This work will be paid for at the Contract unit price each for Light Standard Foundation or Traffic Control Foundation of the type called for which price shall include all materials equipment forms excavation disposal of surplus material Class A concrete electrical conduit sweeps conduit caps ground rod sleeves bonding bushings anchor bolts backfill topsoil grading seeding fertilizing mulching riprap restoration of bituminous concrete sidewalk and pavement surfaces .
The mounting height shall be as called for on the plans measured from the center of the light source to the pavement directly below .
The Contractor shall coordinate the placement of the conduit prior to the placement of the pavement .
Sealed bonding bushing shall be provided at each conduit outlet in all boxes. . Conduit Under Slope Protection Conduit shall be installed in trench under bridge slope protection or between the slope protection and the edge of pavement at the locations and to the dimensions shown on the plans or as directed by the Engineer .
Trenching and backfilling shall be paid under .. No payment for trenching and backfilling will be made for conduit installed during construction under new pavement or in fill areas of new median barrier curb installations .
.. Basis of Payment This work will be paid for at the Contract price each for Concrete Handhole of the type called for Concrete Handhole Type II Bank Adapter or Cast Iron Handhole Cover complete in place which price shall include all materials concrete steel cover grounding tab crushed stone excavating backfilling and replacement of bituminous sidewalk and pavement including grading and placing topsoil seeding fertilizing mulching and all equipment tools labor and work incidental thereto .
The mounting height shall be a nominal feet measured from the center of the light source to the pavement directly below .
When traffic signals are spanmounted they shall be installed so the lowest part of the signal head is not less than feet or more than feet above the pavement grade beneath the signal head .
Loop detectors installed in new or resurfaced pavements shall have the slots saw cut in the pavement base course and the loop wires placed and sealed before the placing of the pavement wearing course .
No loop detector saw cut shall be placed over a patched trench or existing pavement without the approval of the Engineer .
The Contractor shall remove the existing pavement and replace it with new pavement for installation of the loop detectors at the direction of and within the limits prescribed by the Engineer where the condition of the existing pavement is not suitable for installation .
The work shall be performed under the appropriate pavement removal and replacement items .
The existing pavement shall be removed a minimum of inches deep .
The replaced pavement shall be overlaid as directed .
The loop detector shall be installed in the new pavement under the overlay .
The saw cut shall then be filled with plastic compound to a level of approximately inch below the pavement surface .
inch from the surface of the pavement .
The elastomeric compound shall not be applied if the pavement surface temperature is less than oF or more than oF .
Joints shall be made in accordance with The single lane magnetic detector shall be placed in a roadway excavation made only large enough to permit the pavement box and conduit to be lowered into place .
Remove the detector coil unit and other parts from the pavement box replace the cover and install the conduit using pipe joint compound to prevent the entrance of moisture .
The pavement box and conduit assembly will be suspended in the excavation using bolts and inch inch wood pieces as temporary supports .
The conduit entrances shall be sealed with oakum or equivalent and fill the entire pavement box with melted petrolatum Vaseline or equivalent .
Cable to be installed in conduit shall be pulled with a minimum of dragging on the ground or pavement .
SpanWireusedforthesuspensionoftrafficsignals shall be attached to the supporting poles at such a level as to make the lowest part of the signal head not less than feet inches nor more than feet inches above the pavement grade beneath the signal head .
Where pressure sensitive vehicle detectors are to be removed the entire detector frame shall be removed the hole shall be backfilled and the pavement restored in accordance with the appropriate sections of the Standard Specifications .
PAINTED PAVEMENT MARKINGS .. Description This item shall consist of furnishing and installing painted pavement markings hot applied painted pavement markings and painted legend arrows and markings of the type and color specified at the locations indicated on the plans and in accordance with the plans these specifications and as directed by the Engineer .
Painted pavement markings and hot applied painted pavement markings include paint installed with a truckmounted painting machine such as center lines lane lines and shoulder lines .
The exact location for passing zones will be determined by the Engineer prior to the application of the pavement markings .
.. Materials Materials for this work shall meet the requirements of M .. for waterborne pavement marking paint M .. for hotapplied waterborne pavement marking paint and M .. for glass beads Type smaller beads .
.. Construction Methods Pavement areas to be painted shall be dry and sufficiently cleaned of sand and road debris so as to provide an acceptable bond between the paint and the pavement .
of paint for painted pavement markings and painted legend arrows and markings and lb.gal .
of paint for hotapplied painted pavement markings .
.. Method of Measurement Painted pavement markings and hotapplied pavement markings will be measured for payment by the number of linear feet of paint applied by a truckmounted painting machine on the pavement and accepted .
Painted legend arrows and markings will be measured for payment by the number of square feet of paint installed with a hand striping machine on the pavement and accepted .
.. Basis of Payment This work will be paid for at the Contract unit price per square foot for Painted Legend Arrows and Markings and per linear foot of paint for Painted Pavement Markings or HotApplied Painted Pavement Markings of the width and color specified installed on the pavement and accepted .
This price shall include all premarking layout cleaning of pavement paint glass beads application of paint and glass beads protection during drying and all materials equipment tools and labor incidental thereto .
EPOXY RESIN PAVEMENT MARKINGS .. Description .. Materials .. Construction Methods .. Method of Measurement .. Basis of Payment .. Description This item shall consist of furnishing and installing retroreflective white and yellow epoxy resin pavement markings of the width and color specified and epoxy resin pavement markings symbols and legends at the locations indicated on the plans in conformity with the plans and as directed by the Engineer .
Epoxy resin pavement markings include epoxy resin installed with a truckmounted machine such as center lines lane lines and shoulder lines .
Epoxy resin pavement markings symbols and legends installed with a hand striping machine include stop bars crosswalks parking stalls lane arrows legends and markings within areas such as paved islands gore areas and paved medians .
The exact location for passing zones will be determined by the Engineer prior to the application of the pavement markings .
For markings applied on pavements over year old equipment furnished shall also include a power washing machine capable of cleaning the pavement with a pressure of to psi with water heated to between and F. No chemicals shall be added to the water used in the process .
For other pavement areas cleaning shall consist of brushing with rotary broom nonmetallic and any additional work as recommended by the material manufacturer and acceptable to the Engineer .
Longitudinal joints pavement edges and existing markings shall serve as horizontal control when so directed .
They shall be discontinued during periods of rain and shall not continue until the Engineer determines that the pavement surface is dry enough to achieve adhesion .
of epoxy pavement marking material immediately followed by a second drop of glass beads meeting the requirements of Type smaller beads applied and the rate shall be lb.gal .
of epoxy pavement marking material .
For installation of crosswalk pavement markings only glass beads meeting the requirements of Type smaller beads shall be applied and the rate shall be lb.gal .
of epoxy pavement marking material .
Traffic cones or other acceptable method shall be used to protect the pavement markings until cured .
A marking showing no visual deposition of the material to the pavement surface when viewed from a distance of feet shall be considered as showing notracking and meeting this requirement for time to notrack .
Epoxy resin pavement markings may be applied over existing painted markings provided the existing markings are sufficiently worn to allow adequate adhesion .
The measurements shall be obtained when the pavement surface is clean and dry and shall be reported in millicandelas per square foot per foot candle mcds.f.fc .
Grand Average and standard deviation of the retroreflectivity readings for each line symbol or legend Minimum Initial Performance In order to be accepted all epoxy resin pavement markings must meet the following minimum retroreflectivity reading requirement .. Rev .
.. Method of Measurement Epoxy resin pavement markings shall be measured for payment by the actual number of linear feet of epoxy resin pavement markings installed on the pavement and accepted by the Engineer .
Epoxy resin pavement markings symbols and legends will be measured for payment by the actual number of square feet of epoxy resin pavement markings symbols and legends installed on the pavement and accepted by the Engineer .
.. Basis of Payment This work shall be paid for at the Contract unit price per linear foot for Epoxy Resin Pavement Markings of the width and color specified or the Contract unit price per square foot for Epoxy Resin Pavement Markings Symbols and Legends installed on the pavement and accepted .
Payment will not be made for pavement markings affected by Contractor error and ordered removed .
REMOVAL OF PAVEMENT MARKINGS .. Description This item shall consist of removal of pavement markings of the type specified as called for on the plans or as directed by the Engineer .
.. Construction Methods Pavement markings shall be removed from the pavement by any method that does not materially damage the surface or texture of the pavement .
Any damage to the pavement surface caused by pavement marking removal shall be repaired by the Contractor at its expense by methods acceptable to the Engineer .
Sand or other material deposited on the pavement as a result of removing pavement markings shall be removed as the work progresses .
.. Method of Measurement Work under this item will be measured for payment by the actual number of square feet of pavement markings removed .
Payment will not be made for pavement markings installed by Contractor error and ordered .. removed by the Engineer .
TEMPORARY PLASTIC PAVEMENT MARKING TAPE .. Description This item shall consist of furnishing installing and removing temporary plastic pavement marking tape of the color and width specified at the locations shown on the plans or as directed by the Engineer .
.. Materials Materials for this work shall be commercially available pavement marking tape designed and suitable for the purpose intended and readily removable when required .
The marking tape shall be durable flexible formable and following application shall remain in contact with the pavement surface .
.. Construction Methods Installation of the pavement markings shall be performed in a neat and workmanlike manner .
The Contractor will premark the pavement prior to application of the marking and use a string line if required to produce a neat appearing line .
Removal shall be accomplished without the use of heat solvents grinding or sandblasting and in such a manner that no damage to the pavement results .
.. Method of Measurement This work will be measured for payment by the actual number of linear feet of temporary plastic pavement marking tape acceptably installed on and removed from the pavement when it is no longer applicable or when its removal is directed by the Engineer .
.. Basis of Payment This work will be paid for at the Contract unit price per linear foot for Temporary Plastic Pavement Marking Tape of the width and color specified acceptably installed on and removed from the pavement .
This price shall include all premarking layout cleaning of pavement application removal and all materials equipment tools and labor incidental thereto .
Payment will not be made for pavement markings installed by Contractor error and ordered removed by the Engineer .
PREFORMED BLACK LINE MASK PAVEMENT MARKING TAPE .. Description This item shall consist of furnishing installing and removing preformed patterned black line mask pavement marking tape of the width specified to temporarily cover existing pavement markings in accordance with this Section and in accordance with the plans and as directed by the Engineer .
The preformed patterned black line mask pavement marking tape shall be a highly durable skid resistant nonreflective pliant polymer tape designed for the temporary covering of existing pavement markings .
The black line mask pavement marking tape shall be removed when no longer needed unless directed otherwise by the Engineer .
The black line mask pavement marking tape when applied according to the recommendations of the manufacturer shall provide a neat durable masking that will not flow or distort .
The black line mask pavement marking tape shall be weather resistant and through normal traffic wear shall show no lifting or shrinkage which will significantly impair the intended usage of the tape throughout its useful life and show no significant tearing or other signs of poor adhesion .
.. Materials Materials for this work shall meet the requirements of M .. Construction Methods The patterned black line mask pavement marking tape shall be applied in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations and shall mask the existing markings being covered .
.. Method of Measurement Preformed black line mask pavement marking tape shall be measured for payment by the actual number of linear feet furnished installed and removed .
This price shall be for all the work required by this Section including the cleaning and preparing of the pavement surface installation and removal and all materials equipment tools and labor incidental thereto .
Mounting height of signs on portable sign supports shall be a minimum of foot and a maximum of feet measured from the pavement to the bottom of the sign .
Aggregates reclaimed from pavements or structures may only be used where specifically allowed in the specifications .
b Premolded expansion joint filler for bridge bearings shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M . . Joint Sealants a Joint Sealer for Pavement The joint sealer for pavement shall be a rubber compound of the hotpoured type and shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M Type II unless otherwise noted on the plans or in the special provisions .
The Contractor may request the use of such fine aggregate on select projects for certain applications of bituminous concrete pavement .
When ambient temperatures are F and rising grade CSS or CSSH may be substituted if permitted by the Engineer. . Reclaimed Asphalt Pavement RAP a Requirements RAP shall consist of asphalt pavement constructed with asphalt and aggregate reclaimed by cold milling or other removal techniques approved by the Engineer .
When the source of all RAP material is from pavements previously constructed on Department projects the Contractor shall provide a Materials Certificate listing the detailed locations and lengths of those pavements and that the RAP is only from those locations listed .
.. . Joint Seal Material Requirements Joint seal material shall be a hotpoured rubber compound intended for use in sealing joints and cracks in bituminous pavements .
JMF changes are permitted prior to allow for trends in aggregate and mix properties but every effort shall be employed by the Contractor to minimize this to ensure a uniform and dense pavement .
Reinforcing Steel for Pavement Reinforcing steel for pavement shall be in accordance with the applicable standard plans. . Reports and Certification Mill test reports and materials certification shall be submitted for all types of reinforcing steel and dowel bar mechanical connections confirming they meet the requirements of the applicable specifications .
January M .. Vacant M .. Vacant M .. Vacant M .. Vacant M .. Vacant M .. Waterborne PavementMarking Paint Pavementmarking paint shall be waterborne paint and shall be white or yellow depending on its use for application on bituminous concrete and Portland cement concrete pavements .
M .. HotApplied Waterborne PavementMarking Paint Fastdrying waterborne pavementmarking paint to be applied on bituminous concrete and Portland cement concrete pavements shall be the color specified on the plans .
j Glass Beads The glass beads shall meet the requirements of M M .. Vacant M .. Preformed BlackLine Mask PavementMarking Tape General Requirements The preformed patterned blackline mask pavementmarking tape shall consist of a matte black nonreflective tape in widths or sizes sufficiently large to mask the existing markings which are to be temporarily covered .
The patterned masking tape shall be precoated with a pressure sensitive adhesive and shall be capable of being adhered to existing markings on bituminous concrete pavement or Portland cement concrete in accordance with the manufacturers instructions without the use of heat solvents or other additional adhesives and shall be immediately ready for traffic use after application .
January The preformed patterned blackline masking pavementmarking tape shall be suitable for use for year after the date of receipt when stored in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
Detailed Requirements a Composition The nonreflective patterned blackline mask pavementmarking tape shall not contain metallic foil and shall consist of a mixture of high quality polymeric materials pigments and inorganic fillers distributed throughout its base cross sectional area with a matte black nonreflective top layer .
b Skid Resistance The surface of the patterned nonreflective blackline mask pavementmarking tape shall provide an initial average skid resistance value of British Pendulum Number when tested in accordance with ASTM E. c Thickness The patterned material without adhesive shall have a minimum thickness of .
d Adhesion The blackline mask pavementmarking tape shall adhere to the pavement and existing pavement markings under climatic and traffic conditions normally encountered in the construction work zone .
e Removability The blackline mask pavementmarking tape shall be capable of being removed after its intended use without the use of heat solvents grinding or sand or water blasting .
Pipe for outlets shall not be perforated. . Slotted Drain Pipe The pipe shall be asphalt coated and shall be as specified in M Concrete shall be as specified in M .. Class A or pavement type .
When the slope curbing is set adjacent to concrete pavement or gutters the width of the face of the curbing shall be inches with a tolerance of plus or minus inch .
and AWPA C and AWPA C. The pole shall be class and of sufficient length to obtain the necessary height of the signals above the pavement or the mounting height of luminaires above the pavement .
Loop Vehicle Detector A. Functional Requirements The loop detector shall be an electronic device capable of detecting the presence of a moving or parked vehicle and the detection shall be accomplished by the presence of a parked or moving vehicle over a wire loop embedded in the pavement .
The single lane magnetic detector shall consist of two main assemblies the detector coil unit and the pavement box .
The pavement box shall be a heavy duty aluminum casting with dimensions of approximately inches inches inches .
The concrete that is used in the installation of the pavement box shall be a fastsetting highstrength type .
