Check the line and grade before base or pavement is placed adjacent to or around such Utility Infrastructure .
except the incidental work for testing the depth of base and surface courses and pavement will not be paid for separately .
Satisfactorily protect the ends of any sections of rigidtype base course pavement or wearing surface opened to traffic during a temporary partial suspension of work .
Without written permission do not move andor operate heavyduty construction grading and hauling equipment over existing or new pavements subbase base and surface courses and structures which will remain in service .
Consider and make appropriate scheduling and operational allowances including but not limited to seasonal weather conditions and ambient temperatures permitting requirements plant establishment periods traffic signal testing periods Intelligent Transportation System equipmentrelated testing periods pavement marking retroreflectivity testing Maintenance and Protection of Traffic restriction periods and bituminous pavement restriction periods .
For RPS pavements or when specified in a special provision provide a Material Transfer Vehicle MTV to be used as an intermediate and separate motorized selfpropelled unit between the haul vehicle and the bituminous paver as follows Provide adequate covers of sufficient size to protect the material in the MTV under all conditions .
Contract items constructed under Sections and Publication items MS MS MS MS MS MS MS MS MS and MS including any modified standard or nonstandard item where the character of the work to be performed is considered construction of a flexible base pavement pavement patch or shoulder .
Contract items constructed under Sections and including any modified standard or nonstandard item where the character of the work to be performed is considered construction of a rigid base pavement pavement patch or shoulder .
Excluding patching joint new pavement joint and subbase material for concrete pavement patching .
Excluding concrete overlay transition concrete pavement cores cement concrete and surface preparation for concrete overlay .
Remove organic matter and topsoil within embankment areas to a depth of inches below the existing ground to feet beyond the pavement edges .
Beyond feet of the pavement edges and within the embankment area cut trees and stumps flush with the ground surface .
Excavation as indicated or directed for benches and for the removal of existing pavements not being rehabilitated .
For roadway rehabilitation sawcutting and removal of existing pavement to neat lines as indicated or directed. . CONSTRUCTION a General .
Remove existing pavements within feet of the finished grade scarify the underlying base to a depth of inches and recompact. . Outside Embankment Limits .
Remove existing pavements outside the limit of embankments as indicated to neat lines and backfill with suitable material compacted as specified in Section .b. . Roadway Rehabilitation .
Outline area cut and remove existing pavement structure as indicated or directed .
Excavation for pipe culverts pipearches metal plate pipe metal plate pipearches standard endwalls for pipe culverts and pipearches and excavation in excess of the standard depth for pavement base drains pipe underdrains subsurface drain outlets and subgrade drains .
areas of undercutting and topsoil or pavement removal to the adjacent ground elevation .
Break existing pavements more than feet below the finished grade as follows break bituminous pavements to a maximum size of square foot and recompact break concrete pavements to a maximum size of square yard and scarify bituminous surfacetreated roadways to a depth of inches and recompact .
Remove existing pavements less than or equal to feet below finished subgrade in their entirety unless specified otherwise .
Subgrade consists of the top feet of the material immediately below the pavement section subbase. . Moisture Density and Acceptance Testing .
Subgrade consists of the top feet of the material immediately below the pavement section subbase. . Verification Testing .
Employ suitable precautionary measures and devices to prevent roadway damage including pavement drainage features signing traffic barrier andor guide rail lighting traffic control devices and any other roadway element .
Promptly reshape and recompact or remove and replace damaged or unsatisfactory areas before placement of pavement structure .
Subgrade is incidental to the immediate overlying pavement structure .
Indicate on the shop drawings the proposed location and layout of all blocks location and thickness of bedding material capping material embankment material and pavement section and the location of the geotextile and geomembrane .
Total cover thickness includes the pavement section soil embankment and capping material .
Additionally construct the finished surface of the blocks beneath pavement sections to within .
Place soil embankment to pavement subgrade elevation .
Protect finished surface from frost erosion and damage with suitable covers of soil aggregate concrete pavement or other material approved by the Representative .
Provide mechanical fasterners in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations and capable of holding adjacent geocell panels in direct contact until pavement or other type of final surface is placed .
Remove anchors after filling the cells with subbase and before compaction when used for subgrade support and pavement applications .
Mechanical fasteners must be capable of holding adjacent geocell panels in direct contact until pavement is placed .
except interpret references to pavement to mean base course and for the following sections a General .
Replace with the following Where longitudinal joints are indicated or formed for convenience of construction form a tied joint as shown on the Standard Drawings for cement concrete pavement joints .
Replace with the following Unless otherwise directed by the Representative in writing remove and replace pavement defective in surface tolerance as specified in Section .o defective in depth as specified in Section .s defective in air content as specified in Section .c .
The minimum pavement removal and replacement length is feet for the full width .
When removing and replacing pavement defective in depth start at the determined point of deficiency and proceed longitudinally until a section is reached where the deficiency is not more than inch and as specified .
As directed construct transverse joints needed because of the pavement removal . .
The Contractor may perform halfpavement or fullpavement width construction .
Thoroughly sprinkle water on the rubblized pavementsubbase before placing CTPBC if necessary to ensure a moist condition .
At each stage hold the straightedge in contact with the surface and parallel to the road centerline and in successive positions test the pavement surface from one side to the other .
Advance the test location to the next stage by moving the straightedge along the pavement centerline by not more than feet .
Do not place overlying pavement on the CTPBC during this time period .
After the day period restrict construction traffic to only allow trucks and equipment required to place the next layer or any adjacent CTPBC lift or pavement course .
Replace the requirement for defective pavement with the following The pavement is defective if irregularities are more than inch .
Immediately start correcting courses or pavement that are deficient in depth at the core location and proceed longitudinally and transversely until the depth is within inch of the design depth . .
Areas will be marked where base course is required for existing pavement replacement .
Remove pavement in these areas to neat lines as specified in Section . . Miscellaneous .
If base course material is placed on existing pavement as an overlay or buildup construct in compacted layers .
Spread an initial layer of fine material uniformly over the subgrade subbase or existing pavement as a bed and filler spread to a depth of inches on subgrade or inch on subbase or existing pavement .
Repair or replace marred distorted or otherwise damaged pavement . .
DESCRIPTIONThis work is the Standard construction of a plantmixed densegraded WMA pavement base course on a prepared surface using a volumetric asphalt mixture design developed with the Superpave Gyratory Compactor SGC using prescribed manufactured additives or modifiers andor plant process modifications. . MATERIALSection . . CONSTRUCTIONSection .
Revise the last sentence to read The pavement is defective if irregularities are more than inch .
Immediately start correcting courses or pavement that is deficient in depth at the core location and proceed longitudinally and transversely until the depth is within inch of the design depth . .
Areas will be marked where base course is required for existing pavement replacement .
Remove pavement in these areas to neat lines as specified in Section .
Where a base course is placed on existing pavement construct layers as specified in Section .f unless otherwise directed .
Repair or replace marred distorted or otherwise damaged pavement . .
DESCRIPTIONThis work is replacing the existing pavement with Superpave Asphalt Mixture Design HMA or WMA Base Course. . MATERIAL a Subbase .
Repair or replace marred distorted or otherwise damaged pavement . .
Apply emulsified asphalt as specified in Section .b over the RCC pavement surface .
Provide a uniform voidfree application across the RCC pavement surface .
Use equipment that does not damage mar or alter the surface of the compacted RCC pavement surface when applying the emulsified asphalt .
The RCC pavement surface does not need diamond grinding before placing the asphalt wearing course or surface treatment .
Section .l except When the cure period is complete the RCC pavement may be open to local traffic before placing the asphalt wearing course or surface treatment . .
When the District Executive directs in writing to leave defective pavement in place the payment will be at of the contract price. . .b Change No .
If the depth is deficient inch or more from the indicated depth the pavement is defective .
Immediately start removal of the defective pavement beginning at the core location and continuing longitudinally and transversely until the depth is within inch of the indicated depth .
DESCRIPTIONThis work consists of inplace pulverizing and mixing a combination of existing roadway material layers stabilizing additives and imported aggregate or RAP material as required to specified depths and grading and compacting the mixed materials to form a new pavement base layer upon which an asphalt overlay or a surface treatment is applied .
Pulverize and mix existing roadway material layers which may include bound pavement layers aggregate subbase material and subgrade material such that of the material passes the inch sieve .
A formal design protocol should be followed to optimize the performance of the pavement section .
The equipment must also be capable of pulverizing inplace the existing pavement subbase and subgrade materials at a minimum width of feet and mixing any added materials to the specified depth .
Provide equipment capable of mixing water dry or liquid stabilizing additives emulsion and the pulverized pavement into a homogenous mixture .
For rigid pavement and shoulders place a course of No .
For flexible pavement and shoulders place the indicated type of aggregate courses at the position and depth indicated for the pavement structure .
If the subbase is constructed in widths less than the full pavement width neatly trim the edge of completed subbase before placing the abutting subbase .
For simultaneous construction of more than one pavement course complete and maintain the subbase at least linear feet in advance of placing the succeeding pavement course .
Place the required asphalt base course over all prepared subbase for flexible pavements and place the required reinforced or plain cement concrete over all prepared subbase with or without treated permeable base course for rigid pavements prior to the shutdown of paving operations for the construction season .
If subbase is in place over winter without a protective layer bituminous base course for flexible pavements or cement concrete for rigid pavements proof roll as specified in Section .a prior to placement of flexible or rigid pavement .
Square Yard The Department will not pay the entire quantity of subbase complete in place until the base course or pavement is constructed over the subbase .
Allow the mixture to cool to F before placing subsequent layers or pavement courses .
At each stage hold the straightedge in contact with the surface and parallel to the road centerline and in successive positions test the pavement surface from one side to the other .
Advance the test location to the next stage by moving the straightedge along the pavement centerline by not more than feet .
With written permission from the District Executive the Contractor may fill low areas during construction of the next pavement course .
DESCRIPTIONThis work is evaluating a bituminous pavement surface profile and determining the ride quality incentive associated with the pavement surface profile .
Determine the ride quality of finished pavement surfaces including overlaid bridge approach slabs and overlaid bridge decks .
In the presence of the Inspector measure the pavement surface profile according to PTM No . .
Measure the pavement surface of the following excluded areas separate from the pavement surface profile of ridequality lots .
Tapered pavement less than feet wide .
Shoulders medians and other pavement surfaces indicated .
Pavement from feet before and up to feet after any appurtenances such as water boxes manholes railroad tracks and inlets extending out into the pavement .
A full lot is feet of a single pavement lane .
The Representative will designate lots starting at the beginning limit of paving and continuing to the ending limit of paving for each pavement lane and ramp that is feet or wider .
Provide pavement surface profile measuring equipment that has been verified by the Department according to PTM No . .
In the presence of the Inspector determine the pavement surface profile for each lot according to PTM No. . At the completion of testing immediately submit the lot IRI data as defined in PTM No .
At each stage hold the straightedge in contact with the surface and parallel to the roadway centerline and in successive positions test the pavement surface profile from one side of the excluded area to the other .
d Corrective Action. . Do not produce a deviation such as a ridge or valley with the adjacent pavement of more than mm inch when measured on the transverse profile .
Correct a sufficient length of pavement to correct the pavement surface profile without producing additional high or low points .
Perform additional measurements of the pavement surface profile as necessary for the Representative to determine which lots do not require additional corrective action .
Perform all corrective action before testing for pavement depth .
Use grinders of the walkbehind type that have cutting heads of carbide tipped shackles stars or blades and have a locking depth control to produce a uniform pavement surface texture .
Provide a pavement surface texture consisting of parallel grooves between inch and inch wide width a land area between grooves of inch and inch .
Grind longitudinally or transversely across the pavement surface .
Remove the surface course of the entire pavement lane width by milling and replace at least the minimum layer depth of the specified surface course .
Place more than the minimum layer depth if necessary to correct the pavement surface profile .
A ridequality pavement lot is defective if The IRI of the lot exceeds the maximum acceptable IRI specified in Table A of Section .. Any individual bump must grind exists in the lot where the irregularity is more than inch when tested with a foot straightedge .
The specifications for pavement construction require removal and replacement of pavement within the ridequality lot .
Costs associated with evaluating pavement ride quality will not be paid for separately .
DESCRIPTIONThis work is evaluating bituminous pavement longitudinal joint samples on the surface wearing course for determining densities and the incentivedisincentive .
These incentivedisincentive lots are completely independent from lots defined in other sections of these Specifications for pavement acceptance .
Joints where one or both sides of the pavements forming the joint were accepted for density by means other than pavement cores Joints where one side of the joint is formed by existing pavement not constructed under this contract Areas within foot longitudinally of an obstruction during construction of the wearing course manholes inlet grates utilities bridge structures pavement notches etc .
Apply the sealant only to joints in pavement surfaces that are clean dry and free of any loose material and debris .
Replace pavement markings that are marred by sealing operations at no additional cost to the Department . .
When bituminous pavement longitudinal joint density evaluation indicates that a disincentive adjustment is applicable the appropriate amount will be deducted from money due or to become due to the Contractor through the processing of a contract adjustment .
Costs associated with providing joint pavement cores will not be paid for separately and will be considered incidental to the construction items for the wearing courses eligible for the longitudinal joint evaluation .
If necessary replace original contract HMA bituminous pavement items with WMA bituminous pavement items provided each WMA item is added to the contract at a unit price that is less than or equal to the unit price for the HMA contract item it is to replace .
At the outside edge of pavement widths that can not be uniformly placed the Contractor may use a nonactivated extension when approved by the InspectorinCharge .
Before delivering bituminous mixtures remove and dispose of loose and foreign material and excess joint sealer and crack filler from the surface of existing pavement or previously placed pavement courses .
Paint existing vertical surfaces of curbs structures gutters and pavements that will be in contact with bituminous mixtures with a uniform coating of bituminous material Class E AASHTO SS or CSS E AASHTO SSh or CSSh Class AET applied in two or more applications or of the class and type designated for the bituminous course .
Use a scratch course to fill wheel ruts and other local small depressions even with the surrounding pavement .
Mill the existing pavement surface at tiein locations of the wearing course in accordance with the Standard Drawing RCM or as otherwise indicated .
Utilize a Material Transfer Vehicle MTV as specified in Section .c for RPS pavements unless otherwise approved by the Representative .
After spreading do not add mixture to the pavement mat that is segregated below the minimum temperature contains either a deficiency or an excess of asphalt content or is otherwise unsuitable to add to the pavement mat .
If mat density is accepted using pavement cores and mixture acceptance is by lots .
If samples for density are more than percent below the minimum or more than percent above the maximum limits of Table E the pavement will be considered defective work .
For JMFs placed in quantities of tons or less the tonnage may be considered a lot if density acceptance is by pavement cores however mixture acceptance will be by certification .
Do not obtain any other pavement samples except those which are directed by and surrendered to the Department unless allowed in writing from the District Executive .
If the Representative observes pattern segregation that may result in defective pavement then The Inspector will notify the Contractor of the observed pattern segregation .
As a minimum and in the presence of the Representative determine the average depth of pavement surface macrotexture according to PTM No .
in areas with the pattern segregation and in areas with nonsegregated pavement .
The pattern segregation is unacceptable if the difference in average pavement texture depth between the nonsegregated and segregated areas exceeds .
The Representative will determine if the pavement is defective as specified in Section .h.c .
Determine if the pattern segregation resulted in defective pavement as specified in Section .h.c .
At locations selected by the Inspector and with the Inspector present drill a minimum of three inch diameter cores from the area of pattern segregation and a minimum of three cores from the pavement representing a nonsegregated area .
An area of pattern segregation contains defective pavement if the summation of absolute deviations from any two sieves is or more from the JMF the core density is defective the mixture is defective in asphalt content or the mixture is defective for percent passing the μm No .
Construct replacement pavement conforming to the appropriate surface tolerances as specified in Section .l or Section .l. . Flushing .
Flushing is continuous or repeated areas of excessive asphalt on the pavement surface .
In the presence of the Representative determine the average depth of pavement surface macrotexture according to PTM No .
inches then the pavement will be considered to be flushed and is defective .
Replace removed mixture with fresh hot mixture and compact the mixture even with the surrounding pavement surface .
The Department will accept the mat density of RPS construction by lots and pavement cores as specified in Section .j .
Shoulders where density is critical will be accepted by pavement cores as specified in Section .j.a .
Shoulders where density is critical will be accepted by pavement cores as specified in Section .j.a .
For quality control purposes a maximum of one pavement core per sublot may be obtained unless the Representative allows additional cores .
Do not obtain any other pavement cores except those which are directed by and surrendered to the Department unless allowed in writing by the District Executive .
Plan joint locations to ensure that the joint in the top layer is at the approximate pavement centerline for twolane roadways and within inches of the lane lines for roadways with more than two lanes .
Avoid joint locations directly beneath planned pavement marking applications where possible .
Before placing abutting lanes paint the entire area of the joint with a uniform coating of bituminous material the PGBinder used in the pavement course or PG .
Install Uneven Lane signs according to Publication Publication and MUTCD and mile before the notched wedge joint area and every mile within the uneven pavement area. . Transverse Joints .
Construct joints perpendicular to the pavement centerline .
Paint the joint face with a thin coating of bituminous material the PGBinder used in the pavement course or PG before placing fresh mixture against the joint face .
Where placing a wearing course abutting to existing pavement at locations such as paving notches lane additions or utility openings seal the joint with hot bituminous material of the class and type designated for the wearing course .
Hold the straightedge in contact with the surface and in successive positions parallel to the road centerline to check the entire width of the pavement .
Advance along the pavement in stages of not more than onehalf the length of the straightedge until the entire area is tested .
The pavement is defective if irregularities are more than inch .
Construct the pavement to the depth indicated and within the specified tolerances .
Immediately start correcting courses or pavement that are deficient in depth at the core location and proceed longitudinally and transversely until the depth is within inch of the design depth .
Remove and replace pavement defective for pattern segregation as specified in Section .h for flushing as specified in Section .h surface tolerance as specified in Section .l or Section .l and depth as specified in Section .m or Section .m .
Remove and replace pavement defective for percent within tolerance or Payment Factor Percentages as specified in Tables H and I. .
The pavement will be considered defective if the payment factor for asphalt content percent passing the μm No .
For pavements with density acceptance by cores the pavement will be considered defective if the pavement density cores result in a percent within tolerance less than .
Sizes from Table I Acceptance Sample Testing of Pavement Cores Table I Table I Defective pavement .
Section .a except for RPS the Department will determine mat density by pavement cores only .
DESCRIPTIONThis work is the Standard and RPS construction of a plantmixed densegraded WMA pavement course on a prepared surface using a volumetric asphalt mixture design developed with the Superpave Gyratory Compactor SGC using prescribed manufactured additives or modifiers andor plant process modifications. . MATERIALSection .
plant during initial production and subsequently at the project location during initial placement of the specified WMA pavement course .
Have the Technical Representative present at the project location until at least lane mile of the specified pavement course has been placed and compacted .
Ensure proper adhesion between the asphalt pavement overlay and the underlying membrane. . CONSTRUCTIONSection .
Monitor pavement cores for aggregate breakage on every lot .
Before delivering bituminous mixtures remove and dispose of loose and foreign material and excess joint sealer and crack filler from the surface of existing pavement or previously placed pavement courses .
Remove all thermoplastic pavement markings .
Fill and seal all pavement cracks or joints that exceed inches in width .
Paint all existing vertical surfaces of curbs structures gutters and pavements that will be in contact with bituminous mixtures with a uniform coating of bituminous material Emulsified Asphalt Class SSh CSSh or of the class and type designated for the bituminous course .
mm paving mixture and compact the mixture even with the surrounding pavement surface .
The pavement will be considered defective if the payment factor for asphalt content and percent passing the μm No .
Defective pavement .
If a project includes an item or items of work for membrane systems as specified in Section or Section SMA that is to be placed on top of the membrane must be produced and placed at mixture temperatures as per the membrane manufacturers recommendations except not to exceed the minimum and maximum limits in Table D. Ensure proper adhesion between the asphalt pavement overlay and the underlying membrane .
Monitor pavement cores for aggregate breakage on every lot .
Obtain and test three loose mixture samples at the plant for asphalt content gradation and draindown and three pavement cores from the demonstration pavement for density .
Do not allow the finished pavement surface to flush .
Flushing is continuous or repeated areas of excessive asphalt on the pavement surface .
percent above the maximum limits of Table F the pavement will be considered defective work .
Do not obtain any other pavement samples except those which are directed by and surrendered to the Department unless allowed in writing from the District Executive .
sieve is not within the single sample n or multiple sample n tolerances in Table F for two consecutive lots or a total of three lots the pavement exhibits flushing as outlined in .i.b .
For quality control purposes a maximum of one pavement core per sublot may be obtained unless the Representative allows additional cores .
Do not obtain any other pavement cores except those which are directed by and surrendered to the Department unless allowed in writing by the District Executive l Joints .
Unless otherwise directed in writing by the District Executive remove and replace pavement defective for flushing as specified in Section .i.b surface tolerance as specified in Section .l and depth as specified in Section .m .
Remove and replace pavement defective for percent within tolerance or Payment Factor Percentage as specified in Table F. .
The LTS will not perform Gmm testing for lots where the Contractors Gmm value was previously considered verified according to Section .j.d .. After Gmb testing is completed for lots where the Contractors Gmm value was not verified the LTS will select one original density acceptance pavement core from each production or placement date represented by the density acceptance cores in the lot .
The LTS will perform Gmm testing on the selected cores according to AASHTO T as modified in Bulletin with the following exceptions the samples will be obtained as specified in Section .j.c no conditioning only drying will be performed on the sample the minimum sample size will be waived as necessary to use the inch diameter pavement core sample and the supplemental procedure for mixtures containing porous aggregate will only be performed when either the coarse aggregate or fine aggregate in the mixture has a water absorption value .
DESCRIPTIONThis work is the construction of plantmixed bituminous concrete pervious pavement on a prepared surface designed to allow the infiltration of storm water into the subsoil .
Provide asphalt edge restraints as a locally approved material as specified in Section .a.c when specified and of sufficient strength to resist lateral roller forces where the pervious asphalt adjoins landscaped areas to provide a clean durable edge for the pavement .
Do not compact or otherwise subject the existing subgrade under pavement areas to excessive construction equipment traffic before geotextile and stone bed placement .
Do not place pervious pavement mixtures when the air or surface temperature is lower than F. f Rollers .
Coat existing vertical surfaces of curbs structures gutters and pavements that will be in contact with bituminous mixtures with a thin uniform coating of bituminous material AASHTO SS CSS SSh CSSh or AET applied in two or more applications or of the class and type designated for the bituminous course .
Allow the mixture to cool to F before placing subsequent layers or pavement courses .
Do not use pervious pavement beds for storage of equipment materials or soils during construction .
Compact the pervious asphalt pavement when the surface is cool enough to resist a ton steel wheeled static roller or vibratory roller operated in the static mode .
At each stage hold the straightedge in contact with the surface and parallel to the road centerline and in successive positions test the pavement surface from one side to the other .
Advance the test location to the next stage by moving the straightedge along the pavement centerline by not more than feet .
for every square feet of pervious asphalt pavement placed in accordance with ASTM C . Remove and replace pervious asphalt pavement not meeting or exceeding a minimum average infiltration rate of inches per hour .
With written permission from the District Executive low areas may be filled during construction of the next pavement course . .
DESCRIPTIONThis work is preparing and patching of potholes abrupt depressions and deteriorated edges of pavement and repatching temporarily patched potholes using hot bituminous plant mix material placed manually or with mechanical spreading and finishing equipment. . MATERIAL a Superpave Asphalt Mixture Design .
After removal of the debris thoroughly clean the area to be patched and the surrounding pavement of all loose and foreign material .
Ensure that after compaction the surface of the patch conforms to the grade of the surrounding pavement .
Seal edges with emulsified asphalt Class AET the PGBinder used in the pavement course or PG .
Ensure that after compaction the surface of the patch conforms to the grade of the surrounding pavement .
Seal the edges with emulsified asphalt Class AET the PGBinder used in the pavement course or PG . .
Repair damaged areas to the Representatives satisfaction before placing the next pavement course . .
DESCRIPTIONThis work is placing heavy duty membranes over transverse and longitudinal joints and random cracks in existing concrete pavements at locations indicated or directed by the Representative. . MATERIAL a Heavy Duty Membrane .
Before placing the membrane ensure the pavement is sound dry and free of any debris or deteriorated and loose materials and prepare the surface according to the manufacturers recommendations .
DESCRIPTIONThis work is cleaning and sealing longitudinal and transverse joints and cleaning and sealing cracks in existing pavement surfaces as part of routine maintenance and before placing an overlay. . MATERIAL a Asphalt Rubber Sealing Compound .
Clean dry and remove debris and loose material from cracks joints and adjacent pavement surfaces .
Clean the pavement for inches to inches on either side of the joint or crack .
Immediately before sealing use a compressed air stream of at least pounds per square inch measured at the source or a hot compressed air lance to clean and dry damp cracks in bituminous pavements .
If using the hot compressed air lance do not damage the surrounding pavement area from overheating .
If using asphalt sealant fill prepared joints and cracks level with the pavement surface .
Wipe the sealant flush with the pavement surface leaving a thin film of sealant from inch to inch thick and from inch to inches wide .
As specified in Section .b except do not place mixture if the air temperature is F or lower or if the pavement temperature is F or lower .
A mechanicallyoperated squeegeetype distributor is required one which is integrally assembled with the slurry mixer and which includes the following a strikeoff lined with flexible material to prevent loss of slurry mixture during spreading a strikeoff with vertical adjustment available for changing grade and cross slope to ensure uniform spreading of mixture and a pressure system and a fogtype spray bar adequate for placing a complete fog coat of water over pavement surface immediately preceding spreading of mixture with a maximum .
Cover and satisfactorily protect existing raised pavement markers .
DESCRIPTIONThis work is the construction of a polymermodified emulsified asphalt paving system commonly known as microsurfacing to fill ruts andor resurface existing pavements .
Provide a latex based modifier capable of making a microsurfacing mix which cures fast enough to allow traffic to be placed on the pavement within hour without damaging the surface .
Identify any areas of concern in the pavement that may show any signs of fatigue or excessive rutting at the preplacement meeting .
Ensure all pavement markings and legends are completely removed before placing any mixture .
When filling ruts take care to restore the designed profile of the pavement cross section .
and as follows Unless otherwise directed in writing by the District Executive satisfactorily correct pavement not meeting the following criteria .
Thoroughly clean pavements impregnated with grease oil or fuel .
Determine the spray rate given the existing pavement porosity and apply between .
DESCRIPTIONThis work is the milling of an existing bituminous pavement surface. . CONSTRUCTION a Equipment .
Provide a milling machine designed and built for milling existing bituminous pavements with an automatic grade and slope control system and be capable of milling concrete patches .
Maintain the milled pavement surface free of all loose materials and dust .
DESCRIPTION This work is profile milling of existing bituminous pavement surface with parameters to control surface tolerances in both longitudinal and transverse directions. . CONSTRUCTION a Equipment .
Complete adjustment of utility facilities before the milling operation when pavement is not to be resurfaced .
Remove irregularities such as bumps corrugations and wheel ruts and establish the specified pavement surface elevation or crossslope with one or more passes over the designated area operating the milling machine in automated mode .
Repair areas where sound pavement has been damaged by milling operations at no additional cost to the Department in a manner satisfactory to the Representative .
The repaired area must conform to the adjacent pavement in smoothness and durability .
Areas of the milled surface to be patched due to spalling or dislodgement of unsound pavement during profile milling operation will be designated by the Representative .
Level and compact the HMA material to conform to the adjacent pavement .
Provide a positive cross slope as shown in the plans such that the pavement drains .
SECTION ASPHALT CONCRETE PAVEMENT MONTH WARRANTY .. DESCRIPTIONThis work is construction of a plantmixed asphalt concrete pavement on a prepared surface with a month warranty and includes the furnishing of a warranty bond .
.. MATERIALProvide material which ensures that the asphalt concrete pavement meets the warranty performance criteria .
Select the type and class of bituminous material type of aggregate and when necessary type of filler to be used in the constructed pavement .
furnish a Warranty Bond with sufficient surety or sureties in an amount equal to of the total contract amount for all pavements to be constructed under the pavement warranty items .
Maintain insurance to indemnify and save harmless the Commonwealth the Department and all of its officers and employees from all suits actions or claims of any character name and description brought for or on account of any injuries or damages received or sustained by any person persons or property related to the performance of any work by the Contractor these pavement items or to remedial actions taken throughout the warranty period whether the same is due to the use of defective material defective workmanship neglect in safeguarding the work or public interests or by or on account of any act omission neglect or misconduct of the Contractor .
.. CONSTRUCTIONProvide an asphalt concrete pavement meeting the requirements specified herein and capable of meeting the warranty performance based criteria specified herein .
Construct the pavement as a combination of two or more different asphalt concrete pavement courses to achieve the total depth indicated .
Within hours after final compaction in the presence of the Inspector drill one inch diameter or larger core through all lifts and courses placed under this item of work to the top of the existing pavement or base for each linear feet of pavement lane .
When any one core depth measurement indicates the pavement is deficient in depth by more than inch which can not be satisfactorily corrected the affected pavement area will be considered defective work .
When core depth measurements indicate that the pavement is uniformly deficient in depth by more than inch in any three consecutive core locations and the deficiency can not be satisfactorily corrected the affected pavement area will be considered defective work .
Immediately correct pavement that is deficient in depth starting at the point of the determined deficiency and proceed longitudinally and transversely until the depth within the limits of the entire repair area is within inch of the required depth .
Coring operations will not exclude pavement from the warranty performance criteria .
The Department reserves the right to direct the Contractor to obtain loose mixture box samples andor pavement core samples at random locations selected by the Inspector according to PTM No .
If directed and in the presence of the Inspector drill and obtain n inch diameter pavement core samples for each tons of material placed .
TABLE A Performance Criteria Distress Limits PERFORMANCE CRITERION THRESHOLD LEVEL REMEDIAL ACTION FATIGUE CRACKING All medium or greater severity Remove and replace distressed layers full lane width to a depth necessary to correct observed distress but not to exceed warranted pavement and length not less than feet beyond the distressed area .
Transverse Cracking Miscellaneous Cracking All high severity Remove and replace distressed layers full lane width to a depth necessary to correct observed distress but not to exceed warranted pavement and length not less than feet beyond the distressed area .
RAVELING WEATHERING All medium or greater severity Remove and replace distressed layers full lane width to a depth necessary to correct observed distress but not to exceed warranted pavement and length not less than feet beyond the distressed area .
RUTTING inch Remove and replace distressed layers full lane width to a depth necessary to correct observed distress but not to exceed warranted pavement and length not less than feet beyond the distressed area .
FLUSHING ALL Remove and replace distressed layer full depth and full or half lane width longitudinal joint at center of lane for half lane width and a minimum of inches beyond distressed pavement in all longitudinal directions .
POTHOLES INCLUDING SLIPPAGE AREAS ALL Remove and replace distressed layers full lane width to a depth necessary to correct observed distress but not to exceed warranted pavement and length not less than feet beyond the distressed area .
EDGE DETERIORATION shoulder joint All high severity Remove and replace distressed layer one foot either side of the joint transversely and a minimum of inches beyond distressed pavement in all longitudinal directions .
LEFT EDGE JOINT lane joints All high severity Remove and replace distressed layer one foot either side of the joint transversely and a minimum of inches beyond distressed pavement in all longitudinal directions .
NOTE Should deviations beyond the threshold levels indicated in Table A in combination total a remedial action area greater than of the surface area of any segment of pavement as defined herein except that for this determination a medium severity crack referenced above will be considered to be a deviation affecting inches on either side of the crack for the entire length of the crack remove and replace the entire segment .
The Department will schedule and perform annual surveys and additional surveys if needed of the warranted pavement for flushing and potholes .
During the warranty period the Department will not perform routine pavement maintenance such as crack sealing and base repairs on the warranted pavement .
If the Contractor does not notify the Department within hours or begin the repair work within hours of the Departments initial notification the Department reserves the right to make emergency repairs to the warranted pavement during the warranty period .
If the pavement condition is determined to be potentially harmful or unsafe the Department reserves the right to make immediate emergency repairs to the warranted pavement during the warranty period .
Complete remediation work required as part of the pavement warranty at the locations indicated within calendar days after receipt of the Departments written notification that remediation work is required .
Furnish all materials equipment and labor needed to perform remediation work required as part of the pavement warranty including traffic control at no cost to the Department .
Provide and maintain traffic control for operations involved in remediation work performed as part of the pavement warranty .
If the Departments written notification indicates that remedial action is required as part of the pavement warranty and the Departments performance survey results are disputed notify the Department in writing within calendar days from the date of the Departments written notification .
Remove material placed by the Department during emergency repair work within warranted pavement areas and perform required remediation work if it is determined that the emergency repair was required due to faulty workmanship or construction .
The Contractor may monitor or test warranted pavement courses using nondestructive methods at any time during the warranty period .
The Team members who will be identified at the preconstruction meeting must be knowledgeable in the terms and conditions of the warranty specification and the methods used in the measurement and calculation of pavement distress .
The Team will resolve disputes concerning defective work warranted pavement performance survey results required remediation work proposed alternate repair methods and material selection and disputes over probable causes .
If the warranted pavement meets .c .c Change No .
During the warranty period the Department will perform routine maintenance such as snow removal application of antiskid material andor deicing chemicals repairs to safety appurtenances application and maintenance of pavement markings mowing and sign maintenance .
Routine pavement maintenance activities such as crack sealing pothole patching or milling will not be performed by the Department during the warranty period .
The Contractor will not be held responsible for repair of distresses caused by traffic accidentrelated fuel or chemical spills vehicle fires andor gouging or goring of the pavement surface unless the Contractor or its representative is the cause of the distress . .
as work progresses based on the quantity of each separate pavement course placed meeting specified construction criteria .
The Inspector will measure the quantity of each pavement course placed on a daily basis and compute the payable quantity by multiplying the measured area by a factor equal to the depth of the pavement course being placed divided by the total indicated pavement depth .
No additional payment will be made for pavement depths in excess of the total indicated depth .
DESCRIPTIONThis work is construction of normal strength or High EarlyStrength HES cement concrete pavement plain or reinforced on a prepared surface as indicated. . MATERIAL Class AA Cement ConcreteSection HES Cement ConcreteSection ReinforcementSections .
Construct pavements in one or two traffic lane widths as shown on Standard Drawings RC M M M M M M and M unless otherwise directed .
Use steel forms for concrete pavement except as specified herein .
Use forms not less than feet in length with form depth and base width equal to pavement depth .
For pavement construction around manholes inlets valve boxes and similar appurtenances place premolded expansion joint filler not less than inch in total thickness for the full depth of the pavement around the outer sides of structures within the paved areas .
Where pavements adjoin other rigid structures bridges or culverts place premolded expansionjoint filler not less than inch thick adjacent to the structures .
Before placing pavement adjacent to railway tracks fill the spaces along the web and below the head .f .g Change No .
Unless otherwise specifically shown on the construction drawings construct pavement so the longitudinal joints do not traverse a driving lane or conflict with the final pavement markings .
Construct longitudinal joints parallel to and within inches of final pavement markings unless otherwise detailed on the construction drawings . .
Test the pavement surface for edge slumping with a foot straightedge before the concrete becomes nonplastic .
Measure edge slump for the inch width contiguous to the pavement edge .
The pavement within this foot section will be evaluated as specified in Section .g.b .
Test the pavement surface with a foot straightedge to ensure the requirements of Section .g.a have been met .
Remove and replace pavement determined defective as specified in Section .u at no additional cost to the Department .
If placing reinforced concrete pavement in two layers within fixed forms strike off the entire bottom layer and lay the reinforcement full length on the concrete in its final position without further manipulation .
If placing reinforced concrete pavement in one layer position mesh reinforcement on acceptable supports as specified in Section .d in advance of concrete placement .
In new multilane pavements place transverse joints perpendicular to centerline to form a continuous joint across the entire pavement width and locate dowels as shown on Standard Drawing RC M except where paving operations must cease temporarily due to unavoidable conditions .
Where existing concrete pavements are widened align transverse construction or contraction joints if possible with existing construction or contraction joints or cracks otherwise do not place within feet of a joint .
When constructing pavement one lane at a time or placing concrete shoulders after pavement construction fill the ends of transverse joints with joint backing material or cover with duct tape to prevent intrusion of cement mortar into the joint .
Other than white membrane curing compound remove curing materials from pavement at the location where a joint is to be cut .
edge to edge of the pavement .
Saw all initial saw cuts to prevent random cracking without damaging the pavement surface .
If damage to the pavement surface occurs repair in an approved method at no additional cost to the Department .
If a crack or spall occurs at any location and any time before final inspection and resolution of all issues regarding the condition of the pavement repair the pavement in accordance with Table A at no additional cost to the Department .
Join original pavement to replacement pavement and test as specified in Section if Ride Quality and Incentive are not applicable test as specified in Section .o .
If existing concrete pavements are widened align transverse expansion joints if possible with existing expansion joints .
Place transverse expansion joints without load transfer units in the plain cement concrete pavement in paved divisor areas .
Design pavement depth .
Payment for new pavement where the crack has been removed is at the Contract Unit Price CUP with NO additional compensation for the repair .
Payment for new pavement where the crack has not been removed but sealed as specified in Section is at five percent CUP for the slab with NO additional compensation for the repair .
If damage to the pavement surface occurs repair in an approved method at no additional cost to the Department .
Join original and replacement pavements .
Use equipment that does not groove the concrete pavement edges for a width greater than can be eliminated by edging tools .
Use a rubbertired wheel to support the spreader and a transverse finishing machine on the adjoining concrete pavement surface keeping the wheel approximately inches from the pavement edge .
If finishing manually use screeds contoured to the pavement cross section .
After the concrete has been struck off and consolidated smooth and fill in opentextured pavement areas with a float as necessary .
After straightedge testing and surface corrections have been completed and before concrete becomes nonplastic texture the surface transversely for the full pavement width .
Operate the spring steel tine device within inches but not closer than inches of pavement edges .
Maintain the area of burlap in contact with the pavement surface constant at all times during texturing .
Maintain down pressure on pavement surface at all times during texturing to achieve uniform texturing without measurable variations in pavement profile .
When diamond grinding surface corrections are made in the hardened concrete for pavement smoothness no additional texturing is required .
Use sheeting wide enough to cover the pavement surface and sides .
Provide lengths consistent with pavement joint spacing .
After form removal fold sheeting down over the sides for the full pavement depth then secure with suitable material .
Use sheeting wide enough to cover the pavement surface and sides .
Provide lengths consistent with pavement joint spacing .
After form removal fold sheeting down over the sides for the full pavement depth then secure with suitable material .
Following the final finishing immediately after free water has left the pavement surface and while the surface is still damp seal exposed concrete areas with an application of curing compound .
Do not drip curing compound on the pavement .
If rain falls on newly coated pavement before the film has dried sufficiently to resist damage or if film is damaged in any way before the pavement is cured apply a new coat immediately in an amount equal to the original specified application .
During the curing period to prevent moisture loss from concrete in and adjacent to joints use strips inches to inches wide securely held in place on the pavement surface by an acceptable method or place saturated rope strands in the joints .
Place burlap in doublethickness by overlapping each strip onehalf its width on the pavement surface .
Use sheeting wide enough to cover the pavement surface and sides .
Provide lengths consistent with pavement joint spacing .
After form removal fold sheeting down over the sides for the full pavement depth then secure with suitable material .
Liquid MembraneForming Curing Compound Black may be used provided the cement concrete pavement will be overlaid and is not accessible to traffic before the surface course is placed .
Protect the pavement surface and sides to effectively maintain a temperature of not less than F for at least days and until the concrete achieves a strength of pounds per square inch .
Remove and replace defective pavement as specified in Section .t at no cost to the Department .
Remove the forms carefully to avoid pavement damage .
Seal joints before opening any pavement section to traffic including construction equipment and before discontinuing work for the winter season .
When permitted the Contractor may open pavement to construction equipment provided an approved temporary sealing material is in place and initial concrete strength and curing requirements are met .
Do not allow sealing material to spread over the pavement surface .
Before sealing joints seal a minimum of three fullwidth pavement joints according to the test section schedule specified in the QC Plan .
Do not seal the remaining pavement joints until the Representative accepts an installation procedure .
Patch pavement damaged by removing unacceptable seals and adhesive as specified in Section . . Silicone Seals .
After the concrete has hardened test the surface of pavement again using straightedges as specified in Section .k .
The Representative will consider pavement containing depressions of more than inch to be defective. . Longitudinal Joints .
Test the surface of pavement at all longitudinal joints including the joint between the pavement and shoulder again for the following tolerance requirements Where there is no change in the design cross slope across a joint the tolerance will not be greater than inch as measured by holding a foot straightedge centered across and perpendicular to the joint .
Protect pavement as specified in Section and exclude traffic including construction equipment .
When required to complete adjacent pavement the spreading finishing and subgrade machines may operate on the pavement surface after hours if pounds per square inch is achieved. . Late Season Pavements .
on all concrete pavements and shoulders constructed after September .
The Representative will determine when pavement may be opened to traffic .
However do not open to traffic in less than hours for normal strength concrete or hours for HES concrete and until pavement develops the required pounds per square inch minimum compressive strength determined by compressive tests made on cylinder specimens according to PTM No .
Provide sufficient materials on site at all times to properly protect the pavement edges and surface against rain before initial set of concrete .
If rain appears imminent stop paving operations immediately protect the pavement sides and cover the concrete surface with protective material .
Before final acceptance of each phase of the project the concrete pavement thickness will be determined in the presence of the Inspector by drilling cores according to PTM No .
The Department will divide the mainline pavement into lots representing not more than square yards of pavement in each traffic lane .
A traffic lane is defined as the pavement surface between longitudinal joints or between a longitudinal joint and the pavement edge .
If any core measurement is deficient by more than inch in required depth the Inspector will consider the pavement to be defective .
The Inspector will select pavement thickness measurement locations within each lot in accordance with PTM No . .
Determine the pavement thickness in accordance with PTM No .
If the core measurement confirms the pavement thickness is deficient more than inch in required depth drill additional cores to determine the extent of pavement deficient in depth as specified in Section .s .
If the core measurement does not confirm the pavement thickness is deficient more than inch in required depth stop paving operations to investigate the equipment and targets used in the nondestructive testing to determine if reverification is needed .
If the core measurement confirms the pavement thickness is deficient more than inch in required depth drill additional cores to determine the extent of pavement deficient in depth as specified in Section .s .
If the core measurement does not confirm the pavement thickness is deficient more than inch in required depth the drilling of the core will be paid as specified in Section .c .
If the core measurement confirms the pavement thickness is deficient more than inch in required depth drill additional cores to determine the extent of pavement deficient in depth as specified in Section .s .
If the core measurement confirms the pavement thickness is not deficient by more than inch in required depth the drilling of the core will be paid as specified in Section .c .
Unless otherwise directed in writing by the District Executive remove and replace pavement that is defective in construction or sawing of transverse joints as specified in Section .i defective in curing requirements as specified in Section .l defective in surface tolerance as specified in Section .o defective in depth as specified in Section .s defective in air content as specified in Section .c defective in compressive strength as specified in Section .d or showing surface defects resulting from the effects of freezing and thawing rain improper final finish or honeycombing which in the Representatives opinion can not be repaired .
Repair pavement that is cracked or spalled in accordance with Table A .
The minimum pavement removal and replacement length between transverse joints is feet if constructing reinforced cement concrete pavements or feet if constructing plain cement concrete pavements .
After removal of defective pavement construct required transverse joints according to the methods for joining pavements as shown on the Standard Drawings .
If removing and replacing pavement defective in depth start at the determined point of deficiency as determined by the Representative .
Remove and replace defective work transversely for the fulllane width and longitudinally until the pavement is not more than inch deficient in depth as specified in Section .s . .
The Department will not pay for defective pavement left in place unless otherwise directed in writing by the District Executive .
When the District Executive directs that defective pavement be left in place final payment for this pavement will be at of the contract price .
DESCRIPTIONThis work is the construction of roller compacted concrete RCC pavement as indicated on a prepared subgrade and subbase using a stiffer low slump concrete mix conventional or highdensity asphalt paving equipment and various size rollers to obtain the required thickness density and surface texture. . MATERIAL a Cement .
Do not place RCC pavement during a hard rain that may damage the pavement surface .
Placement may continue during a light rain or mist as determined by the Representative as long as the RCC pavement surface is not damaged . .
Determine rate of evaporation using a weather station or the individual measurements of air temperature relative humidity concrete temperature wind speed and the NRMCA chart in ACI R. Minimize moisture loss by one or more of the following methods adding retarding admixtures to the mix reducing time between mixing and final compaction using covers on the haul trucks using temporary windbreaks or fogging and misting the RCC pavement surface .
Produce an RCC pavement mixture in the proportions defined by the approved mix design and within the specified tolerances .
For single lift placement less than inches use either a conventional paver or a highdensity paver equipped with compaction devices capable of producing RCC pavement with a minimum compaction of of the maximum wet density prior to using rollers .
For multiplelift placement use either a conventional paver or a highdensity paver equipped with compaction devices capable of producing RCC pavement with a minimum compaction of of the maximum wet density in each lift prior to using rollers .
Equip the water truck with a water distribution system containing fog nozzles capable of evenly applying a fine mist of water to the RCC pavement surface without damaging the final surface .
Place RCC pavement in a pattern so that the curing water from the previous placements do not pose a potential surface erosion or runoff problem on the fresh RCC surface or on the subbase layer. . SubgradeSubbase Condition .
Do not place RCC pavement on frozen base subbase or subgrade .
Construct pavements between inches and less than or equal to inches in single lifts .
Construct pavements greater than inches in multiple lifts of equal thickness to achieve density requirements. . MultipleLift Placement .
If the lane edge will not have an adjacent lane or if the lane edge is the outside pavement edge the lane may be placed wider to achieve compaction for the required width with the additional RCC pavement material cutoff after density acceptance .
Avoid deformation of the RCC pavement by operating the rollers at slow enough speeds at all times .
Correct any deformations of the RCC pavement resulting from reverse direction of the roller or from any other causes. . Density Requirements .
Construct fresh vertical joints to assure a continuous bond between new and previously placed lanes of RCC pavement .
A cold joint is any planned or unplanned longitudinal or transverse construction vertical joint or any horizontal joint between multiple lifts in the RCC pavement that does not qualify as a fresh joint .
Before placement of an adjacent RCC lane prepare the cold vertical joint as follows Cut the pavement vertically for the full depth in sound compacted material at least inches from the exposed edge .
Saw cut control joints as indicated on the Plans to depth of the compacted RCC pavement .
Saw cut pavement behind the rolling operation as soon as possible to prevent random cracking using early entry saws set to the manufacturers recommendations .
Saw cut without causing raveling or other damage to the pavement begin sawing no later than hours after placement .
If random cracking occurs in the pavement before the saw cutting operation repair cracks as directed by the Representative at no expense to the Department. . Sealing Joints .
Immediately after final rolling and infield density testing keep the RCC pavement surface moist until one or more of the following curing methods are used .
Maintain the selected curing methods for a minimum of hours and the RCC pavement has developed a compressive strength of at least pounds per square inch determine compressive strength as specified in Section .m. . Water Cure .
Apply water cure using a water truck equipped with misting spray nozzles soaking hoses sprinkler system or other means to maintain a uniform moist condition on the RCC pavement surface .
Apply moisture in a manner that does not wash out or damage the surface of the finished RCC pavement. . White Polyethylene Sheeting .
Provide a uniform voidfree application across the entire RCC pavement surface .
Protect the RCC pavement surface and sides to maintain a temperature of not less than F during the cure period .
If at any time during the curing period the temperature readings fall below F the RCC pavement will be considered defective .
Test the finished RCC pavement surface with a foot straight edge or crown surface template at areas the Representative determines may be deficient or irregular .
and in successive positions parallel to the road centerline to check the entire width of the pavement .
Advance along the pavement in stages of not more than feet a stage until the entire area is tested . .
When the pavement surface varies by more than inch remove high points by grinding the surface to within the tolerance use a selfpropelled diamond grinder or cutting tools at no expense to the Department .
The Representative will consider depressions in the pavement surface of more than inch to be defective .
For RCC pavement with an exposed pavement surface and a speed limit of miles per hour or greater texture the pavement surface by diamond grinding as specified in Section .c .
Protect the RCC pavement from vehicular traffic for the duration of the curing period .
Each lot consists of five equal sublots n. Test completed lots and sublots for density compressive strength and pavement thickness .
If the lot does not meet the maximum wet density and the compressive strength requirements the pavement is considered defective. . Compressive Strength .
If the day compressive strength test result is greater than or equal to pounds per square inch the field cure on the lot of RCC pavement represented by the test cylinders may be discontinued unless otherwise directed .
If the day compressive strength test result is greater than or equal to pounds per square inch the field cure on the lot of RCC pavement represented by the test cylinders may be discontinued unless otherwise directed .
Test the day test cylinders to verify the RCC pavement has achieved a minimum compressive strength of pounds per square inch .
RCC pavement that fails to meet the day compressive strength requirement is considered defective .
Any cores taken for pavement depth measurements may be used for compressive strength testing if needed. . Pavement Depth .
If the measured depth is within inch of plan depth the RCC pavement is acceptable .
If the average depth of the three cores is less than a inch deficient the pavement depth is acceptable .
If the average depth is greater than inch the pavement depth is defective .
Unless otherwise directed in writing by the District Executive remove and replace pavement lots that are defective during curing as specified in Section .j defective in surface tolerance as specified in .n .b Change No .
When the District Executive directs in writing to leave defective pavement in place the payment will be at of the contract price .
DESCRIPTIONThis work is the application of protective coating to concrete pavements and shoulders. . MATERIAL Boiled Linseed Oil AASHTO M from a manufacturer listed in Bulletin .
Before using the treated pavement surface satisfactorily correct slippery pavement conditions other hazards or inconvenience to traffic resulting from the protective coating application as directed . .
DESCRIPTIONThis work is construction of a pavement relief joint including subbase material and necessary excavation. . MATERIAL Class AA Cement ConcreteSection High Early Strength Cement ConcreteSection Reinforcement Bars Section .
DESCRIPTIONThis work is construction of normal strength or high earlystrength HES cement concrete pavement plain or reinforced on a prepared surface under restricted performance specifications RPS. . MATERIALSection .
Test the surface of pavement as follows .
These pavements include but are not limited to any full width lane used for travel passing climbing center turn acceleration deceleration and ramps. . Other than Mainline Pavement .
These pavements include but are not limited to approach slabs bridge decks tapers shoulders medians or other pavement surfaces as directed .
Complete any surface corrective work before testing for pavement depth .
Test pavement depth by obtaining one core from each sublot .
determine the average lot pavement thickness by averaging the individual sublot core thicknesses accept concrete as specified in Section .u and determine price adjustments as specified in Section .a .
by the District Executive remove and replace pavement determined defective as follows .
The lot is defective if the pavement contains surface defects from rain improper final finish or honeycombing that can not be satisfactorily repaired as determined by the Representative. . Other Than Mainline Pavement Surface Tolerance .
The lot is defective if the pavement contains depressions or high points as specified in Section .o that can not be satisfactorily corrected as determined by the Representative . .
The pavement is defective if the requirements specified in Section .g are not met .
Remove and replace a minimum of feet of pavement between transverse joints of reinforced cement concrete pavements or an entire panel of plain cement concrete pavement .
Longitudinal edge spall repairs are not considered satisfactory repairs for edge slumping or spalling between adjacent lanes or outside pavement edges .
Construct transverse joints at other locations resulting from removal of defective pavement using the methods for joining pavements shown on the Standard Drawings .
Add this section as follows Lots and sublots for the combined pavement characteristics of depth strength and air content will be determined based on the full width of pavement placement .
Lots and sublots will be calculated as the work progresses and will include any pavement designated as RPS pavement .
Do not combine various depth pavement into any lot or sublot .
A full lot is defined as square yards of pavement of the same constant depth and consists of four equal sublots of square yards each .
Combine partial lots with the last full lot or make a separate lot according to the following procedure If less than square yards remain combine the remaining pavement with the last full lot .
If the remaining pavement is equal to or greater than square yards consider the remaining pavement as a separate lot .
Determine sublots for the last pavement lot by establishing a number of equal size sublots .
Determine lots and sublots based on the full width of pavement placement . .
MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENTSquare Yard The Department will pay on a lotbylot basis at the contract price adjusted for pavement characteristics relative to depth compressive strength and air content .
The Department will not pay for defective pavement left in place unless otherwise directed in writing by the District Executive .
DESCRIPTIONThis work is evaluating a concrete pavement surface profile and determining the ride quality incentive associated with the pavement surface profile .
Determine the ride quality of finished pavement surfaces including approach slabs and pavement relief joints .
In the presence of the Inspector measure the pavement surface profile according to PTM No . .
Measure the pavement surface of the following excluded areas separate from the pavement surface profile of ridequality lots .
Tapered pavements less than feet wide .
Shoulders medians and other pavement surfaces indicated .
A full lot is feet of a single pavement lane with the same lot type .
The Representative will designate lots starting at the beginning limit of paving and continuing to the ending limit of paving for each pavement lane and ramp that is feet or wider .
Provide pavement surface profile measuring equipment that has been verified by the Department according to PTM No . .
In the presence of the Inspector determine the pavement surface profile for each lot according to PTM No. . At the completion of testing immediately submit the lot IRI data as defined in PTM No .
At each stage hold the straightedge in contact with the surface and parallel to the road centerline and in successive positions test the pavement surface profile from one side of the excluded area to the other .
d Corrective Action. . Do not produce a deviation such as a ridge or valley with the adjacent pavement of more than inch when measured on the transverse profile .
Correct a sufficient length of pavement to correct the pavement surface profile without producing additional high or low points .
Perform additional measurements of the pavement surface profile as necessary for the Representative to determine which lots do not require additional corrective action .
Perform all corrective action before testing for pavement depth .
Use grinders of the walkbehind type that have cutting heads of carbide tipped shackles stars or blades and have a locking depth control to produce a uniform pavement surface texture .
Provide a pavement surface texture consisting of parallel grooves between inch and inch wide width a land area between grooves inch and inch .
Grind longitudinally or transversely across the pavement surface .
Remove and replace a minimum of feet of pavement between transverse joints of reinforced cement concrete pavements or an entire panel of plain cement concrete pavement .
Construct transverse joints at other locations resulting from removal of defective pavement using the methods for joining pavements shown on the Standard Drawings .
A ridequality pavement lot is defective if The IRI of the lot exceeds the maximum acceptable IRI specified in Table A of Section .. Any individual bump must grind exists in the lot where the irregularity is more than inch when tested with a foot straightedge .
The specifications for pavement construction require removal and replacement of pavement within the ridequality lot .
Costs associated with evaluating pavement ride quality will not be paid for separately .
DESCRIPTIONThis work is the cutting of longitudinal grooves in existing cement concrete pavement. . CONSTRUCTIONSatisfactorily groove the existing pavement surface longitudinally between the limiting stations indicated .
Do not cut grooves within inches of the outside edge and centerline pavement joint .
DESCRIPTIONThis work is construction of a pavement pressure relief joint. . MATERIAL a Pressure Relief Material .
As recommended by the manufacturer of the pressure relief material. . CONSTRUCTIONSaw the joint opening inches wide full depth and full width of the pavement .
DESCRIPTIONThis work is cleaning and sealing longitudinal joints in existing cement concrete pavements. . MATERIALSection .b or c . CONSTRUCTIONThoroughly clean the longitudinal joints of all existing sealing material bituminous material and other foreign material by sawing sandblasting or water blasting .
Seal the joint as specified in the applicable parts of Section .n to a level inch to inch below the pavement surface . .
DESCRIPTIONThis work is construction of a sealant reservoir and sealing transverse contraction construction or expansion joints in existing Portland cement concrete pavements of the type indicated .
Use a power driven selfpropelled machine having diamond blades and capable of grinding the surface of the pavement to the specified smoothness tolerances and texture .
Grind the entire pavement surface in the longitudinal direction beginning and ending at lines normal to the pavement centerline unless otherwise specified .
Texture the entire pavement surface however do not perform extra depth grinding to eliminate minor depressions .
Satisfactorily clean the pavement surface after diamond grinding and prior to opening to traffic .
Restore original pavement cross slope .
Provide a positive cross slope such that the pavement drains .
Test the pavement surface roughness in the longitudinal direction and submit the record of the information to the InspectorinCharge before beginning any diamond grinding work .
Following grinding of the pavement surface test the longitudinal roughness as specified in Section .c .
Regrind pavement segments as specified in Section .d .
Concrete pavement repairs including concrete pavement patching concrete spall repair dowel retrofit slab stabilization and slab jacking must be completed before the start of any diamond grinding operations .
After completing the concrete rehabilitation operation determine the ride quality of the existing pavement in accordance with Section .a and Section .b before performing any diamond grinding .
After completing the diamond grinding operations reevaluate the ride quality of the pavement surface according to Section .a and Section .b .
Use the same pavement surface profile measuring equipment to perform all ride quality evaluations on the project .
After diamond grinding the pavement surface provide a maximum IRI of inmile for facilities where posted speed limits are greater than miles per hour and a maximum IRI of inmile for facilities where posted speed .e .
Meet these requirements in all IRI lots where diamond grinding of the pavement was performed to receive payment. . Lots .
The Representative will designate lots starting at the beginning ride quality limit and continuing to the ending ride quality limit for each pavement lane and ramp that is feet or wider .
Excluded areas will consist of bridge decks ramps less than feetin length tapered pavements less than feet wide partial lots less than feet in length shoulders medians and other pavement surfaces as indicated . .
No ride quality incentive will be paid for diamond grinding on concrete pavement rehabilitation projects. . .c Initial Edition SECTION SAWING AND SEALING OF BITUMINOUS OVERLAYS .
DESCRIPTIONThis work is the saw cutting of new bituminous concrete courses directly above existing or constructed transverse joints in the underlying concrete pavement as directed and sealing the reservoir. . MATERIAL a Sealing Material .
Fill the reservoir with sealing material to a level inch to inch below the pavement surface .
Do not allow sealing material to spread over the pavement surface . .
DESCRIPTIONThis work is the construction of single course full depth normal strength or accelerated strength cement concrete pavement patches .
If diamond grinding is to be performed test the pavement surface in the longitudinal direction as specified in Section .d .
Provide full depth sawcuts at the existing pavementpatch interface install load transfer dowels in the transverse faces of the existing pavement construct a sealant reservoir and seal the joint .
If patching adjacent lanes construct concrete pavement patches onelane at a time where twolane width construction would interfere with traffic .
After saw cutting the existing pavement allow traffic on patch areas of existing pavement for a maximum of hours .
Make full depth transverse sawcuts at the locations marked on the pavement surface .
Do not break back the underside of the existing pavement .
Full depth saw cuts at the patch limits will be allowed to extend transversely into the adjacent pavement up to full depth inches provided dowel bars in the adjacent lane are not damaged .
Additional full depth transverse saw cuts will be allowed to facilitate slab removal but may not extend transversely into the adjacent pavement to remain in place .
Remove concrete between narrowly spaced sawcuts at the end of a proposed patch area in a manner that does not damage any adjacent pavement that is to remain in place .
Do not allow wheel saws with carbide steel tips to cut into pavement that is to remain in place .
Remove the concrete in the patch area in one or more pieces minimizing disturbance to the subbase subgrade and the adjacent pavement to remain in place .
If damage occurs to pavement to remain in place repair as specified in Section .b at no additional cost to the Department .
Drill holes into the face of the existing pavement that has been saw cut full depth .
As indicated and when directed provide load transfer units adjacent to existing joints and at the same joint spacing as the existing pavement .
Place coated dowel bars parallel to the centerline and surface of the pavement .
Form all patch sides not in contact with pavement remaining in place .
Extend all forms to the full depth of the existing pavement .
For Type A and B patches finish the surface of the patch to match the existing pavement cross section .
For Type C patches taper the wheel ruts at both ends of the patch to a straight pavement cross slope within the patch with a minimum transition length of feet .
Texture Type A and B patches to correspond with the texture of the surrounding pavement .
If the contract includes grinding of the pavement surface then the matching of wheel ruts and the texturing of the patch surface is not necessary .
Cure test cylinders under the same conditions as the concrete pavement patch .
Control the curing temperature and monitor at least hourly to ensure that the concrete pavement patch does not experience a curing temperature change in excess of F within any hour period during the curing operation .
If a change in curing temperature in excess of F occurs in the concrete pavement patch within any hour period the work will be considered defective .
Remove and replace concrete pavement patches that are considered defective at no cost to the Department .
When longitudinal joint cleaning and sealing is part of the contract the sealing of longitudinal joints is incidental to that item not to concrete pavement patching .
The unit price includes removal of the existing pavement and all repairs or corrections specified in Section .
DESCRIPTIONThis work is the cutting of transverse grooves in existing cement concrete pavement after the original texture has been lost. . CONSTRUCTIONSatisfactorily groove the existing pavement surface transversely between the limiting stations indicated .
Do not cut grooves within inches of the outside edge or centerline pavement joint .
DESCRIPTIONThis work is the construction of one course fulldepth continuously reinforced cement concrete pavement patches .
Provide partial depth sawcuts at the existing pavementpatch interface construct a sealant reservoir and seal the joint .
Replace the second paragraph of Section .b with the following Make initial fulldepth transverse sawcuts from the outside edge of the pavement toward the longitudinal saw cut .
A wheel saw having carbide steel tips may be used while making the fulldepth transverse sawcuts to provide a trench across the slab to relieve compression in pavement before lifting out failed area .
Do not allow the wheel to cut into pavement that is remaining in place .
Do not break back the underside of the existing pavement .
If the existing pavement was constructed on top of a bond breaker remove the bond breaker from the top of pavement base .
The unit price includes removal of the existing pavement and repairs or corrections specified in Section .
DESCRIPTIONThis work is the construction of plantmixed pervious concrete pavement on a prepared surface designed to allow the infiltration of storm water into the subsoil .
Completely cover the pavement surface with a mil minimum polyethylene sheet .
Do not open the pavement to vehicular traffic until the concrete has cured for at least days during which the ambient temperature has exceeded F during any time of the day .
DESCRIPTIONThis work consists of cleaning and sealing existing transverse joints in cement concrete pavements. . MATERIAL Joint Sealing MaterialSection .b or c Joint Backing MaterialSection . . CONSTRUCTIONCompletely remove all existing joint sealing material neoprene compression seals bituminous material and other foreign material in a manner that provides a clean newly exposed concrete surface .
Immediately before sealing the joint place the backer rod to a depth of inch below the pavement surface .
Do not place joint sealant unless the ambient air and the pavement temperatures are F or greater .
Fill the joint reservoir to a level of inch to inch below the pavement surface . .
Completely clean milled pavement surface .
If a crack occurs before acceptance of pavement remove and replace one full panel width and length .
The maximum time period allowed for pavement curing covers to be removed is hour .
The Representative will determine when pavement will be opened to traffic but no sooner than hours or when the concrete attains the minimum required compressive strength .
If concrete pavement has not attained a minimum hour compressive strength of pounds per square inch at the time of opening to traffic consider the work defective .
Section .t except revise the first paragraph as follows Unless otherwise directed in writing by the District Executive remove and replace at no expense to the Department pavement that is defective in surface tolerance as specified in Section .o defective in compressive strength as specified in Section .b defective in depth as specified in Section .t defective in air content as specified in Section .b where the temperature change in concrete in excess of F occurs within a hour period or showing surface defects resulting from the effects of rain hail improper final finish excessive raveling of joints during sawing or honeycombing which in the Representatives opinion can not be repaired .
Construct an offsite slab weeks before placement of accelerated concrete pavement on the project as follows Construct the test slab one lane width wide and feet long .
DESCRIPTIONThis work is the construction of a partialdepth repair of an existing concrete pavement .
Areas that require repair depths that are greater than half the slab thickness are to be repaired with fulldepth concrete pavement patches as specified in Section .
Concrete pavement partialdepth repair is classified by two types as follows a Concrete Pavement PartialDepth Repair Type .
Prepare and submit for approval a QC Plan specifically for concrete pavement partialdepth repair as specified in Section .a .
For areas where delamination extends through a pavement joint the area should be repaired by maintaining the joint with two separate minimum repair areas .
Cut and remove any reinforcement in jointed reinforced concrete pavement that is exposed after the removal of delaminated concrete .
Do not cut or remove the reinforcement in continuously reinforced concrete pavement .
If the partialdepth repair area becomes a fulldepth concrete pavement patch due to excessive unnecessary removal of concrete or damage to the dowel bars during the concrete removal process construct a fulldepth concrete pavement patch as specified in Section at no additional cost to the Department .
When the Representative determines the dowel bars are unacceptable due to misalignment of extensive deterioration construct a fulldepth concrete pavement patch as specified in Section .
Strikeoff and shape concrete to match the surrounding pavement including wheel ruts .
Use preformed cellular polystyrene temporary forms that extend to the pavement surface to keep the concrete out of existing joints .
Strikeoff and shape concrete to match the surrounding pavement including wheel ruts .
Use preformed cellular polystyrene temporary forms that extend to the pavement surface to keep the concrete out of existing joints .
If a change in curing temperature in excess of F occurs in the concrete pavement patch within any hour period the work will be considered defective .
The unit price includes removal of existing pavement and repairs or corrections specified in Section .
Linear Foot If transverse andor longitudinal joint cleaning and sealing are part of the contract sealing of joints at partialdepth repair areas are incidental to that item and will not be payable under concrete pavement partialdepth repair. . .d Initial Edition SECTION RUBBLIZING OF CONCRETE PAVEMENTS .
DESCRIPTIONThis work is rubblizing and seating of existing concrete pavements before the placement of a pavement overlay .
Rubblizing pavement into pieces having a maximum horizontal dimension of inches .
Rubblizing pavement into pieces having a maximum horizontal dimension of inches and with at least of the pieces per square yard having a maximum horizontal dimension of inches. . MATERIAL a Coarse Aggregate Type A or Type B No . .
Submit a pavement rubblizing plan and list of proposed equipment for Department approval before the start of construction .
Remove any existing bituminous paving materials that are overlaying the concrete pavement as specified in Section .
Use mechanical or sonic vibratory equipment capable of providing concrete pieces of the specified dimensions throughout the full depth of the pavement on a regular and continuous basis .
Excavate two foot by foot fulldepth sections of rubblized pavement within the first mile of rubblizing operations to ensure that the pavement is being rubblized to the specific dimensions .
Repeat the initial twosection fulldepth pavement removal testing procedure whenever the equipment rubblizing pattern or breaking force is changed .
Cut off and remove any reinforcement steel exposed at the surface of the rubblized pavement .
If the transverse joints of the original pavement contained steel plates remove any steel plates that are exposed .
Exercise care during rubblizing operations to prevent shattering pavement edges adjacent to bituminous base repairs .
Following the rubblizing operation use a ton pneumatictired roller as specified in Section .c.e to seat the rubblized pavement .
Establish a rolling pattern that ensures all areas of rubblized pavement surface are directly contacted by the roller in no more than four passes .
.d .e Initial Edition Final seating of the rubblized pavement is satisfactory when vertical deflection under the roller is less than inch .
Backfill to existing subgrade with suitable material to the top of existing subbase with subbase material and to the top of the rubblized pavement with coarse aggregate .
After final seating sweep and clean the surface of the rubblized and seated pavement to remove all loose material .
Prohibit traffic on the roadway after the pavement has been rubblized and seated .
Repair all rubblized and seated pavement areas disturbed by construction traffic at no cost to the Department .
Do not leave the rubblized and seated pavement exposed to freezing conditions . .
DESCRIPTION This work is the installation of epoxycoated smooth dowel bars into existing concrete pavement across cracks or transverse joints without dowels. . MATERIAL a ForceTransfer Units .
Do not use equipment that may cause pavement to spall or cause surface aggregates to fracture .
Saw cut pavement to place center of dowel at middepth of pavement slab .
If repair area spans different pavement thicknesses e.g .
If pavement damage occurs from pounds chip hammer use a pound chip hammer .
Place coated dowel bars parallel to roadway centerline and pavement surface allowing no greater than inch tolerance out of plane .
Finish the surface of the slots to match the existing pavement surface profile including any existing wheel ruts .
DESCRIPTION This work consists of crossstitching longitudinal cracks and may include crossstitching longitudinal joints in plain cement concrete pavement by placing epoxy coated deformed tie bars at an angle across the longitudinal joint or crack. . MATERIAL a Reinforcement .
Do not perform work if either the ambient air temperature or the pavement surface temperature is below F. Do not move drifted slabs back into position against the adjacent slabs .
Before crossstitching longitudinal pavement joints make a full depth saw cut in the existing longitudinal joint along the entire length of the slab .
If spalling of the concrete pavement surface occurs drill shallow vertical holes at each tie bar location .
Drill angled holes to intersect the crack at approximately middepth of the pavement thickness .
Provide inch coverage for the tie bar at the surface of the pavement .
Trowel the epoxy bonding compound flush with the pavement surface .
Initial Edition Do not place sealing material if either the ambient air temperature or the pavement surface temperature is below F. Fill the longitudinal crack or longitudinal joint to a level of inch to inch below the pavement surface .
Do not let sealing material spread over the pavement surface .
Remove and replace any pavement slab where drilled holes have extended through the bottom of the slab with a full depth pavement patch at no additional cost to the Department . .
DESCRIPTIONThis work is the construction of LongLife Concrete Pavements LLCP and is intended to provide a longer service life than conventional concrete pavement. . MATERIAL a Class AA Cement Concrete Modified .
Fixed forms may be used for pavement gaps and nonuniform areas with the approval of the Representative .
Provide an electronic monitoring device meeting the following characteristics and requirements to display the operating frequency of each individual internal vibrator for concrete pavement placed by the slipform method Contains a readout display near the operators controls visible to the operator and the Representative .
Records the following at least every feet of paving or at least every minutes Clock time Station location Paver track speed Operating frequency of individual vibrators Do not operate equipment other than sawing equipment or a lightweight profiler on the new pavement slab as specified in Section .q .
Place and anchor FTU assemblies so that dowel misalignments before concrete placements do not exceed the following limits Vertical or horizontal rotation relative to the plane of the grade and the centerline of the constructed pavement .
Finish the surface of all travel and passing lane pavements with a longitudinal texture as specified in Section .k.a .
Finish all other pavement surfaces as specified in Section .k or Section .k.a .
Following the final finishing immediately after free water has left the pavement surface and while the surface is still damp seal exposed concrete areas with an application of curing compound .
Do not drip curing compound on the pavement .
If rain falls on newly coated pavement before the film has dried sufficiently to resist damage or if film is damaged in any way before the pavement is cured apply a new coat immediately in an amount equal to the original specified application .
Include the method of joint curing in the pavement QC plan as required in Section .a .
Test the surface of pavement as follows .
These pavements include but are not limited to any full width lane used for travel passing climbing center turn acceleration deceleration and ramps. . Other than Mainline Pavement .
These pavements include but are not limited to approach slabs bridge decks tapers shoulders medians or other pavement surfaces as directed .
The Representative will determine when pavement may be opened to traffic .
Do not open pavement to traffic or operate heavy equipment on it for a minimum of hours and until the concrete has reached a minimum compressive strength of pounds per square inch .
can be used as an alternate method of determining the compressive strength of the finished pavement .
Perform operations on new pavement as approved by the Representative and in accordance with the following When moving on and off the pavement construct a ramp to prevent damage to the pavement slab .
Take positive action to prevent damage to the pavement surface and joints .
Before placing the protective mats sweep the pavement surface free of debris .
New pavement will not be opened to any traffic until all joints have been sealed unless an acceptable method to protect joints from damage and keep noncompressible materials from entering the joint is approved by the Representative .
Complete any surface corrective work before testing for pavement depth .
Test pavement depth by obtaining one core or one nondestructive test in each sublot .
determine the average lot pavement thickness by averaging the individual sublot core thicknesses accept concrete as specified in Section .u and determine price adjustments as specified in Section .a . .
When indicated or when requested in writing and approved by the District Executive test the depth of the finished pavement as indicated in Section .s .
by the District Executive remove and replace pavement determined defective as follows .
The lot is defective if the pavement contains surface defects from rain improper final finish cracking or honeycombing that can not be satisfactorily repaired as determined by the Representative. . Other Than Mainline Pavement Surface Tolerance .
The lot is defective if the pavement contains depressions or high points as specified in Section .o that can not be satisfactorily corrected as determined by the Representative . .
The pavement is defective if the requirements specified in Section .g are not met .
Remove and replace a minimum of an entire panel of LLCP pavement as shown in RCM .
Longitudinal edge spall repairs are not considered satisfactory repairs for edge slumping or spalling between adjacent lanes or outside pavement edges .
Lots and sublots for the combined pavement characteristics of depth and compressive strength will be determined based on the full width of pavement placement .
Lots and sublots will be calculated as the work progresses and will include any pavement designated as LLCP pavement .
Do not combine pavement with different depths into any lot or sublot .
A full lot is defined as square yards of pavement of the same constant depth and consists of four equal sublots of square yards each .
Combine partial lots with the last full lot or make a separate lot according to the following procedure If less than square yards remain combine the remaining pavement with the last full lot .
If the remaining pavement is equal to or greater than square yards consider the remaining pavement as a separate lot .
Determine sublots for the last pavement lot by establishing a number of equal size sublots .
Determine lots and sublots based on the full width of pavement placement . .
MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENTSquare Yard The Department will pay on a lotbylot basis at the contract price adjusted for pavement characteristics relative to depth a n d compressive strength .
The lot average pavement depth will be determined as specified in Section .s .
The Department will not pay for defective pavement left in place unless otherwise directed in writing by the District Executive .
When the District Executive directs that defective pavement be left in place final payment for this pavement will be at of the contract unit price .
DESCRIPTIONThis work is the construction of a Portland cement concrete overlay with a thickness of to inches and is bonded to an existing asphaltsurfaced pavement .
Profile mill the existing asphalt pavement surface to the depth indicated in the plans as specified in Section .
In lieu of replacing unsound pavement as specified in Section .c with asphalt .e .l Change No .
Clean and fill in cracks greater than inches with nonshrink grout or other material approved by the Department which will enable bond to the concrete overlay prior to pavement surface cleaning .
Completely clean the milled pavement surface using a vacuum truck or other approved means .
Immediately before placing the concrete overlay ensure the asphalt surface is less than F. Fogmisting protective covers or blankets will be allowed to achieve the proper condition of the surface however do not allow any standing water or moisture to remain on the pavement surface .
The Representative may allow or require slight deviations from nominal panel dimensions in order to match joints in adjacent pavement or structures or to avoid the construction of panels with dimensions or shapes that would otherwise be subject to premature cracking .
If pavement is cured by means other than whitepigmented liquid membraneforming curing compound remove curing materials from overlay at the location where a joint is to be cut .
The maximum time period allowed for pavement curing covers to be removed is hour .
In areas where transitions contain existing treated base course or concrete pavement directly below the overlay place geotextile as a debonding layer as specified in Section .
Maintain the curing materials until the pavement has achieved sufficient strength for opening to traffic as specified in Section .q .
Replace with the following The Representative will determine when pavement will be opened to traffic based on when the concrete attains the minimum required compressive strength of pounds per square inch as measured either by compressive strength testing of cylinders in accordance with PTM No .
Replace with the following Before final acceptance of the each phase of the project proceed as follows The Department will divide the concrete overlay pavement into lots representing not more than square yards of pavement in each traffic lane .
The Inspector will consider the pavement to be defective if any core measurement is deficient in required depth as indicated in Table B. t Defective Work .
Replace with the following Unless otherwise directed in writing by the District Executive remove and replace at no expense to the Department pavement that is defective in construction or sawing of joints as specified in Section .i defective in curing requirements as specified in Section .l defective in surface tolerance as specified in Section .o defective in depth as specified in Section .s defective in air content as specified in Section .c defective in .t .f Change No .
The minimum pavement removal and replacement will be one panel in length and width .
Where deficiencies are exhibited in successive panels of pavement remove and replace entire panels .
After removal of defective pavement reestablish replaced joints .
If removing and replacing pavement defective in depth start at the determined point of deficiency as determined by the Representative .
Remove and replace defective work transversely for the fulllane width and longitudinally until the pavement is not more than inch deficient in depth as specified in Section .s . .
The price also excludes the concrete overlay transitions and the concrete pavement cores .
An additional quantity not to exceed of the computed overlay quantity may be paid as compensation for the cost of cement concrete material needed to replace unsound pavement material removed as part of the profile milling operation .
The Department will not pay for defective pavement left in place unless otherwise directed in writing by the District Executive .
When the District Executive directs that defective pavement be left in place final payment for this pavement will be at of the contract unit prices of the concrete overlay and the cement concrete .
DESCRIPTIONThis work is the construction of a bonded concrete overlay or inlay of concrete pavements including surface preparation and joint sawing and sealing. . MATERIAL a Cement Concrete Class AA .
When used to lower the pavement elevation scarify the existing pavement surface to the depth indicated .
Remove all loose material from the pavement surface before cleaning .
If inlaying and the existing transverse pavement joints have steel plates remove exposed steel plates . .
Install joint backing or other approved joint filling material to within inch of the pavement surface in all existing transverse joints including those associated with fulldepth repairs prior to placement of the overlay .
Completely blow off standing water with compressed air from the pavement surface .
Section .l with the following modifications Replace the first sentence of Section .l with the following Apply curing materials after finishing and texturing operations and within minutes of the dissipation of bleed water and maintain them in place until the pavement has reached sufficient strength as specified in .l for opening to traffic .
Saw cut depth must be equal to the full thickness of the overlay including any additional thickness used for grade corrections plus inch but must not result in damage to dowel load transfer devices in the original pavement .
To prevent debonding saw cut width should be at least the width of the underlying joint or crack in the existing pavement or greater .
Provide a neat vertical edge face free of honeycomb and segregation longitudinally along both sides of the overlaid pavement .
The Representative can determine when pavement will be open to traffic based on when the concrete attains the minimum required compressive strength of pounds per square inch as measured by compressive strength testing of cylinders in accordance with PTM No .
Unless otherwise directed in writing from the District Executive remove and replace pavement overlay that is defective in depth as specified in Section .c Table A defective in air content as specified in Section .c modified as specified in Section .a defective in bond strength as specified in Section .e or showing surface defects resulting from the effects of rain improper final finish or honeycombing which in the Representatives opinion can not be repaired .
Replace defective pavement overlay as specified in Section .t except provide a minimum pavement removal and replacement length between transverse joints of feet . .
An additional quantity not to exceed of the computed overlay quantity will be paid as compensation for the cost of cement concrete material needed to replace unsound pavement material removed as part of the surface preparation operation .
Also excludes concrete overlay transitions and concrete pavement cores . .
The Department will not pay for defective pavement left in place unless otherwise directed in writing by the District Executive .
When the District Executive directs that defective pavement be left in place final payment for this pavement will be at of the contract unit prices of the concrete overlayinlay and the cement concrete .
DESCRIPTIONThis work is the construction of an unbonded concrete overlay of concrete pavements including surface preparation and joint sawing and sealing. . MATERIALSection .
Repair surface defects with a patching material that consists of a bituminous material a cementitious material or a similar pavement repair material meeting the approval of the Representative before placing the overlay .
Sweep pavement to remove any loose debris by either using a power broom vacuum truck or other approved means before applying pavement interlayer . .
Place geotextile flat on the repaired and cleaned existing pavement surface .
Extend free edge of geotextile interlayer a minimum of inches beyond edge of pavement .
Do not allow the surface temperature of the pavement to exceed F before the overlay placement .
Before starting concrete pavement placement and before each day of concrete pavement placement demonstrate the fastening method to the Representative for approval .
Add the following Identify and mark any transverse expansion joints in the existing pavement .
The saw cut depth must be no less than D within inches of the pavement edges and must be no less than D anywhere .
The Representative may allow slight deviations from nominal panel dimensions in order to match joints in adjacent pavement or structures or to avoid the construction of panels with dimensions or shapes that would otherwise be subject to premature cracking. . Sawing for Creating Concrete Overly Joints .
If pavement is cured by means other than whitepigmented liquid membraneforming curing compound remove curing materials from overlay at the location where a joint is to be cut .
The maximum time period allowed for pavement curing covers to be removed is hour .
Maintain the curing materials until the pavement has achieved sufficient strength for opening to traffic as specified in Section .q .
gallon per square feet for pavements inches and per square feet for pavements inches or according to the manufacturers recommendations whichever is greater .
Replace with the following The Representative will determine when pavement will be open to traffic based on when the concrete attains the minimum required compressive strength according to Table A as measured either by compressive strength testing of cylinders in accordance with PTM No .
In areas where transitions contain existing treated base course or concrete pavement directly below the overlay place geotextile as a debonding layer as specified in Section .e.a . .
DESCRIPTIONThis work is cleaning and sealing of cracks in existing cement concrete pavements having an opening of inch and wider. . MATERIAL a Joint Sealing Material .
Do not place joint sealant unless the ambient air temperature is F or greater and the pavement temperature is F or greater .
Fill the sealant reservoir to a level of inch to inch below the pavement surface . .
DESCRIPTION This work is milling of an existing cement concrete pavement surface to the indicated depth. . CONSTRUCTION a Equipment .
Provide a milling machine designed and built for milling existing cement concrete pavements .
Maintain the milled pavement surface free of all loose materials and dust before placing a proposed bituminous overlay .
Lay pipe as shown on the Standard Drawings before constructing base course or pavement .
For pipes constructed in new embankments backfill to the pavement subgrade elevation bottom of the pavement subbase layer with No .
A Coarse Aggregate when the trench is located within the roadway footprint including the shoulders and the distance from the top of pipe elevation to the pavement subgrade elevation is less than or equal to feet .
A Coarse Aggregate to the pavement subgrade elevation .
For reconstruction or replacement of pipesutilities under existing pavements backfill the entire trench with No .
A Coarse Aggregate regardless of the distance from the top of pipe to the pavement subgrade elevation .
Repair or replace existing pavement curb and sidewalk damaged due to rebuilding .
Before placing pavement material set the adjustable extension unit in the existing inlet or manhole frame with the section resting on the flange .
DESCRIPTIONThis work is construction of pipe underdrains of the type and size indicated and pavement base drains. . MATERIAL a Pipes .
Use prefabricated pavement base drains consisting of an inert plastic core designed to carry water flow wrapped in geotextile fabric for filtering purposes .
Water absorption ASTM D. after hours Fungus resistance ASTM Gno growth Crush strength GRIGC pounds per square inch minimum Flow rate ASTM D gallons per minute feet minimum Provide a minimum of open core area on the pavement side face of the base drain and a minimum of on the shoulder side face .
Provide unobstructed inflow through a minimum of of the geotextile area on the pavement side face of the base drain and of the geotextile area on the shoulder side face when stretched across the face of the core .
Clearly identify each roll of pavement base drain by affixing a tag or sticker containing the following information Lot number Manufacturers name and address Product type and designation Product identification including thickness height roll length and roll weight Geotextile type and designation .g Wrapping of the Core .
Firmly attach geotextile to the protrusions on the pavement side face of the drainage core and spotbond on the shoulder side face or submit results of flow tests on the drain under loading with the geotextile unattached to ensure that the geotextile will not deform under continuous loading to the point where flow capacity is diminished and the specified minimum flow rate is not achieved .
Provide standard fittings and splice connections along the pavement base drain as indicated or as directed of sufficient strength to withstand construction handling and permanent loading .
Place pavement base drain after the adjacent roadway pavement is constructed except when it is placed under curb sections or other special locations .
Excavate pavement base drain trench without disturbing subbase under the roadway pavement .
Use Class geotextile as specified in Section .b for all pavement base drain construction and if indicated for pipe underdrain construction .
Place prefabricated pavement base drain in a trench constructed adjacent to the roadway pavement edge as shown on the Standard Drawings .
Construct trench without disturbing the pavement structure or subbase .
Place prefabricated pavement base drain vertically in the trench as shown on the Standard Drawings .
If raised core projections protrude from only one side of the drain place the projections toward the pavement side of the trench .
concurrently with the pavement base drain to establish positive drainage within hours of the beginning of trenching for the installation of a given section of base drain .
Cubic Yard For extradepth pipe underdrain and extradepth pavement base drain excavation in excess of that shown on the Standard Drawings .
Maintain a minimum slope of inch per foot on the trench bottom through pavement and shoulder areas .
Unless otherwise directed use outlet pipe of the same materials as the underdrain or pavement base drain .
Provide smooth walled PE or PVC outlet pipe for use with PE PVC or ABS underdrain or pavement base drain conforming to the above requirements and having a minimum stiffness of pounds per square inch at deflection at all pipe diameters .
Compact the portion of the outlet under pavement or shoulder as specified in Section .f .
Connect to the pipe underdrain or pavement base drain using suitable couplings and fittings or special connectors connect with a maximum degree bend or series of degree bends .
Use prefabricated pavement base drains consisting of an inert plastic core designed to carry water flow wrapped in geotextile fabric for filtering purposes. . Geotextile Fabric .
The depth of saw cut may be decreased at the edge adjacent to the pavement to obtain a maximum depth without pavement damage .
Remove existing curb pavement and sidewalk to neat lines when indicated then compact the material upon which the curb is to be constructed to a firm even surface .
Replace existing pavement and sidewalk damaged or removed during construction .
Modify curb construction within existing pavement limits and existing structures where indicated or directed .
Install depressed curb for all curb ramps and at median or traffic refuge island access openings where the opening meets adjacent roadway pavement . .
Modify curb construction within existing pavement limits and existing structures where indicated or directed .
Properly support and massload the curbpaver during operation along the edge of pavement .
DESCRIPTIONThis work consists of furnishing and applying a High Friction Surface Treatment HFST on asphalt and concrete pavements. . MATERIALS a Binder Resin System Binder .
Cover and protect all existing pavement markings and utilities manholesinlets that are adjacent to the HFST site as directed by the Representative before performing surface preparation .
Remove pavement markings that conflict with the HFST installation in accordance with Section ..
Prepare all pavement surfaces immediately before the installation of HFST .
Wash pavement surfaces with a mild detergent solution to remove oils greases or other deleterious materials that remained after the surface preparation rinse with clean potable water and dry using a hot compressed air lance .
Do not overfill cracks if cracks are overfilled scarify the material to make it flush with the adjacent pavement after the Binder material is cured .
Clean asphalt pavement surfaces using mechanical sweepers and high pressure air wash with sufficient oil traps .
Do not apply HFST applications on new asphalt pavements until after a mandatory day cure period . .
Clean concrete pavement surfaces by shot blasting and vacuum sweeping .
Hand squeegee the mixed components onto the prepared pavement surface using a serrated edge squeegee at a uniform application thickness of mils square foot per gallon .
Hand squeegee the mixed Binder onto the prepared pavement surface using a serrated edge squeegee at a uniform application thickness of mils square foot per gallon .
MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENTMeasured longitudinally along edge of pavement .
The depth of the saw cut may be decreased at the edge adjacent to the pavement if required to obtain a maximum depth without pavement damage .
Make the filler inch less than the pavement depth .
Repair or replace existing pavement curb and sidewalk damaged due to construction .
DESCRIPTIONThis work is the filling of voids beneath existing rigid base courses or pavements at locations as directed. . MATERIAL a Cement .
Zero both gauges to the pavement surface with no force on the slab on both sides of the joint or crack .
Provide generator core drill and diamondtip core barrels or other satisfactory equipment capable of drilling the grout injection holes through the pavement and base material and equipment in satisfactory condition and operated to produce holes that are smooth vertical and do not break out the bottom of the slab. . Vertical Movement Testing .
Supply satisfactory equipment to measure slab lift capable of detecting simultaneously the lift of the pavement edge or of any two outside slab corners adjacent to a joint and the adjoining shoulder .
Upward movement of the pavement greater than .
Do not extend the discharge end of the packer or hose below the lower surface of the concrete pavement .
Grind pavement raised in excess of the .inch allowable tolerance to the correct grade .
Strike patches flush with the surface of the surrounding pavement .
DESCRIPTIONThis work is filling voids beneath existing rigid base courses or pavements and pressure jacking the pavement or base course to grade with cement grout. . MATERIALSSection .
Use a stiffer mix if the above mix fails to raise the pavement slab. . CONSTRUCTION a General .
Do not extend the discharge end of the packer below the lower surface of the concrete pavement .
If jacking continuously reinforced concrete pavement pump in a pattern and in the amount required to raise the pavement to within .
If jacking jointed slabs of concrete pavement and bridge end slabs pump in a pattern and in the amount required to raise the pavement to within .
Pressure to pounds per square inch will be allowed only for short periods except in the event the pavement is bonded to the subgrade brief pressure rises to pounds per square inch will be allowed. . Overjacking .
Bring pavement raised above the tolerances listed above to grade by grinding .
foot satisfactorily remove and replace the pavement in as specified in Section at no cost to the Department . .
Within feet horizontally andor longitudinally from any tieins to existing pavement or structures set grade points at foot intervals in accordance with Section .b .
Establish stationing at the centerline or edges of pavement with paint marks or by placing stakes at right angles to the station or segmentoffset .
Salvaged and crushed concrete pavements and concrete highway structures from Department county or municipal projects for use as aggregate in subbase only .
The LTS may accept aggregate failing the test if it can be demonstrated in writing that the aggregate has a satisfactory service record in both pavements and structures .
For use on ice or snowcovered pavement surfaces furnish antiskid material conforming to Table E from a producer or agent listed in Bulletin .
If allowed by the District Executive in writing volumetric mixing plants may also be used for pavement patching and structures .
When used for transverse joints in reinforced or plain cement concrete pavement furnish lengths equal to the width of the traffic lane ramp or taper with a minimum thickness of inch .
AASHTO M and ASTM D Movement Range for pavement seals ASTM D for bridge seals and as follows .a Seals .
Function properly at temperatures between F and F. Misalign the walls by not more than inch when the pavement seal is in a compressed condition .
Vary from nominal height by not more than inch if pavement seals are used and inch if bridge seals are used .
A seal lot is a continuous production not exceeding linear feet for pavement seals and not exceeding linear feet for bridge seals . .
Also mark the top of each pavement seal at foot inch intervals in a manner clear and durable to enable stretchcompression determinations of the seal .
A semiopen flexible polyurethane foam that is molded to a crosssectional shape and easily installed in a pavement joint with parallel sides and is sufficiently selflocking to prevent the material from floating out of the joint .
If using deformed bent tie bars in pavement structures use only Grade . .
AdhesiveSection .c Temporary Traffic Control SignalsSection Temporary Traffic Control Signals ResetSection When traffic line paint and glass beads or pavement marking tape are provided according to the requirements of Section .k furnish certification as specified in Section .b that these materials meet specifications .
The Contractor is not responsible for picking up and disposing of dead animals Keeping roadways clear of dust and soil and cleaning up nonhazardous spills Maintaining a safe and unobstructed passageway through or around the work zone for all traffic including emergency pulloff areas at the edges of pavements Maintaining surface drainage including the removal of debris ice and snow from around inlets to ensure the drainage system is functioning as intended Removal of ice and snow from bridge sidewalks andor temporary walkways open to pedestrian traffic and Maintaining access to devices associated with Intelligent Transportation Systems including controllers and meter cabinets .
Unless otherwise indicated in the TCP furnish all material and install reflectorized pavement markings in work areas for all base course flexible pavement and rigid pavement construction operations as follows All Operations Except Seal CoatSurface Treatment Oil Chip Skin Patching Slurry Seal Heat Scarification and Microresurfacing Operations .
Before terminating work each day replace all lane lines and centerlines covered or destroyed during the days operations with applicable pavement marking pattern shown in Standard Drawing TC and the MUTCD .
In not less than days or more than days after completion of the operation remove signs and replace all lane lines and centerlines covered or destroyed during the operation with the applicable pavement marking pattern shown in Standard Drawing TC and the MUTCD .
In not less than days or more than days after completion of the operation remove signs and replace all lane lines and centerlines covered or destroyed during the operation with applicable pavement marking pattern shown in Standard Drawing TC and the MUTCD .
In these cases install the applicable standard pavement marking pattern before terminating work each day and eliminate the requirement for installation of No Pavement Markings signs .
Apply work area pavement markings as specified in Section .
For temporary pavement markings placed at the Departments direction and under conditions not meeting Section .
Temporary pavement markings installed under this condition will be paid by the Department .
As an alternate to paint and glass beads provide standard pavement markings consisting of temporary pavement marking tape or use nonplowable raised pavement markers when directed except for final markings .
Use traffic line paint and glass beads for pavement markings meeting requirements in Publication Publication and the MUTCD or temporary pavement marking tape from a manufacturer listed in Bulletin .
Place standard pavement markings in the same location as covered or destroyed pavement markings unless otherwise indicated in the TCP or directed .
Remove any pavement markings improperly placed and install in the correct location at no additional cost to the Department .
If the roadway is to be closed to traffic until completion of the project and standard pavement markings will be in place when the roadway is opened to traffic then work area pavement markings as specified above are not required .
Notify the Representative in writing at least days before implementing or changing any lateral lane restriction which provides less than feet of pavement and shoulder in each direction for oversize vehicles .
Remove conflicting pavement markings during any phase of construction and relocate as indicated .
Furnish install and maintain yellow or white one or twodirection temporary nonplowable raised pavement markers according to the locations spacings and configurations indicated or directed .
After removal restore the pavement surface .
DESCRIPTIONThis work is maintenance and protection of traffic on the project and the maintenance and protection of the project during a temporary work suspension. . MATERIALSection . . CONSTRUCTIONMaintain and protect the project during suspension as specified in Section .b as directed and as follows Shape and maintain the existing roadway if existing roadway pavements are broken up and removed in advance of a reasonable paving schedule .
Unless otherwise indicated install bracket arms at right angles to the pavement edge with arms securely fastened to the pole shafts .
If possible install conduits under roadways before placing the pavement .
Jack auger or bore under pavements shoulders sidewalks railway tracks and other indicated areas .
On tangent sections of roadway locate and erect posts to allow signs to face away from roadway at an angle of degrees from the pavement edge .
Submit a sketch for acceptance for each plan location before post fabrication showing the following location of sign by plan station lateral offset from pavement edge to sign edge sign size width and height exit panel sign size width and height number of post supports and sections post heights measured from bottom of post base plate to post top measured distance from reference line elevation at pavement edge to foundation top steel finned pipe foundation design or footing base type design and reinforcing steel and bracket identification number and quantity .
Provide a ground mount anchoring system for installing flexible delineator posts in the ground or in proposed pavement median or island . .
Provide a surface mount anchoring system for installing flexible delineator posts to existing pavements. . CONSTRUCTION a General .
Place soil anchors in proposed pavement median or island for inpavement mount .
Install surface mount base anchors on the existing pavement and insert post and secure as recommended by the manufacturer . .
Measure to accurately establish the marker locations in mile increments along the outside pavement edge of the northbound or eastbound roadway only .
Place inch premolded expansion joint filler between the foundation and existing concrete sidewalks and pavements .
Cut existing pavement only when indicated .
Restore existing pavement .
For flexible pavement use bituminous material of a type equal to the existing pavement as determined by the Representative .
For rigid pavement use High Early Strength Cement Concrete as specified in Section .. b Directional Boring .
Do not deform the pavement .
Keep boring pits at least feet from the edge of pavement unless otherwise authorized in writing .
Do not use water or drilling fluids to the extent that the pavement might be undermined or subgrade softened .
Saw cut slots in the pavement for the sensor as indicated .
Fill the slot to within inch of the pavement surface and ensure that there are no voids .
When resurfacing occurs over any area of loop sensor install the sensor in the existing pavement structure or in the binder course before placement of the wearing course .
Do not install the top course of pavement before the sealant is cured .
Rotary drill a hole in the pavement for the sensor .
Bore a tunnel with boring pit as necessary without disturbing the pavement from the junction box to a point approximately feet beyond the centerline of the detection zone .
Repair any damage to the roadway or pavement base drain caused by boring .
DESCRIPTIONThis work is the furnishing and installation of hot thermoplastic pavement markings of the indicated type and color with a surface application of glass beads. . MATERIAL a General .
Clean the roadway surface where the hot thermoplastic pavement markings will be applied .
Surface preparation is incidental to the application of hot thermoplastic pavement markings except for the removal of pavement markings which is performed and paid for under Section .
Identify the location of the final pavement markings by applying spots on the pavement at foot intervals .
Apply on dry pavement when the air and roadway temperatures are between F and F and when the wind speed is less than miles per hour .
Restripe the cleaned surface as specified in Sections .b and c. Inadequate retroreflectivity glass bead coverage or retentionRemove defective markings and clean pavement surface including foot beyond each end of the affected area .
DESCRIPTIONThis work is the furnishing and installation of plastic pavement markings or legends of the type indicated. . MATERIALASTM D . When required provide compatible adhesive activator or primer sealer as listed in Bulletin or as recommended by the manufacturer. . CONSTRUCTION a General .
Clean the roadway surface where the cold plastic pavement markings or legends will be applied .
Surface preparation is incidental to the application of cold plastic pavement markings or legends except for the removal of pavement markings which is performed and paid for under Section .
Identify the location of the final pavement markings .
Apply on dry pavement when the roadway temperature is greater than or equal to F unless unless otherwise directed .
Place the material with a thickness of mils mils to mils mils on the pavement before final compaction and within the temperature range specified by the manufacturer .
DESCRIPTIONThis work is the furnishing and application of waterborne pavement markings of the type and color indicated. . MATERIAL a General .
Clean the roadway surface where the waterborne pavement markings will be applied .
Surface preparation is incidental to the application of waterborne pavement markings except for the removal of pavement markings which is performed and paid for under Section .
Identify the location of the final pavement markings by applying spots on the pavement at foot intervals .
Apply on a dry pavement with minimum ambient and pavement temperatures of F and a maximum relative humidity of .
Confirm the proper atmospheric and pavement surface conditions with the InspectorinCharge .
Locate and place as indicated and as follows Avoid placing markings on longitudinal pavement joints and seams .
and clean pavement surface including foot beyond each end of the affected area .
Guarantee pavement marking material against failure due to premature wear or poor adhesion resulting from defective materials or method of application in accordance with Section .b for a period of days from the date of acceptance . .
DESCRIPTIONThis work is the removal of pavement markings and legends. . CONSTRUCTIONRemove existing pavement markings as indicated immediately before any change in traffic patterns or before the application of final markings .
Remove markings for restriping to the extent that of the material is removed without materially damaging or grooving the pavement surface more than inch .
Remove waterborne pavement markings by sandblasting grit blasting steel shot blasting or waterblasting .
Repair any pavement or surface damage caused during the removal process .
DESCRIPTIONThis work is the furnishing and installation of reflectorized twocomponent epoxy resin pavement markings of the color indicated with glass beads at the locations indicated. . MATERIAL a General .
Furnish white and yellow pavement markings that satisfy the following chromaticity coordinates x y x y x y x y White . . . . . . . . Yellow . . . . . . . . Furnish black epoxy that satisfies color chip of Federal Standard B and is equal to the quality of the white epoxy being used. . No Track Time .
Clean the roadway surface where the epoxy pavement markings will be applied .
Surface preparation is incidental to the application of epoxy pavement markings except for the removal of pavement markings which is performed and paid for under Section .
Identify the location of the final pavement markings by applying spots on the pavement at foot intervals .
Install epoxy on dry pavement only if the road surface and ambient temperatures are F or higher unless otherwise approved by the InspectorinCharge and acceptable to the manufacturer .
and clean pavement surface including foot beyond each end of the affected area .
Guarantee of the pavement marking material against failure due premature wear or poor adhesion resulting from defective materials or method of application in accordance with Section .b for a period .d .b Initial Edition of days from the date of acceptance .
DESCRIPTIONThis work is the furnishing and installation of preformed thermoplastic pavement markings of the type and color indicated. . MATERIAL a General .
Clean the roadway surface where the preformed thermoplastic pavement markings will be applied .
Surface preparation is incidental to the application of preformed thermoplastic pavement markings except for the removal of pavement markings which is performed and paid for under Section .
Identify the location of the final pavement markings by applying spots on the pavement at foot intervals .
Apply on dry pavement when the air and roadway temperatures are within the manufacturers recommendations and when the wind speed is less than miles per hours .
Use a heat gun to fuse the material to the pavement .
Inadequate retroreflectivity glass bead coverage or retentionRemove defective markings and clean pavement surface including foot beyond each end of the affected area .
DESCRIPTIONThis work is the furnishing installation replacement and removal of snowplowable retroreflective raised pavement markers of the type indicated. . MATERIAL a General .
A type and formulation recommended by the pavement marker manufacturer and approved by the Department for bonding the reflectors or holders to the pavement or the reflectors to the holders .
Before installing lay out the pavement marker locations .
Do not place devices on pavement surfaces that show visible evidence of pavement cracking checking spalling or failure of underlying base material .
Do not place devices within inches of a pavement joint .
Cut the depression in the pavement .
At the time of installation be sure that devices are free of dirt dust oil grease rust moisture or any foreign matter that impairs adhesion to the pavement .
Do not apply devices if the pavement surface temperature and the air temperature at the time of application are less than F or as recommended by the manufacturer .
Do not install markers if the pavement surface is moist or wet .
Remove and dispose of existing pavement markers prior to paving or milling operations .
Remove by method that will cause the least damage to pavement structure and is approved by the Department .
Satisfactorily repair any pavement damage caused by the removal methods .
When pavement markers are removed from a bituminous pavement prepare the existing surface voids as specified in Section .g .
Fill voids in pavement with bituminous wearing course or approved equal .
When pavement markers are removed from a cement concrete pavement clean void areas from all loose and foreign material .
Each Includes removal and disposal of existing pavement markers and filling of pavement voids .
Each As indicated for the existing pavement type .
Includes filling of pavement voids .
When strikeoff finishing machines are used support the wheels above the pavement surface on temporary rails supported on nondeflecting forms or other horizontal structural devices .
Complete saw cuts inches above the top of the deck slab or pavement surface .
After the straightedge testing and surface corrections have been completed and before the latex becomes nonplastic texture the surface as specified for concrete pavements in Section .k .
As indicated and as follows Physical SizeCylindrical housing nonferrous moistureproof suitable for direct burial in roadway pavement with no damage due to subsurface stresses and with a leadin cable of proper length for hookup .
If there is no sidewalk measure the mounting height above the pavement grade at the center of the roadway . .
Suspend the bottom of the housing of a signal face over the roadway a minimum of feet but not more than feet above the pavement .
If there is no sidewalk measure the mounting height above the pavement grade at the center of the roadway . .
New Section October To allow the use of pervious bituminous pavement systems on Department projects .
in place of AASHTO T . New Section October To allow the use of roller compacted concrete RCC pavement on Department projects .
in place of AASHTO T . New Section October To allow the use of pervious concrete pavement systems on Department projects .
New Section October To allow the use of pervious bituminous pavement systems on Department projects .
From Nature and Rationale for Change New Section October To allow the use of roller compacted concrete RCC pavement on Department projects .
in place of AASHTO T . New Section October To allow the use of pervious concrete pavement systems on Department projects .
New Section October To allow the use of pervious bituminous pavement systems on Department projects .
From Nature and Rationale for Change New Section October To allow the use of roller compacted concrete RCC pavement on Department projects .
in place of AASHTO T . New Section October To allow the use of pervious concrete pavement systems on Department projects .
.a and .k October To add a second type of material to be used for sign coverings to indicated that pavement markings placed at the Departments direction and under conditions not meeting Section will be paid by the Department to remove reference to a Section dealing with Marshal asphalt mix design that will be removed from Pub .
.b October To reference the manufacturers recommendations for road surface preparations when applying preformed thermoplastic pavement markings .
New Section April To give Districts another tool for pavement preservation and for applications that a thinner overlay would be applicable .
New Section October To allow the use of pervious bituminous pavement systems on Department projects .
in place of AASHTO T . New Section October To allow the use of roller compacted concrete RCC pavement on Department projects .
in place of AASHTO T . New Section October To allow the use of pervious concrete pavement systems on Department projects .
.h nd bullet October To revise references to Section andor Class Type A and Type B geotextile. . .a and .k October To add a second type of material to be used for sign coverings to indicated that pavement markings placed at the Departments direction and under conditions not meeting Section will be paid by the Department to remove reference to a Section dealing with Marshal asphalt mix design that will be removed from Pub .
.b October To reference the manufacturers recommendations for road surface preparations when applying preformed thermoplastic pavement markings .
