BASE COURSE That portion of the pavement structure of planned thickness placed immediately below the pavement or surface course .
SUBGRADE That portion of the roadbed prepared as a foundation for the pavement structure including curb and gutter .
On portions of projects that do not include the construction of a base course or pavement the presence of the subgrade will not be recognized during the life of such contract .
Section DISPOSITION OF SURPLUS PROPERTY All property that is surplus to the needs of the project will remain or become the property of the Contractor unless otherwise stated in the contract with the following exceptions A Materials that are the property of utility companies providing service to buildings that are to be demolished or removed in accordance with Sections and B Materials resulting from the removal of existing pavement in accordance with Section that are to be stockpiled for the use of the Department C Materials resulting from the removal of existing structures in accordance with Section where the contract indicates that the material will remain the property of the Department D Aggregate base course where the contract requires that this material become the property of the Department E Left over materials for which the Department has reimbursed the Contractor as provided in Article and F Materials that have been furnished by the Department for use on the project .
Submittals that propose material substitutions of permanent features such as but not limited to changes from rigid to flexible or flexible to rigid pavements concrete to steel or steel to concrete bridges will not be considered acceptable VEPs .
Section Regulations pertaining to size and weight will not apply to equipment used on the project provided the vehicles involved are not operated on pavement completed base course or structures .
DENSITY DETERMINATION BY NUCLEAR METHODS The Engineer may at his option use nuclear methods as described in Articles and to determine the density of selected pavement materials .
Where it is necessary to remove existing sidewalks or driveways furnish a neat edge along the pavement retained by sawing a neat line approximately inches deep with a concrete saw before breaking the adjacent pavement away .
Use all necessary precautions to prevent damage to the existing structures or pavement .
Surcharges and waiting periods may be required for embankments and retaining walls to minimize and control the effects of settlement on structures approach slabs pavements pipes utilities etc .
Remove or break up existing pavement in accordance with Section .
Where embankments are being constructed principally of rock or broken pavement place in uniform layers with a maximum depth of inches .
Place rock or broken pavement so larger pieces are evenly distributed and are no larger than inches in any dimension .
Place rock or broken pavement lifts at least feet below finished subgrade or finished grade whichever is lower .
Do not place rock or broken pavement in embankment areas where piles or drilled shaft foundations are to be constructed or where underground utilities exist .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit Drainage Ditch Excavation Cubic Yard Berm Ditch Construction Linear Foot SECTION REMOVAL OF EXISTING PAVEMENT DESCRIPTION Break up remove and satisfactorily dispose of the Portland cement concrete or asphalt components of an existing roadway pavement structure including paved shoulders within the limits shown in the plans or as directed .
This work includes the removal of any temporary roadway pavement structure placed during construction to serve as a detour .
PAVEMENT REMOVAL AND DISPOSAL Break up and remove the pavement for its entire depth .
Where concrete or asphalt pavement is to be removed provide a neat edge along the pavement being retained by sawing the pavement approximately inches deep before breaking the adjacent pavement away .
Properly dispose of all materials resulting from the pavement removal as provided herein .
When existing pavement is located where embankment is to be constructed and the depth of the embankment is greater than foot exclusive of base and pavement do not remove existing pavement but break up the existing pavement into pieces with the longest dimension Section no larger than feet .
MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT Removal of Existing Asphalt Pavement will be measured and paid in square yards of existing asphalt pavement actually removed and disposed of properly .
Removal of existing asphalt pavement will be measured by actual surface measurement of the asphalt pavement before its removal .
Removal of Existing Concrete Pavement will be measured and paid in square yards of existing concrete pavement actually removed and disposed of properly .
Removal of existing concrete pavement will be measured by actual surface measurement of the concrete pavement before its removal .
Breaking of Existing Concrete Pavement will be measured and paid in square yards of existing concrete pavement actually broken up and left in place .
The quantity will be determined by actual surface measurement of the pavement before breaking it up .
Breaking of Existing Asphalt Pavement will be measured and paid in square yards of existing asphalt pavement actually broken up and left in place .
The quantity will be determined by actual surface measurement of the pavement before breaking it up .
Where the pavement removed or broken up is a combination of layers of both asphalt and concrete pavement payment will be made at the contract unit price per square yard for Removal of Existing Concrete Pavement or Breaking of Existing Concrete Pavement .
Where the pavement removed is a combination of layers of both asphalt and concrete pavement and an item is not established for concrete pavement removal the cost of removing the combination of layers of asphalt and concrete will be made in accordance with Article .
Payment includes but is not limited to breaking up removing and disposing of existing concrete or asphalt pavement including paved shoulders and removing any temporary roadway pavement structure placed during construction to serve as a detour .
This work does not include pavement removal for pipe installation removing and disposing of sidewalks driveways curb and gutter traffic islands and parking areas or any other incidental paved structures that are not part of a roadway pavement structure .
Removal and disposal of existing pavement and unsuitable material above the pipe invert are a part of the excavation for the new pipe culvert installation .
Repair of the pavement will be made in accordance with Section .
When required by the plans consider curtain walls raised medians sidewalks pavement brackets end posts sign mounts luminaire brackets and any other concrete appurtenances or expansion joint material a portion of the slab .
These quantities include amounts for inch additional concrete due to the corrugation of the metal forms concrete diaphragms and when required by the plans curtain walls pavement brackets end posts raised medians sidewalks and other required attachments based on the profile grade and plan camber of the girders .
These quantities include concrete diaphragms and when required by the plans curtain walls pavement brackets end posts raised medians sidewalks and other required attachments based on the profile grade and plan camber of girders .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit Class ____ Concrete Cubic Yard Grooving Bridge Floors Square Foot Reinforced Concrete Deck Slab Square Foot Reinforced Concrete Deck Slab Sand Lightweight Concrete Square Foot Section SECTION BRIDGE APPROACH SLABS DESCRIPTION Construct reinforced concrete slabs at bridge approaches including curbs and sidewalks furnish and place temporary slope drains remove existing pavement or approach slab furnish and place concrete reinforcing steel joint filler sealer and other materials finish and cure concrete .
stone and backfill or natural ground and between stone and overlying fill or pavement section except when concrete pavement full depth asphalt or cement treated base is placed directly on stone .
stone and backfill or natural ground and between stone and overlying fill or pavement section except when concrete pavement full depth asphalt or cement treated base is placed directly on stone .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit __ Slope Protection Square Yard Section DIVISION SUBGRADE BASES AND SHOULDERS SECTION FINE GRADING SUBGRADE SHOULDERS AND DITCHES DESCRIPTION Perform the work covered by this section on all portions of the project which will be paved under the contract including but not limited to preparing grading shaping manipulating moisture content and compacting either an unstabilized or stabilized roadbed to a condition suitable for placement of base course pavement and shoulders .
On those portions of the project where there is no pavement to be placed under the contract perform the work of Sections or depending upon the source of the material .
Store or stockpile material excavated in preparing the subgrade so as to not interfere with proper drainage or later operations of stabilization placing base or placing pavement .
Subgrade tolerance of inch from the established grade is required for subgrade under concrete pavement mainline lanes .
Perform the grading operation such that the maximum difference between the established grade and the graded subgrade within any foot section is inch for normal subgrade and inch for subgrade for concrete pavement .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit Fine Grading Lump Sum Section SECTION LIMETREATED SOIL DESCRIPTION Perform the work covered by this section including but not limited to treating the subgrade embankment natural ground or existing pavement structure by adding water and lime in the form specified herein mixing shaping compacting and finishing the mixture to the required density .
Item Section Lime Water Use soil material which consists of material upon which the pavement is to be placed existing material upon which the embankment is to be placed approved borrow material or a combination of these materials proportioned as directed .
Do not construct limetreated soil that will not be covered with a layer of pavement or base by December of that same calendar year .
The aggregate shall be sampled tested and approved before placing layers of base material or pavement thereon .
Have each layer of material sampled tested compacted and approved before placing succeeding layers of base material or pavement .
Base course that is in place on November shall immediately be covered with a subsequent layer of pavement structure or with a sand seal .
Base course that has been placed between November and March inclusive shall be covered within calendar days with a subsequent layer of pavement structure or with a sand seal .
When the base course will be used under concrete pavement the tolerance will be inch .
Construct the base so that the maximum differential between the established grade and the base within any feet section is inch or inch when used as a base course under concrete pavement .
Included in the work is A Conditioning of an existing base to prepare it for the placement of a pavement directly upon the base .
Do not place cementtreated base that will not be covered with pavement by December of the same year .
When the base course will be used under concrete pavement the tolerance will be inch .
Construct the base so that the maximum differential between the established grade and the base within any foot section is inch or inch when used as a base course under concrete pavement .
Do not construct soilcement base that will not be covered with a layer of base or pavement by December st of the same year .
Curing time will be counted in at least day units and only when the air temperature measured at the location of the operation is at least F. Complete the curing before placement of subsequent layers of pavement .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit Asphalt Curing Seal Gallon Section SECTION INCIDENTAL STONE BASE DESCRIPTION Perform the work covered by this section including but not limited to furnishing hauling placing and shaping a graded stone material for use in driveways temporary maintenance of traffic adjacent to mailboxes beneath traffic island median covers and at any other locations other than use as a part of any base course on which pavement is to be placed shaping tamping when required maintaining the base and disposing of any surplus stockpiled material .
Construct the shoulders in proper sequence with the type of base and pavement being constructed .
Do not damage base surface pavement or drainage features during the construction of the shoulders .
When shoulder material is obtained as a result of fine grading operations trenching out existing subgrade or shaping slopes and ditches no direct payment will be made for the work of shoulder construction as such work will be incidental to the work of constructing the base or pavement .
Maintain the prime coat in an acceptable condition until such time as the pavement is placed .
Remove grass dirt and other materials from the edge of the existing pavement before the placement of tack coat .
Take necessary precautions to limit the tracking or accumulation of tack coat on either existing or newly constructed pavements .
Apply tack coat to contact surfaces of headers curbs gutters manholes and vertical faces of old pavements .
SECTION MILLING ASPHALT PAVEMENT DESCRIPTION Perform the work covered by this section including but not limited to milling and remilling the pavement at locations depths widths and typical sections indicated in the contract cleaning the milled surface loading hauling and stockpiling the milled material for use in recycled asphalt mixtures and disposal of any excess milled material .
EQUIPMENT Use a selfpropelled unit capable of removing the existing asphalt pavement to the depths widths and typical sections shown in the contract .
Use milling machines designed and built exclusively for pavement milling operations and with sufficient power traction and stability to accurately maintain depth of cut and slope .
Use milling machines equipped with an electronic control system that will automatically control the longitudinal profile and cross slope of the milled pavement surface .
Otherwise use a mobile grade reference system capable of averaging the existing grade or pavement profile over at least feet .
Use a machine capable of leaving a uniform surface suitable for handling traffic without damage to the underlying pavement structure .
Provide additional equipment necessary to satisfactorily remove the pavement in the area of manholes water valves curb gutter and other obstructions .
CONSTRUCTION METHODS Mill the existing pavement to restore the pavement surface to a uniform longitudinal profile and cross section in accordance with typical sections shown in the plans .
Where indicated in the contract remove pavement to a specified depth and produce a specified cross slope .
Operate the milling equipment so as to prevent damage to the underlying pavement structure utilities drainage facilities curb and gutter paved surfaces outside the milled area and any other appurtenances .
Produce milled pavement surfaces that are reasonably smooth and free of excessive scarification marks gouges ridges continuous grooves or other damage .
Thoroughly clean the milled pavement surface of all loose aggregate particles dust and other objectionable material .
Disposing or wasting of oversize pieces of pavement or loose aggregate material will not be permitted within the right of way .
Conduct pavement removal operations so as to effectively minimize the amount of dust being emitted .
TOLERANCE Remove the existing pavement to the depth required by the contract .
MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT A Milled Asphalt Pavement Milled Asphalt Pavement __ Depth and Milling Asphalt Pavement __ to __ to be paid will be the actual number of square yards of pavement surface milled in accordance with this Specification .
In measuring this quantity the length will be the actual length milled measured along the pavement surface .
The width will be the width required by the plans or directed measured along the pavement surface .
Areas to be paid under these items include mainline turn lanes shoulders and any additional equipment necessary to remove pavement in the area of manholes water valves curb gutter and other obstructions .
For each square yard that the Engineer directs to be milled including but not limited to the mainline turn lanes bus loading and unloading areas widening for bus or truck Uturns shoulders intersections and crossovers requiring any additional equipment necessary to remove pavement in the area of manholes water valves curb gutter and other obstructions compensation will be made at the contract unit price per square yard for Milling Asphalt Pavement __ Depth or Milling Asphalt Pavement __ to __ .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit Milling Asphalt Pavement __ to __ Square Yard Milling Asphalt Pavement __ Depth Square Yard Incidental Milling Square Yard SECTION QUALITY MANAGEMENT SYSTEM FOR ASPHALT PAVEMENTS DESCRIPTION Produce and construct asphalt mixtures and pavements in accordance with a quality management system as described herein .
A Quality Control QC Define a quality control QC program as all activities including mix design process control plant and equipment calibration sampling and testing and necessary adjustments in the process that are related to production of a pavement that meet the Standard Specifications .
B Quality Assurance QA Define a quality assurance QA program as all activities including inspection sampling and testing related to determining that the quality of the completed pavement conforms to specification requirements .
The Contractor may elect to use either pavement core samples or density gauge readings as the method of density control .
Perform density sampling and testing on all pavements as outlined in Sections .
B Limited Production Procedures Define resurfacing as the first new uniform layer placed on an existing pavement .
As exceptions to the above pavement within each construction category New and Other as defined in Section .. of the Asphalt QMS Manual and pavement placed simultaneously by multiple paving crews will be evaluated independently for limited production purposes .
Limited production is defined as the production placement and compaction of a sufficient quantity of mix to construct a feet control strip plus feet of pavement adjacent to each end of the control strip .
The Engineer will determine acceptability of the mix andor pavement represented by the falsified results or documentation .
If the mix andor pavement in question is determined to be acceptable the Engineer may allow the mix to remain in place at no pay for the mix asphalt binder and other mix components .
If the mix or pavement represented by the falsified results is determined not to be acceptable remove and replace with mix that complies with the Standard Specifications .
If the potential for a pavement failure exist the Engineer may suspend production wholly or in part in accordance with Article while the investigation is in progress .
ACCEPTANCE Final acceptance of the asphalt pavement will be made by the Department in accordance with the following A Mix Acceptance The Engineer will base final acceptance of the mix on the results of random testing made on split samples during the assurance process verification samples retests if applicable and validation of the Contractors quality control process conducted in accordance with Specifications .
B Density Acceptance The Department will evaluate the asphalt pavement for density compliance after the asphalt mix has been placed and compacted using the Contractors quality control test results the Departments quality assurance test results including verification samples Section and by observation of the Contractors total density quality control process conducted in accordance with Specifications .
Produce and construct all asphalt mixtures and pavements in accordance with these Standard Specifications .
If the mix or pavement represented by the falsified results is removed and replaced payment will be made for the actual quantities of materials required to replace the falsified quantities not to exceed the original amounts .
This work includes producing weighing transporting placing and compacting the plant mix furnishing aggregate asphalt binder antistrip additive and all other materials for the plant mix furnishing and applying tack coat as specified furnishing scales maintaining the course until final acceptance of the project making any repairs or corrections to the course that may become necessary providing and conducting QC as specified in Section and surface testing of the completed pavement .
Do not place surface course material that is to be the final layer of pavement between December and March of the next year if it is inch or greater in thickness or between November and April of the next year if it is less than inch in thickness unless otherwise approved .
Use a material transfer vehicle MTV when placing all asphalt concrete plant mix pavements which require the use of asphalt binder grade PG and for all types of OGFC unless otherwise approved .
Place asphalt concrete base course material in trench sections with asphalt pavement spreaders made for the purpose or with other equipment approved by the Engineer .
COMPACTION Immediately after the asphalt mixture has been spread struck off and surface and edge irregularities adjusted thoroughly and uniformly compact the pavement .
Steelwheel tandem vibratory rollers specifically designed for the compaction of asphalt pavements may be used on all layers inch or greater in thickness during the breakdown and intermediate rolling phase .
Do not operate vibratory rollers in the vibratory mode during the finish rolling phase on any mix type or pavement course OGFC or on PADC .
When vibratory rollers are used use rollers that have variable amplitude and frequency capabilities and that are designed specifically for asphalt pavement compaction .
The Engineer may prohibit or restrict the use of vibratory rollers where damage to the pavement being placed the underlying pavement structure drainage structures utilities or other facilities is likely to occur or is evident .
If traffic will pass over the joint construct a sloped wedge ahead of the end of the full depth pavement to provide for proper compaction and protection of the full depth pavement .
Before paving operations are resumed remove the sloped wedge and cut back into the previously constructed pavement to the point of full pavement depth .
Coat the exposed edge of the previously constructed pavement with tack coat .
B Longitudinal Joints Tack the exposed edge of all longitudinal joints before placing the adjoining pavement .
Section SURFACE REQUIREMENTS AND ACCEPTANCE Construct pavements using qualitypaving practices as detailed herein .
Construct the pavement surface smooth and true to the plan grade and cross slope .
Pavement imperfections resulting from unsatisfactory workmanship such as segregation improper longitudinal joint placement or alignment nonuniform edge alignment or excessive pavement repairs will be unsatisfactory .
Limited production for unsatisfactory laydown is defined as being restricted to the production placement compaction and final surface testing if applicable of a sufficient quantity of mix necessary to construct only feet of pavement at the laydown width .
Each pavement layer will be tested by the Contractor and the Engineer using a foot stationary straightedge furnished by the Contractor .
Any location on the pavement selected by the Department shall be tested as well as all transverse joints .
FINAL SURFACE TESTING AND ACCEPTANCE On portions of this project where the typical section requires two or more layers of new pavement perform smoothness acceptance testing of the longitudinal profile of the finished pavement surface using either an Inertial Profiler or a North Carolina Hearne Straightedge Model No. . Smoothness acceptance testing using the inertial profiler is not required on ramps loops and turn lanes .
Use an Inertial Profiler Option to perform smoothness acceptance testing of the longitudinal profile of the finished pavement surface .
Furnish and operate the Hearne straightedge Option to determine and record the longitudinal profile of the pavement on a continuous graph .
A Option Inertial Profiler Use an Inertial Profiler to measure the longitudinal pavement profile for construction quality control and smoothness acceptance .
Configure the profiler to record the actual elevation of the pavement surface .
Certification of the Inertial Profiling system shall conform to AASHTO R . Remove all objects and foreign material on the pavement surface prior to longitudinal pavement profile testing .
Divide the pavement surface for the project into sections which represent a continuous placement i.e .
mile of a single pavement lane .
Traffic control and all associated activities included in the pavement smoothness testing of the pavement surface will be the responsibility of the Contractor .
Table provides the acceptance quality rating scale of pavement based on the final rideability determination .
When corrections to the pavement surface are required the Engineer shall approve the Contractors method of correction .
Corrections to the pavement surface the adjoining traffic lanes and shoulders will be at no cost to the Department .
Section Where corrections are made after the initial smoothness testing the pavement will be retested by the Contractor to verify that corrections have produced the acceptable ride surface .
Any corrective action performed shall not reduce the integrity or durability of the pavement that is to remain in place .
B Option North Carolina Hearne Straightedge Push the straightedge manually over the pavement at a speed not exceeding miles per hour .
For all lanes take profiles in the right wheel path approximately feet from the right edge of pavement in the same direction as the paving operation unless otherwise approved due to traffic control or safety considerations .
Take profiles as soon as practical after the pavement has been rolled and compacted but no later than hours following placement of the pavement unless otherwise authorized by the Engineer .
Take profiles over the entire length of final surface travel lane pavement exclusive of Yline travel lanes less than or equal to feet in length ramps less than or equal to feet in length turn lanes less than or equal to feet in length structures approach slabs paved shoulders loops and tapers or other irregular shaped areas of pavement unless otherwise approved by the Engineer .
The calibration strip shall be a foot section of pavement that is reasonably level and smooth .
The pavement will be accepted for surface smoothness on a lot by lot basis .
A test section represents pavement one travel lane wide not more than feet in length .
Section Limited production for unsatisfactory laydown is defined as being restricted to the production placement compaction and final surface testing of a sufficient quantity of mix necessary to construct only feet of pavement at the laydown width .
Any corrective action performed shall not reduce the integrity or durability of the pavement that is to remain in place .
Scraping of the pavement with any blade type device will not be allowed as a corrective action .
In this instance reevaluation of the test sections shall be completed within hours of pavement placement and these test results will serve as the initial test results .
DENSITY ACCEPTANCE The Department will evaluate the asphalt pavement for density acceptance after the asphalt mix has been placed and compacted using the Contractors QC test results the Departments QA test results including verification samples and by observation of the Contractors density QC process conducted in accordance with Section of the Asphalt QMS Manual .
MAINTENANCE Maintain the plant mix pavement in an acceptable condition until final acceptance of the project .
Perform maintenance to damaged or defective pavement and repeat as often as may be necessary to keep the base or pavement in an acceptable condition .
Section MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT Hot Mix Asphalt Pavement will be paid at the contract unit price per ton that will be the actual number of tons of each type of hot mix asphalt pavement incorporated into the completed and accepted work in accordance with Article .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit Asphalt Binder for Plant Mix Ton Polymer Modified Asphalt Binder for Plant Mix Ton SECTION OPENGRADED ASPHALT FRICTION COURSE DESCRIPTION Perform the work covered by this section including but not limited to construction of a plant mixed opengraded asphalt friction course OGFC properly laid upon a prepared surface in accordance with these Specifications and in conformity with the lines grades thickness and typical sections shown on the plans producing weighing transporting placing and rolling the plant mix as specified in Section furnishing the asphalt binder antistrip additive fiber stabilizing additive and all other materials for the plant mix furnishing and applying tack coat as specified providing QC as specified in Section as modified for OGFC surface testing of the completed pavement furnishing scales making any repairs or corrections to the friction course that may become necessary and maintaining the friction course until final acceptance of the project .
Remove all existing raised pavement markers as directed and repair any damaged areas caused by the removal .
Consolidate the drainage layer sufficiently with rolling so as to support the weight of equipment that will place the next layer of pavement .
Only equipment necessary to place the next layer of pavement will be allowed on the drainage layer .
Do not place PADC that will not be covered with the next layer of pavement during the same calendar year or within days of placement if the PADC is placed in January or February .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit Permeable Asphalt Drainage Course Type PM Ton Permeable Asphalt Drainage Course Type P Ton SECTION ASPHALT PLANT MIX PAVEMENT REPAIR DESCRIPTION Perform the work covered by this section including but not limited to repairing of existing pavement with asphalt plant mix in order to provide a safe passable and convenient condition for traffic or to replace pavement removed in order to remove or to place pipe lines .
Perform the work by cutting the existing pavement to a neat vertical joint and uniform line removing and disposing of pavement base and subgrade material as approved or directed coating the area to be repaired with a tack coat furnishing placing and compacting asphalt plant mix and replacing of the removed material with asphalt plant mix .
MATERIALS Where a pavement repair detail is not shown in the plans use an approved asphalt plant mix .
Where a pavement repair detail is shown in the plans the type of plant mix shall be in accordance with the pavement repair detail except where the Specifications permit the substitution of another type of plant mix or where approved .
Section In areas where the existing pavement is not to be resurfaced the Contractor will not be allowed to substitute a different type of surface course from that shown on the pavement repair detail .
CONSTRUCTION METHODS A General Perform repair of existing pavement as approved or directed .
Immediately upon completion of the entire pipeline removal or installation repair the pavement .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit Asphalt Plant Mix Pavement Repair Ton SECTION SEALING EXISTING PAVEMENT CRACKS AND JOINTS DESCRIPTION The work consists of sealing existing longitudinal and transverse pavement cracks and joints with hot applied joint sealer at locations as directed by the Engineer .
Use the hot air lance to dry and warm the adjacent pavement immediately before sealing .
Do not apply the hot applied joint sealer when the surface temperature of the pavement is below F. Follow manufacturers recommendations .
After the crack or joint has been sealed promptly remove any surplus sealer on the pavement .
MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT Sealing existing pavement cracks and joints will be measured and paid as the actual number of pounds of material that has satisfactorily been used to seal pavement cracks and joints in the designated highway .
For mat coats constructed on existing pavement surfaces construct the mat coat in accordance with Subarticle C using the size aggregate required by the contract and the application rates specified in the contract .
Other factors considered to be beyond the control of the Contractor which may contribute to pavement distress will be considered by the Engineer on a case by case basis upon receipt of a written request from the Contractor .
Maintaining traffic on the pavement surface prior to the Engineers acceptance will not be a condition for voiding the warranty .
C Emergency Repairs If in the opinion of the Department a pavement condition covered by the warranty requires immediate attention for the safety of the traveling public the Contractor will be notified immediately .
D Warranty Performance Criteria TABLE PERFORMANCE CRITERIA Surface Defects Severity Extent Per Lot Surface Patterns Alternate lean and heavy lines streaking over the entire pavement surface .
Loss of Cover Aggregate Large patches of cover aggregate lost from the pavement surface .
Lot A foot section of pavement or portion thereof a lane width wide on which AST is constructed on a single map .
Ensure that the asphalt binder is compatible with the PMEM or alternate and the existing pavement .
COMPOSITION OF MIX Do not use crystalline limestone crystallinedolomitic limestone or marble for aggregates and do not use reclaimed asphalt pavement RAP .
Screed with the ability to be crowned at the center both positively and negatively and have vertically and horizontally adjustable extensions to accommodate the desired pavement profile and widths .
Use pavers equipped with an electronic screed control that will automatically control the longitudinal profile and cross slope of the pavement .
Unless otherwise specified use a mobile grade reference system capable of averaging the existing grade or pavement profile over at least a feet distance or by noncontacting laser or sonar type ski with at least four referencing stations mounted on the paver at a minimum length of Section feet .
Support the stringline with grade stakes placed at maximum intervals of feet for the finished pavement grade .
Remove thermoplastic traffic markings symbols characters or other markings greater than inch in thickness on the existing pavement .
Section Clean and completely fill pavement cracks and joints greater than inch wide .
Thoroughly clean the entire pavement surface giving specific attention to accumulated mud and debris .
galsy and adjust according to the mix design existing pavement type and condition for the specified project and the manufacturers recommendations .
Before opening to traffic allow the pavement to sufficiently cool after the rolling operation to resist damage to the pavement .
The hot mix asphalt pavement will be measured by being weighed in trucks on certified platform scales or other certified weighing devices .
The hot mix asphalt pavement will be measured by being weighed in trucks on certified platform scales or other certified weighing devices .
The above prices and payments will be full compensation for all work covered by this section including but not limited to furnishing all materials producing weighing transporting placing and compacting the polymer modified asphalt emulsion maintaining the ultrathin bonded wearing course until final acceptance of the project performing QC as specified in the contract and making any repairs or corrections to the surface of the pavement or adjacent landscape that may become necessary .
At the end of each working day remove all equipment to a location where it does not present a traffic hazard clean pavement and reopen work area to traffic .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit Milled Rumble Strips Asphalt Concrete Linear Foot Section DIVISION CONCRETE PAVEMENTS AND SHOULDERS SECTION GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR PORTLAND CEMENT CONCRETE PAVEMENT DESCRIPTION Perform the work covered by this section which includes but is not limited to the construction of a single course nonreinforced Portland cement concrete pavement on a prepared base in accordance with these Standard Specifications and with the lines grades thicknesses and typical sections shown on the plans or as directed .
The Department accepts concrete pavement with respect to strength thickness and ride quality on a lot by lot basis subject to adjusted unit prices as provided in Sections and .
Submit for approval a Process Control Plan addressing all operations necessary in the production and placement of concrete pavement a minimum of calendar days prior to placing concrete pavement .
Section PREPARATION OF SUBGRADE AND BASE Prepare the subgrade and base beneath Portland cement concrete pavement in accordance with the applicable sections of these Specifications and with a grading tolerance of inch from the established grade on mainline lanes and a grading tolerance of inch in all other areas .
Unless otherwise approved use and maintain a braided metal cable stringline reference to control the profile and alignment of the concrete pavement .
PLACING CONCRETE A General Use a slip form paver to place concrete except where impractical due to irregular areas or areas of existing pavement adjacent to the proposed pavement .
Air temperature in the shade is F and rising or the concrete temperature is greater than F. Where additional pavement aggregate or soil must be placed adjacent to new pavement by machine methods do not place it until the concrete has attained a compressive strength of at least psi .
Construction equipment or hauling equipment will not be allowed over the pavement until the concrete has attained a compressive strength of psi .
Perform the spreading with a mechanical spreader independent of the paver except where hand methods are necessary due to pavement design equipment breakdown or other emergencies .
Section B Slip Form Paver Method Use a slip form paver that is an approved selfpropelled machine designed to spread consolidate screed and float finish the concrete in one complete pass of the machine to provide a smooth dense and homogeneous pavement with minimal hand finishing .
Use forms that have a depth not less than the edge thickness of the pavement to be constructed and not more than inch greater than the edge thickness of the pavement to be constructed .
The Engineer may require pinholes in the base to be sealed before placing subsequent pavement .
Operate the electronic vibrator monitoring device in areas where the mainline ramp or loop pavement exceeds feet in length .
FINISHING Finish concrete pavement or concrete shoulders in accordance with Article or respectively .
PROTECTION OF PORTLAND CEMENT CONCRETE PAVEMENT A General Protect the concrete pavement from environmental conditions .
Remove and replace concrete pavement damaged as a result of environmental conditions .
Use protective covering that will protect the surface of the freshly placed pavement from rain or cold weather readily available each day at the location of each proposed days operation before beginning work .
B Cold Weather When the temperature is projected to drop below F for more than four hours insulate the concrete pavement to prohibit the concrete surface temperature from dropping below F during the curing period .
Failure to properly protect the concrete pavement may constitute cause for removal and replacement of the damaged pavement .
CURING A General Immediately after finishing operations have been completed and surface water has disappeared cover all exposed surfaces of the pavement by one of the curing methods herein or as approved by the Engineer .
Apply the selected curing method to the edges of the pavement immediately after the forms are removed .
C Polyethylene Film Spread the sections of the film in a manner that will not damage the finished pavement surface .
Cover all exposed surfaces and beyond the edge of the pavement surface .
Section D Burlap Spread the sections of burlap in a manner that will not damage the finished pavement surface .
Saw the concrete pavement as soon as it can support the weight of the equipment and operator without disturbing the final finish .
The Engineer may order any concrete pavement or shoulder where uncontrolled cracking has occurred before final acceptance to be removed and replaced at no cost to the Department .
Before placing either concrete pavement or concrete shoulders adjacent to a previously placed pavement cover the transverse joint opening on the edge of the existing slab to prevent intrusion of grout into the opening .
Section C Longitudinal Contraction Joints Construct longitudinal contraction joints in all pavements wider than feet in accordance with the details and dimensions shown on the plans .
mile of pavement whichever is greater at random intervals as selected by the Engineer throughout the pavement each time the paving train is mobilized .
Mark scanned joints on the pavement .
Do not perform final sawing and sealing of concrete pavement joints until after surface testing correction of surface deficiencies and all adjacent earth and paved shoulder construction has been completed .
E Cleaning Pavement After a joint has been sealed remove surplus joint sealer on the pavement as soon as possible .
USE OF NEW PAVEMENT OR SHOULDER Traffic or other heavy equipment will not be allowed on the concrete pavement or shoulder until the estimated compressive strength of the concrete using the maturity method has exceeded psi .
Estimate the compressive strength of concrete pavement in accordance with ASTM C unless otherwise specified .
Set the datum temperature at C to calculate the TTF in Equation of ASTM C. Section Establish and submit a strengthmaturity relationship in conjunction with each concrete pavement mix design .
If the verification samples compressive strength when tested at TTF is less than psi immediately suspend early opening of traffic on pavement that has not obtained TTF until a new strengthmaturity relationship is developed .
No permanent traffic will be allowed on the pavement until construction of the joints including all sawing sealing and curing that is required has been completed .
Take particular care to protect the exposed pavement edges and ends .
The Contractors roadway foreman and all personnel involved in the batching sampling testing and acceptance of Portland cement concrete pavement shall be Department certified Portland cement concrete pavement technicians .
The following tests will be performed on both concrete pavement and concrete shoulders to determine acceptance .
F Thickness The thickness of the pavement will be determined by measurement of cores in accordance with AASHTO T . Take inch diameter cores in the presence of the Engineer .
Take the cores when the concrete has attained a compressive strength of at least psi and at least hours have elapsed since placement of the pavement .
Take cores no later than days after the pavement has been placed .
Patch all core holes within hours of taking the core using an approved nonshrink grout compatible with the pavement or shoulder concrete .
G Surface Smoothness Perform acceptance testing for surface smoothness on concrete pavements in accordance with Article .
SECTION CONCRETE PAVEMENT DESCRIPTION Perform the work covered by this section including but not limited to designing the concrete mix furnishing and placing concrete furnishing of all admixtures and additives constructing all joints and furnishing joint materials marking the pavement curing the pavement and furnishing all curing materials furnishing concrete necessary for making test beams and cylinders performing maturity testing coring and patching the pavement calibrating and checking the operation of batching equipment taking actions necessary to prevent or to repair cracking sawing and sealing joints verifying dowel bar alignment removing and replacing of defective pavement and constructing Portland cement concrete pavement in accordance with these Standard Specifications and with the lines grades and dimensions shown on the plans .
ACCEPTANCE OF CONCRETE The Department will test the concrete pavement for acceptance with respect to compressive strength and thickness on a lot by lot basis in accordance with Article and the requirements herein .
For all concrete pavement including mainline shoulders ramps tapers intersections entrances crossovers and irregular areas not otherwise defined produce a lot consisting of .
CONSTRUCTION METHODS Construct concrete pavement in accordance with Section .
Produce a final finish on the pavement surface true to grade and uniform in appearance and free of irregular rough or porous areas .
Following the finishing of the pavement by screeding floating and checking with straightedges further finish the surface of the pavement by burlap dragging or other acceptable method to produce a uniform surface texture .
Produce the final surface finish on all mainline pavement auxiliary lanes and ramps by mechanical equipment for longitudinally tined grooves while the concrete is plastic .
A inch to inch wide strip of pavement surface shall be protected from tining for the length of and centered about longitudinal joints .
Where abutting pavement is to be placed the tining shall extend as close to the edge as possible without damaging the edge .
If abutting pavement is not to be placed the inch area nearest the edge or foot from the face of the curb shall not be tined .
When surface corrections for pavement smoothness are made in the hardened concrete no additional texturing is required .
After final finishing hand finishing may be required on the edges of pavement and joints whenever irregularities in surface texture or alignment occur .
Care should be taken in hand finishing pavement edges to avoid ridges or high places that will prevent water from draining out of the transverse grooves .
Perform randomly located tests in accordance with ASTM E within the initial pavement lot of each mobilization in the presence of the Engineer .
FINAL SURFACE TESTING Use an Inertial Profiler to measure the longitudinal pavement profile for construction quality control and smoothness acceptance .
Configure the profiler to record the actual elevation of the pavement surface .
Certification of the Inertial Profiling system shall conform to AASHTO R . Remove all objects and foreign material on the pavement surface prior to longitudinal pavement profile testing .
Divide the pavement surface for the project into sections which represent a continuous placement i.e .
mile of a single pavement lane .
Traffic control and all associated activities included in the pavement smoothness testing of the pavement surface will be the responsibility of the Contractor .
A Acceptance for New Construction IRI and MRI numbers recorded in inches per mile will be established for each .mile section for each travel lane of the finished pavement surface designated by the Contract .
Any location on the pavement selected by the Department shall be tested as well as all transverse joints .
Table provides the acceptance quality rating scale of pavement based on the final rideability determination .
Section When corrections to the pavement surface are required the Engineer shall approve the Contractors method of correction .
Corrections to the pavement surface the adjoining traffic lanes and shoulders will be at no cost to the Department .
Where corrections are made after the initial smoothness testing the pavement will be retested by the Contractor to verify that corrections have produced the acceptable ride surface .
Any corrective action performed shall not reduce the integrity or durability of the pavement that is to remain in place .
MARKING FOR STATION NUMBERS AND DRAINAGE OUTLETS Mark the pavement at locations as shown on the plans with station numbers .
Mark the pavement by pressing beveledface metal dies between inches and inches high into the plastic concrete .
At locations where shoulder drain outlets are placed mark the edge of pavement nearest the outlet with the letters OL .
To establish an adjusted unit price if appropriate for mainline pavement take one inch diameter core from each lot at a random location as directed .
sy of pavement or fraction thereof in the lot .
The pavement between these exploratory cores will be removed full lane width wide and replaced with concrete of the thickness shown on the plans .
In determining the average thickness of the pavement lot the Engineer will use all core measurements .
Any full lane or full shoulder width repairs to the concrete pavement shall be performed in accordance with the North Carolina Department of Transportation Partial and Full Depth Repair Manual and not be less than of the slab length .
Patch all core holes within hours of taking the core using a Department approved nonshrink grout compatible with the pavement concrete .
MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT A General The quantity of Portland cement concrete pavement to be paid will be the actual number of square yards of concrete pavement completed and accepted .
In measuring this quantity the width of the pavement will be as called for on the plans or as directed .
The length will be the actual length constructed measured along the centerline of the pavement .
Separate measurement will be made of pavement that is deficient in thickness by more than .
inch and of pavement that is deficient in compressive strength .
The quantities of Portland cement concrete pavement will be paid at the contract unit price per square yard for __ Portland Cement Concrete Pavement Through Lanes with dowels __ Portland Cement Concrete Pavement Ramps with dowels or __ Portland Cement Concrete Pavement Miscellaneous without dowels or if applicable at such contract unit prices adjusted in accordance with the requirements shown below .
Pavement will be classified as through lane ramp or miscellaneous pavement in accordance with the classification shown on the plans .
Section B Pavement Deficient In Thickness The quantities of Portland cement concrete pavement which are deficient in thickness by more than .
Where pavement deficient by more than .
inch is removed and replaced the replacement pavement will be paid at the contract unit price per square yard for __ Portland Cement Concrete Pavement Through Lanes with dowels __ Portland Cement Concrete Pavement Ramps with dowels or __ Portland Cement Concrete Pavement Miscellaneous without dowels which price and payment will be full compensation for all work of placement removal restoration of subgrade and base and replacement .
C Concrete Pavement Varying In Strength One of the following formulas will be used to calculate the concrete pavement pay factor .
Compressive Strength The pay factor for pavement achieving a compressive strength in days of psi or greater is .
The pay factor for pavement achieving a compressive strength in days between psi and psi is determined by the following formula Pay Factor Compressive Strength . . pay factor rounded to nearest .
Flexural Strength The pay factor for pavement achieving a flexural strength in days of psi or greater is .
The pay factor for pavement achieving a flexural strength in days between psi and psi is determined by the following formula Pay Factor .
The quantities of Portland cement concrete pavement that meet these criteria will be paid at an adjusted unit price per square yard for __ Portland Cement Concrete Pavement Through Lanes with dowels __ Portland Cement Concrete Pavement Ramps with dowels or __ Portland Cement Concrete Pavement Miscellaneous without dowels completed in place and accepted .
Any pavement that fails to attain psi in compression is subject to removal .
If allowed to remain in place the pavement will be accepted at a reduced unit price based on a pay factor level of as provided in Article .
Where pavement deficient in strength is removed and replaced the replacement pavement if acceptable will be paid at the contract unit price for __ Portland Cement Section Concrete Pavement Through Lanes with dowels __ Portland Cement Concrete Pavement Ramps with dowels or __ Portland Cement Concrete Pavement Miscellaneous without dowels which price and payment will be full compensation for all work including placement removal restoration of subgrade and base and replacement .
Use tie bars between the concrete pavement and the concrete shoulder .
Match the transverse joints in the concrete shoulder with the transverse joints in the adjacent concrete pavement .
The adjusted contract unit price will be determined by multiplying the contract unit price by the pay factor level in Subarticle C. Where concrete shoulder deficient in strength is removed and replaced the replacement pavement if acceptable will be paid at the contract unit price for Concrete Shoulders Adjacent to __ Pavement which price and payment will be full compensation for all work of placement removal and replacement .
E Pay Items Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit Concrete Shoulders Adjacent to __ Pavement Square Yard SECTION CONCRETE REPAIR DESCRIPTION Perform work covered by this section including patching concrete pavement spalls and repair of jointed concrete pavement slabs using very high early strength concrete .
Patch partial and full depth spalls in existing Portland cement concrete pavement by sawing and removing the broken damaged or disintegrated concrete pavement from the spalled areas of the pavement surface and patch the areas with an approved patching material .
Remove and satisfactory dispose of existing damaged jointed concrete pavement slabs furnish and place new jointed concrete pavement slabs as shown in the plans or directed by the Engineer .
Item Section Portland Cement Concrete Curing Agents Water Select Material Class IV Dowels and Tie Bars Geotextile for Soil Stabilization Section For repair of jointed concrete pavement slabs use Select Material Class IV .
As a result of the full depth sawing of the existing pavement to remove the distressed area saw cuts that extend into the adjacent pavement shall be filled with epoxy prior to placing traffic on the new area .
Take necessary measures to protect the exposed subgrade and base form damage resulting from surface water or rain during the period between the pavement removal and replacement .
The Contractor shall submit his plan for removing the pavement areas to the Engineer for approval .
The removal method shall minimize damage to the subgrade and to adjacent pavement and shoulders .
Thoroughly tamp any loosened subgrade or base material to the satisfaction of the Engineer before the pavement is replaced .
New pavement shall be cast to match the thickness of the adjacent slabs .
The equipment shall be operated so as to prevent damage to the pavement being drilled .
The drilled holes shall be thoroughly cleaned of all contaminants and the dowels of specified type and size shall then be set into the hardened concrete face of the existing pavement with an epoxy bonding compound meeting the requirements of a Type A epoxy detailed in Section .
The specified dowels shall be placed at locations noted on Plan details with one half of dowel protruding beyond the hardened face of existing pavement and placed at correct horizontal and vertical alignment with misalignment not to exceed .
Replacement of such a slab would generally be required if in the opinion of the Engineer excessive grinding of the adjacent pavement is necessary to match the profile of the full depth slab replacement or if a drainage problem would be created by grinding the adjacent pavement .
The surface finish of the proposed concrete pavement shall be a burlap drag finish and conform to the crosssection of adjacent pavement .
Immediately after finishing operations have been completed and surface water has disappeared all exposed surfaces of the pavement shall be cured in accordance with the applicable provisions of Section and Section .
The pavement shall not be opened to traffic until the concrete is appropriately cured per the manufacturers recommendations .
Measurement and Payment The quantity of Repair of Jointed Concrete Pavement Slab to be paid for at the unit price established herein will be the actual number of square yards of jointed concrete pavement with dowels which has been completed and accepted .
The length will be the actual length constructed measured along the centerline of the pavement .
The unit price for Repair of Jointed Concrete Pavement Slabs will be full compensation for all work covered including furnishing all labor materials tools equipment and incidentals for doing all work involved in placement of the concrete including but not limited to furnishing placing and curing concrete dowel bars sawing and removing concrete and filling saw cuts around the pavement repair .
The price and payment will be full compensation for work involved including furnishing labor materials tools equipment and incidentals for sawing concrete pavement removing deteriorated concrete cleaning surfaces epoxying furnishing placing finishing and curing concrete patch .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit Nonwoven Geotextile Interlayer Square Yard SECTION FIELD LABORATORY FOR PORTLAND CEMENT CONCRETE PAVEMENT DESCRIPTION Perform the work covered by this section including but not limited to providing and maintaining the building or trailer and the curing shelter for the exclusive use of the Engineer at concrete plants producing Portland cement concrete for use in pavement to be constructed on the project furnishing water heat electricity and other utility services and any other equipment that may be necessary .
MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT Field Laboratory Rental Portland Cement Concrete Pavement will be paid at the contract lump sum price which will be made for furnishing and maintaining all field laboratories available for use by the Engineer at any concrete plant producing Portland cement concrete for use in pavement to be constructed on the project .
Partial payments for field laboratory rental will be made with the first and last partial pay estimates which include concrete pavement or concrete shoulders .
Remove all equipment to a location where it does not present a traffic hazard and clean pavement before reopening work area to traffic .
As an exception to the above where the work covered by the contract is limited exclusively to the resurfacing of an existing pavement payment of the entire lump sum price for Mobilization will be made with the first partial pay estimate paid on the contract provided the amount bid does not exceed of the total amount bid for the contract .
Include the proposed finish elevations of the edges of pavement each lane line and the ground at each proposed sign footing location .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit Construction Surveying Lump Sum Supplemental Field Surveying Hour Supplemental Surveying Office Calculations Hour SECTION DISPOSAL OF WASTE AND DEBRIS DESCRIPTION The work consists of the disposal of waste and debris including but not limited to furnishing any waste areas providing and implementing a Development Use and Reclamation Plan any right of access to waste areas disposing of waste and debris dressing and shaping of waste areas furnishing and spreading earth material over debris rock broken pavement and masonry clearing and grubbing of waste areas hauling waste and debris to waste areas or permitted landfills assessment for wetlands and endangered species obtaining required permits or certifications and any tipping fees required for disposal in permitted landfills .
Cover all rock concrete broken pavement and masonry with a minimum inch thick layer of earth material from the project or borrow .
D Construction Debris Cover construction debris and all broken pavement and masonry with a minimum inch thick layer of earth waste material from the project or borrow .
When waste areas are located outside the right of way no payment will be made for any borrow used to cover rock broken pavement masonry or other inert materials .
CONSTRUCTION METHODS Remove any existing pavement as directed .
The work includes but is not limited to all breaking up removing and disposing of pavement all plowing of the roadbed and all grading and excavation necessary to reshape the roadway .
Such price includes but is not limited to all breaking up removing and disposing of pavement all plowing of the roadbed and all grading and excavation necessary to reshape the roadway .
Install steel and pavement markers at concrete pads as shown in the plans .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit Subdrain Excavation Cubic Yard Geotextile for Subsurface Drains Square Yard Subdrain Fine Aggregate Cubic Yard Subdrain Coarse Aggregate Cubic Yard __ Perforated Subdrain Pipe Linear Foot __ Outlet Pipe Linear Foot Subdrain Pipe Outlet Each SECTION SHOULDER DRAINS DESCRIPTION Construct shoulder drains and furnish and install painted pavement markers and vertical markers to locate concrete pads for the drains in accordance with the requirements of the contract .
Such price and payment includes but is not limited to furnishing hauling and placing all pipe fittings shoulder drain aggregate filtration geotextiles concrete and other materials making all joint connections cutting into and making connections to existing drainage structures grouting around the pipe where it enters existing drainage structures pavement and vertical markers and all excavation and backfilling .
Where concrete is to be placed adjacent to any existing slab or pavement that has a broken or irregular edge provide a reasonably vertical edge by sawing .
Install an expansion joint adjacent to any existing slab pavement or structure against which new concrete is placed and at other locations detailed in the plans .
Locate joints to line up with the joints in concrete pavement when placed adjacent to concrete pavement .
Form grooved contraction joints as required by Subarticle B. Construct grooved butt joint between the work and adjacent pavement except where expansion joints are required by the plans .
E Backfilling Do not place backfill or pavement adjacent to the curb curb and gutter gutter shoulder berm gutter expressway gutter or concrete valley gutter until at least curing days as defined in Article have elapsed .
CONSTRUCTION METHODS Where it is necessary to remove a portion of existing sidewalks or driveways saw a neat edge along the pavement to be retained approximately inches deep with a concrete saw before breaking the adjacent pavement away .
Such price and payment will be full compensation for excavating and backfilling sawing repairing and replacing portions of the existing curb ramp within the pay limits for retrofit shown on the detail pavement repairs furnishing and placing detectable warnings construction joints and removing and disposing of portions of the existing curb ramp when required and for all materials labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
Longitudinal measurements will be made along the surface of the pavement at the centerline of the ditch and transverse measurements will be made along the surface of the pavement at right angles to the centerline .
Locate joints in monolithic concrete islands and medians constructed adjacent to concrete pavement to line up with the joints in the concrete pavement wherever possible .
Do not handle or remove the forms from barrier until the strength of the concrete reaches at least psi as evidenced by nondestructive tests made in place by a rebound hammer in accordance with ASTM C. Section Construct the base beneath the precast units to be equivalent to the adjacent pavement structure .
Backfill excavated areas in an existing pavement with Portland cement concrete .
Section Where rock or concrete pavement or slabs are encountered within the required depth where fence posts are to be erected drill a hole in the rock or concrete of a diameter slightly larger than the largest dimension of the post in the rock or concrete and grout in the post .
The depth of post embedment shown in the plans will not be required and the post may be shortened as necessary provided the post is embedded within the rock or concrete pavement or slab to a minimum depth of inches .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit Disposal of Sign System Overhead Each Disposal of Sign System Steel Beam Each Disposal of Sign System UChannel Each Disposal of Sign System Wood Each Disposal of Sign A and B Ground Mounted Each Disposal of Sign A or B Overhead Each Disposal of Sign D E or F Each Disposal of Sign Milemarker Each Disposal of Sign Overlay Overhead Each Disposal of Sign Overlay Ground Mounted Each Disposal of Support Overhead Structure Each Disposal of Support Steel Beam Each Disposal of Support UChannel Each Disposal of Support Wood Each Disposal of Lighting System Each Disposal of Lighting Fixtures Each Disposal of Walkway Each Stockpile Sign System Overhead Each Stockpile Sign System Steel Beam Each Stockpile Sign System UChannel Each Stockpile Sign System Wood Each Stockpile Sign A or B Overhead Each Stockpile Sign A and B Ground Mounted Each Stockpile Sign D E or F Each Stockpile Sign Milemarker Each Stockpile Support Overhead Structure Each Stockpile Support Steel Beam Each Stockpile Support UChannel Each Stockpile Support Wood Each Stockpile Lighting System Each Stockpile Lighting Fixtures Each Stockpile Walkway Each Section DIVISION MATERIALS SECTION PORTLAND CEMENT CONCRETE PRODUCTION AND DELIVERY DESCRIPTION This section addresses Portland cement concrete to be used for pavement structures and precast and incidental construction .
Tests for depth of the pavement in the plastic state .
Furnishing data to verify that the approved theoretical cement content has been met at intervals not to exceed sy of pavement .
F Contractor Not Relieved of Responsibility for End Result The Contractor will not be relieved of his obligation to produce a uniform pavement meeting Specifications by reason of The acceptance or approval by the Engineer of the concrete mix design or any adjustments Compliance with the concrete mix design and compliance with the testing requirements and other process control requirements by the Contractor or The failure of the Engineer to perform any tests in the process control nor the performance of any tests in the process control that indicate compliance with the Specifications .
Tests for depth of the pavement in the plastic state .
Furnishing data to verify that the approved theoretical cement content has been met at intervals not to exceed sy of pavement .
SECTION GROUT PRODUCTION AND DELIVERY DESCRIPTION This section addresses cement grout to be used for structures foundations retaining walls concrete barriers embankments pavements and other applications in accordance with the contract .
sieve and larger with a aspect ratio maximum to minimum for all pavement types except there is no requirement for Types S.A SF.A and S.B .
M coarse aggregate in concrete for Portland cement concrete pavement unless otherwise specified by the Engineer .
A Silicone Sealant Types Type NS A nonsag silicone for use in sealing horizontal and vertical joints in Portland cement concrete pavements and bridges .
Type SL A selfleveling silicone used to seal horizontal joints in Portland cement concrete pavements and bridges .
Where broken concrete from demolished structures or pavement is available it may be used in place of stone provided that such use meets with the approval of TABLE SRW UNIT REQUIREMENTS Property Requirement Test Method Compressive Strength for SRW Units psi min ASTM C Compressive Strength for FreezeThaw Durable SRW Units psi min ASTM C Absorption max ASTM C Durability for FreezeThaw Durable SRW Units max A ASTM C Section the Engineer .
SECTION AGGREGATE FROM CRUSHED CONCRETE GENERAL Aggregate from crushed concrete is a recycled product made by crushing concrete obtained from concrete truck clean out demolition of existing concrete structures or pavement or similar sources and transported from a crushing facility .
It does not include concrete pavements that are rubblelized broken or otherwise crushed in place on the roadway .
Use dowel assemblies for supporting dowel bars of rigid construction capable of holding the dowel bars in proper position during placing of concrete and of such design to permit unrestricted movement of the pavement slab .
Apply the adhesive when the road surface ambient air and pavement marker temperatures are in the range of F to F on dry pavement .
Section Heat the adhesive to between F and F and applied directly to the pavement surface from the melterapplicator by either pumping or pouring .
Use sufficient adhesive to insure total contact with the entire bottom of the pavement marker .
Apply pavement markers to the adhesive immediately within seconds to assure bonding .
Place the pavement marker in position by applying downward pressure until the marker is firmly seated with the required adhesive thickness and squeezeout .
Remove excessive adhesive squeezeout from the pavement and immediately remove adhesive on the exposed surfaces of pavement markers .
Soft rags with mineral spirits conforming to Federal Specifications TTT or kerosene may be used if necessary to remove adhesive from exposed faces of pavement markers .
EPOXY RESIN ADHESIVE FOR BONDING TRAFFIC MARKERS A General This section covers epoxy resin adhesive for bonding traffic markers to pavement surfaces .
This type of adhesive provides rapid adherence to traffic markers to the surface of pavement .
This type of adhesive is recommended for adherence of traffic markers to pavement surfaces when rapid set is not required .
SECTION PAVEMENT MARKERS TEMPORARY RAISED PAVEMENT MARKERS A General Use raised pavement markers evaluated by NTPEP .
Use raised pavement markers of the prismatic reflector type or better as approved .
The color of the reflective pavement marker housing shall match the pavement marking color which it supplements .
All raised pavement marker reflective lenses shall be in close conformance with the Federal Standard No .
Use an epoxy adhesive type that is appropriate for the pavement and ambient temperature per the manufactures recommendations .
C Material Certification Furnish a Type material certification in accordance with Article for all raised pavement markers before use .
PERMANENT RAISED PAVEMENT MARKERS A General Use raised pavement markers evaluated by NTPEP .
Raised pavement markers permanent shall be of the glass or plastic face lens type and meet Subarticle A .
B Optical Requirements All optical performance for permanent raised pavement markers shall conform to ASTM D. C Physical Properties All physical properties for permanent raised pavement markers shall conform to ASTM D. D Hot Bitumen Adhesives Use hot bitumen adhesive for mounting the pavement markers to asphalt concrete roadways .
E Epoxy Adhesives Use epoxy adhesive for mounting the pavement markers to concrete roadways .
F Material Certification Furnish a Type material certification in accordance with Article for all raised pavement markers before use .
SNOWPLOWABLE PAVEMENT MARKERS A General Use snowplowable pavement markers evaluated by NTPEP .
The snowplowable pavement marker shall consist of a cast iron housing with one or more glass or plastic face lens type reflective lenses to provide the required color designation .
Use recycled snowplowable pavement which markers that meet all the requirements of new snowplowable pavement markers except Subarticle B .
Recycled snowplowable pavement markers with minimal variation in dimensions are acceptable Section only when the reflector fits in the casting of the recycled snowplowable pavement marker as originally designed .
Reflector Type a Onedirection one color crystal b Bidirectional one color yellow and yellow c Bidirectional two colors red and crystal d Bidirectional two colors red and yellow All pavement marker reflective lenses shall be in close conformance with the Federal Standard No .
TABLE MINIMUM SPECIFIC INTENSITY candlefootcandleunit marker Color Horizontal Entrance Angle Degrees Degrees Crystal . . Yellow . . Red . . D Properties All optical and physical properties for snowplowable pavement markers shall conform to ASTM D. E Epoxy Adhesive The epoxy adhesive shall meet the requirements of Section .
Section SECTION PAVEMENT MARKINGS GENERAL Yellow and white pavement markings shall be retroreflective .
Black pavement markings shall be matte nonretroreflective .
The material manufacturer has the option of formulating the pavement marking material according to his own specifications however the manufacturer shall meet all the minimum requirements specified herein .
All pavement marking materials pigments beads highly reflective media and resins shall be free from all skins dirt and foreign objects .
Use pavement marking materials capable of being fabricated into pavement markings of specified dimensions and adhering to asphalt and Portland cement concrete pavements when applied in accordance with their manufacturers recommendation .
Homogeneously mix all pavement marking materials .
COMPOSITION A Paint Composition Pavement marking paint shall be a ready mixed type paint product conforming to Federal Specification TTP F with spraying consistency suitable for use as a retroreflective pavement marking .
Glass beads are dropped by suitable pressurized means into the wet paint as it is applied to the pavement .
B Removable Tape Composition Removable tape pavement marking shall be composed of materials as specified by their manufacturer .
Use removable tape markings capable of conforming to pavement contours breaks faults etc .
through the action of traffic at normal pavement temperatures .
Use removable tape markings capable of adhering to the pavement by a pressuresensitive precoated adhesive or as directed by the manufacturer .
C Thermoplastic Composition Use thermoplastic alkydmaleic pavement markings composed of the materials in Table .
The thermoplastic material shall be readily applicable at temperatures between F and F from the approved equipment to produce lines and symbols of the required above the pavement thickness .
D Cold Applied Plastic Composition The cold applied plastic pavement marking shall consist of a mixture of high quality polymeric materials pigments and glass beads distributed throughout its base cross sectional area with a reflective layer of beads bonded to the top surface .
The cold applied plastic markings shall adhere to the pavement by a pressuresensitive precoated adhesive .
The cold applied plastic shall conform to pavement contours breaks faults etc .
through the action of traffic at normal pavement temperatures .
The cold applied plastic pavement marking shall be patchable .
COLOR All pavement markings without dropon beads andor media shall visually match the color chips that correspond to the Federal Standard Number b for the following colors Crystal Color No .
and USC r. C Gradation Roundness Use dropon and intermixed glass beads in all pavement markings with at least true spheres when tested in accordance with ASTM D. Dropon and intermixed glass beads used on any pavement markings shall meet Table .
Section PACKAGING FOR SHIPMENT Deliver all pavement marking and glass bead materials to the project in suitable containers packaged by the manufacturer .
Thermoplastic pavement marking materials shall be in block or granular form packaged in either suitable corrugated containers or thermal degradable plastic bags to which it will not adhere during shipment or storage .
STORAGE LIFE All pavement marking materials shall meet this Specification for one year from the date of shipment from the manufacturer to the Contractor or the project when stored properly by the manufacturers recommendation .
Replace any pavement marking materials not meeting these Specifications .
Perform the following tests on thermoplastic pavement marking materials intermixed glass beads and dropon glass beads unless prescribed otherwise by the Engineer A Intermixed and Dropon Glass Beads Use Xray Fluorescence for the normal sampling procedure for intermixed and dropon beads without crushing to check for any levels of arsenic and lead .
load applied shall be between and units after seconds at F in accordance with ASTM D. MATERIAL CERTIFICATION Furnish the following pavement marking material certifications in accordance with Article Glass Beads Type Material Certification and Type Material Certification Paint Type Material Certification Removable Tape Type Material Certification Thermoplastic Type Material Certification and Type Material Certification Cold Applied Plastic Type Material Certification and Type Material Certification Polyurea Type Material Certification Section SECTION DELINEATORS REFLECTIVE UNIT REQUIREMENTS FOR DELINEATORS A Definition Refer to ASTM D. Define entrance angle as the angle at the reflector between direction of light incident on it and direction of reflector axis .
Provide loop sealant that does not generate temperatures greater than F. Ensure sealant bonds with asphalt and concrete pavement saw slots so sealant and encapsulated loop wire do not come out of slot .
Ensure sealant will not be affected by water and sealant does not chemically interact with pavement and loop wire insulation .
Ensure loop sealant has sufficient flexibility to permit expected pavement expansion and contraction due to weather and to permit pavement movement due to traffic without cracking for a temperature range of to F. Provide sealant with a usable life of at least ten minutes once mixed when the ambient temperature is F. Ensure sealant dries to tack free state in less than hours and does not flow within or out of saw slot after exposed surface has become tack free .
EXCAVATIONS WITHIN TRAVELWAY During the process of excavating in a travelway where traffic is to be later maintained make provisions to backfill and repair any excavated or damaged pavement before allowing traffic to proceed over the affected lanes .
Install roll up or approved composite signs at least one foot from the bottom of the sign to the edge of pavement elevation on twolane twoway roadways .
Install roll up or approved composite signs at least feet from the bottom of the sign to the edge of pavement elevation on multilane roadways .
Do not anchor barricades to any pavement surfaces unless such anchoring method has passed the crash test requirement of NCHRP for work zone category II devices .
Repair any pavement damaged by the installation or removal of a temporary crash cushion .
Repair or replace damaged pavement at no cost to the Department .
Satisfactorily repair all spalled or damaged pavement .
Completely fill the anchor hole with adhesive and remove any excess adhesive flush with the pavement .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit Law Enforcement Hour Section DIVISION PAVEMENT MARKINGS MARKERS AND DELINEATION SECTION PAVEMENT MARKING GENERAL REQUIREMENTS DESCRIPTION Furnish install and remove pavement markings in accordance with the contract .
Item Section Pavement Markings B Material Qualifications Use pavement marking materials that are on the NCDOT APL .
C Performance Poor performance of pavement marking materials at any site whether or not related to a specific contract may be grounds for nonacceptance of a product on any project under contract .
CONSTRUCTION METHODS Do not use handliners or any other nontruck mounted pavement marking machine to install pavement markings for long line applications of any one line longer than feet .
A Testing Procedures All pavement marking materials and placement will be tested by the Department .
Install pavement markings in order to meet the retroreflectivity requirements as measured by a Department approved m mobile or handheld retroreflectometer .
B Application Equipment General for all Application Equipment Use pavement marking application equipment such that all parts that come in contact with pavement marking material are constructed for easy accessibility during cleaning and maintenance .
Glass Bead and Highly Reflective Media Dispensing Equipment Apply glass beads and highly reflective media to the surface of pavement long line markings using an automatic high pressurized bead and media dispenser or a pressurized mechanical feed attached to the marking equipment .
Locate the bead and media applicator at the proper distance behind the application of pavement marking material to provide the proper amount of retroreflectivity .
Spread the beads and reflective media uniformly over the entire surface of the pavement marking material such that they are partially embedded in the pavement marking .
C Weather Limitations and Seasonal Limitations for All Markings Do not place pavement markings when moisture tests conducted on the pavement show signs of moisture presence on the pavement or when it is anticipated that damage caused by moisture may occur during the installation and drying periods .
E PremarkingInterimTemporary Markings Premarking or layout markings are small paint spots used by striping contractors to establish locations of pavement markings .
Premark each installation of the final pavement marking materials before application on new pavement and when required to replace existing pavement marking except when existing markings are visible .
Get the premarking inspected and approved by the Engineer before placing the pavement marking materials .
Interim paint is a thin layer of pavement marking paint applied at the striping contractors option to maintain traffic instead of durable pavement markings .
Apply interim paint to comply with time limitations for placement if final pavement markings can not be placed .
Place temporary paint markings for detours lane shifts milled surfaces and lifts of asphalt other than the final pavement surface .
Section Review and record the existing pavement markings before resurfacing and reestablish the new pavement markings using the record of existing markings in conjunction with the Roadway Standard Drawings unless otherwise directed .
Submit the record of the existing pavement markings calendar days before the obliteration of any pavement markings .
F Surface Preparation and Curing Compound Removal Prepare the pavement to accept pavement markings to insure maximum possible adhesion .
Clean seal and remove curing compound as necessary to insure that the markings adhere to the pavement .
Pavements shall be free of grease oil mud dust dirt grass loose gravel winter surface treatments and other deleterious material before applying pavement markings .
Prepare the pavement surface including removal of curing compound at least inches wider than the pavement markings to be placed such that an additional inch of prepared area is on all sides of the pavement markings after they are applied .
Remove the groves caused by concrete grinders before installing the polyurea pavement marking .
Remove all curing compound and surface laitance on Portland cement concrete pavements where longlife pavement markings will be placed .
Ensure that the surface is free of all residue laitance and debris before applying the pavement marking .
When surface preparation and curing compound removal operations are completed blow the pavement surface clean by compressed air immediately before installing the pavement markings .
If required apply a primer sealer to pavement surfaces before applying pavement marking material as recommended by the manufacturer .
Apply primer sealer in a continuous film at least inches wider than the pavement markings in such a way as not to cause any noticeable change in the appearance of the pavement markings .
Conduct all pavement surface preparation including curing compound removal in such a manner that the pavement or joint material is not damaged or left in a condition that will mislead or misdirect the motorist .
Repair any damage caused to the pavement or joint materials caused by surface preparation or the removal of curing compound by acceptable methods and at no additional cost to the Department .
Surface preparation and removal of bridge laitance shall be considered incidental to the installation of pavement marking with the exception of curing compound removal .
Where pavement surface preparation results in obscuring existing pavement markings of a lane occupied by traffic immediately remove the residue including dust by approved methods .
G Application of Pavement Markings General for all types of Pavement Markings Install pavement marking material that has a uniform thickness smooth surfaced cross section throughout its entire length width and length not less than the dimensions specified in the plans and that does not exceed the dimension by more than inch .
Do not apply pavement marking materials over a longitudinal joint .
This work will be incidental to the installation of the pavement markings .
Section Install pavement marking lines that are straight or have uniform curvature and conform to the tangents curves and transitions as specified in the plans .
Apply all longitudinal pavement marking lines inches or less in width with one pass of the pavement marking equipment .
Pavement marking lines greater than inches in width and pavement marking symbols may be applied with multiple passes of the pavement marking equipment .
Install all pavement marking lines stop bars characters and symbols that require multiple passes of the application equipment such that there are no gaps separating the application passes .
Protect the pavement markings until they are track free .
Remove all pavement marking materials spilled on the road surface by acceptable methods .
Use yellow white and black pavement markings without glass beads and reflective media that visually match the color chips that correspond to the Federal Test Standard No .
Highly Reflective Media Application Dropon is the method where glass beads and highly reflective media are dispensed by a pressurized mechanical feed or high pressure means onto the pavement marking as it is applied to the pavement .
H Observation Period Maintain responsibility for debonding and color of the pavement markings during a month observation period beginning upon final acceptance of the project as defined under Article .
During the month observation period provide pavement marking material that shows no signs of failure due to blistering chipping bleeding discoloration smearing or spreading under heat or poor adhesion to the pavement materials .
Replace at no additional expense to the Department any pavement markings that do not perform satisfactorily under traffic during the month observation period .
Section I Removal of Pavement Markings This work includes the removal of all types of pavement marking lines symbols and characters including removal for long life marking preparation .
This work does not include removal of removable tape pavement markings .
Remove pavement marking lines characters and symbols by acceptable methods to the Engineer that will not materially or structurally damage the surface or the texture of the pavement .
Leave the pavement surface in a condition that will not mislead or misdirect the motorist .
Where existing pavement markings are to be removed and replaced by other pavement markings do not begin removal until adequate provisions have been made to complete the installation of the replacement markings .
Remove pavement markings such that the surface is in proper condition for adequate bonding of the new markings .
Promptly remove any material deposited on the pavement as a result of removing pavement markings as the work progresses by acceptable methods .
When using a grinding method for pavement marking removal the equipment shall have multiple heads working in tandem or have a removal head with operator dialed controls to result in a planed surface and provide adequate preparation of the surface to accept the new marking material .
Application of polyurea over existing pavement marking materials will require at least of the existing pavement marking material to be removed however if one mil application of paint was placed on asphalt pavement less than months old do not remove the existing paint pavement markings .
Application over existing pavement marking materials other than thermoplastic will require the existing pavement marking material to be removed so that at least of the existing pavement marking surface is removed .
Before applying thermoplastic pavement markings over the existing thermoplastic pavement markings remove at least of the oxidized existing thermoplastic .
However if one mil application of paint was placed on asphalt pavement less than months old do not remove the existing paint pavement markings .
Use black color in paint or tape as determined by Contractor to cover any remaining conflicting pavement marking after removal from asphalt pavement surfaces .
Do not use black paint or tape on concrete pavement surfaces .
J Pavement Marking Installer Qualifications Ensure at least one member of every pavement marking crew is certified through the NCDOT Pavement Marking Technician Certification Process .
Section THERMOPLASTIC ALKYDMALEIC A Application Equipment General Use application equipment constructed to assure continuous uniformity in the thickness and width of the thermoplastic pavement marking .
Use application equipment that provides multiple width settings ranging from inches to inches and multiple thickness settings to achieve the pavement marking thickness ranging from .
Special thickness equipment may be required for in lane or shoulder transverse rumble strip pavement markings .
Premelting Kettle Use equipment to install hot thermoplastic pavement marking material that includes an oiljacketed or airjacketed premelt kettle for uniform heating and melting of the thermoplastic material .
Applicator Storage Kettle Equip long line pavement marking vehicles with an automatic thermostat control device to maintain the thermoplastic material at the application temperature and provide continuous mixing and agitation of the thermoplastic material during installation .
Construct the equipment so that all mixing and conveying parts up to and including the application apparatus maintains the thermoplastic pavement marking material at the specified installation temperature and which has a capacity of at least lbs .
of molten thermoplastic pavement marking material .
B Weather Limitations and Seasonal Limitations Do not apply thermoplastic pavement markings on existing or new pavements unless the ambient air temperature and the temperature of the pavement is F or higher .
Do not apply thermoplastic pavement markings between the dates specified below East of I December and the following March East of I to and including I November and the following April West of and including I November and the following April Exception to the above When traffic is maintained on a portion of roadway and thermoplastic pavement marking will not be placed within calendar days due to seasonal limitations place pavement marking paint and beads in accordance with Subarticle C. Section C Application Use only thermoplastic markings that are of the hot machine applied type .
Apply alkydmaleic thermoplastic pavement markings by extrusion methods only .
Retroreflective measurements will be taken within days after final placement of the pavement marking .
A thin layer of interim pavement marking paint at the proper width may be placed before installing the thermoplastic markings .
Cover any such thin layer of pavement marking paint with thermoplastic pavement marking within calendar days of placement .
Apply the thin layer of pavement marking paint and beads at the rate necessary to produce a dry film thickness of to mils .
Produce a crosssectional thickness of the thermoplastic markings above the surface of the pavement in accordance with Table .
TABLE THICKNESS REQUIREMENTS FOR THERMOPLASTIC Thickness Location mils Inlane and shouldertransverse pavement markings rumble strips may be placed in passes .
POLYUREA A Weather Limitations and Seasonal Limitations Do not apply polyurea pavement markings on existing or new pavements unless the ambient air temperature and the temperature of the pavement is F or higher .
Do not apply polyurea pavement marking between November and the following February unless the surface is free from winter surface treatment applications .
B Application Produce polyurea pavement marking lines that have a minimum dry thickness of mils when placed on concrete and asphalt pavements .
Using the polyurea application equipment apply the pavement marking materials simultaneously .
Apply the polyurea resin mixed at the proper ratio according to the manufacturers recommendations to the pavement surfaces within the proper application temperatures as determined by the material manufacturer .
Inject reflective glass beads and highly reflectivemedia into the molten liquid polyurea pavement markings .
Place a thin layer of pavement marking paint at the proper width before applying the polyurea markings during the day waiting period .
Apply the thin layer of pavement marking paint and beads at the rate necessary to produce a dry film thickness of to mils .
Direct payment for the pavement marking paint will not be made .
Cover any such thin layer of paint with polyurea pavement marking within calendar days of placement .
Retroreflective measurements will be taken within days after final placement of the pavement marking .
Section TABLE MINIMUM REFLECTOMETER REQUIREMENTS FOR POLYUREA Item Color Reflectivity Highly Reflective Media White mcdluxm Yellow mcdluxm COLD APPLIED PLASTIC A Application Equipment Use mechanical application equipment defined as a mobile pavement marking machine specifically designed for use in applying pressure sensitive pavement marking tape of varying widths up to inches .
Use an applicator equipped with rollers to provide initial adhesion of the preformed pressure sensitive marking tape with the pavement surface .
Tamp the cold applied plastic pavement marking material with a lb .
Install cold applied plastic pavement markings at ambient air temperature and pavement surface temperature per manufacturers specifications .
Wait at least hours after a rain before applying cold applied plastic pavement marking .
Cold applied plastic pavement markings shall be between to mils thick .
B Types of Cold Applied Plastic At the time of installation cold applied plastic pavement markings shall meet Table .
B Weather Limitations Apply heatedinplace thermoplastic only when ambient air temperature and pavement surface temperature is F and rising .
The Contractor may choose to use heatedinplace thermoplastic symbols characters and transverse lines instead of molten thermoplastics pavement markings .
Produce a cross sectional thickness of installed heatedinplace thermoplastic markings above the surface of the pavement after installation and upon cooling in accordance with Table .
PAINT A Application Equipment The equipment to apply paint to pavements shall be a truck mounted pneumatic or airless spray machine with suitable arrangements of atomizing nozzles and controls to obtain the specified markings .
Paint pavement markings application equipment shall be capable of placing double solid lines single solid lines intermittent skip lines or a combination of solid and intermittent skip lines in a single pass .
The spray guns used for hand held paint pavement marking application shall be operable from the application truck .
All metal parts that hold or transfer paint pavement marking material shall be Section stainless steel .
B Weather Limitations Apply paint only when the ambient air temperature and pavement surface temperatures are at least F and rising and no more than F. C Application Final pavement marking applications of paint shall be placed in applications of mils wet each .
When paint is required by the Engineer or Traffic Control Plan for temporary pavement markings during temporary traffic patterns apply one application of paint at mils wet .
MAINTENANCE Replace pavement markings that prematurely deteriorate fail to adhere to the pavement lack reflectorization or are otherwise unsatisfactory during the life of the project or during the month observation period as determined by the Engineer .
Section Upon notification from the Engineer winterize the project by placing an initial or additional application of paint pavement marking lines in accordance with Article .
MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT ____ Pavement Marking Lines will be measured and paid as the actual number of linear feet of pavement marking lines satisfactorily placed and accepted by the Engineer .
____ Pavement Marking Symbols will be measured and paid as the actual number of pavement marking symbols satisfactorily placed and accepted by the Engineer .
In addition Paint Pavement Marking Characters will be paid for each mil application placed in accordance with Subarticle C. Removal of Pavement Marking Lines will be measured and paid as the actual number of linear feet of pavement marking lines satisfactorily removed and accepted by the Engineer .
No payment will be made for the removal of removable pavement marking tape .
Removal of Pavement Marking Symbols Characters will be measured and paid as the actual number of pavement marking symbols and characters satisfactorily removed and accepted by the Engineer .
Curing Compound Removal Lines will be measured and paid as the actual number of linear feet of pavement surface from which the curing compounds are satisfactorily removed .
Measurement will be made along the surface of the pavement .
No direct payment will be made for the work involved in applying the lines including surface preparation reapplication of molten pavement marking crossed by a vehicle removal of all pavement marking materials spilled on the roadway surface and repair of markings tracked by a vehicle .
The Contractor may choose to use heatedinplace thermoplastic symbols characters and transverse lines instead of molten thermoplastics pavement markings and cold applied plastic at no additional cost to the Department .
Section Replacement of pavement markings that prematurely deteriorated failed to adhere to the pavement lacked reflectorization or were otherwise unsatisfactory during the life of the project or during the month observation period as determined by the Engineer will be at no cost to the Department .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit Paint Pavement Marking Lines __ Linear Foot Thermoplastic Pavement Marking Lines __ __ mils Linear Foot Polyurea Pavement Marking Lines __ __ mils Linear Foot Cold Applied Plastic Pavement Marking Lines Type ____ __ Linear Foot HeatedInPlace Thermoplastic Pavement Marking Lines __ __ mils Linear Foot Paint Pavement Marking Symbols Each Thermoplastic Pavement Marking Symbols __ mils Each Cold Applied Plastic Pavement Marking Symbols Type ____ Each HeatedInPlace Thermoplastic Pavement Marking Symbols __ mils Each Paint Pavement Marking Characters Each Thermoplastic Pavement Marking Characters __ mils Each Cold Applied Plastic Pavement Marking Characters Type ____ Each HeatedInPlace Pavement Marking Characters __ mils Each Removal of Pavement Marking Lines __ Linear Foot Removal of Pavement Marking Symbols Characters Each Curing Compound Removal Lines Linear Foot Curing Compound Removal Symbols Characters Each SECTION PAVEMENT MARKERS GENERAL REQUIREMENTS DESCRIPTION Furnish and place pavement markers in accordance with the contract .
Item Section Pavement Markers B Material Qualifications Use pavement markers that are on the NCDOT APL .
Section C Historical Performance Historical performance of the pavement markers will be used in determining future use of the pavement markers by the Department even if the pavement markers have been traffic qualified .
Poor performance of pavement markers at any site whether or not related to a specific contract may be grounds for nonacceptance of a product on any project under contract .
CONSTRUCTION METHODS A Weather Limitations Do not install pavement markers or replacement reflectors if moisture tests performed on the pavement indicate the presence of moisture on the pavement surface or on the pavement marker .
Install all pavement marker adhesives as required by the manufacturers specifications for weather and temperature limitations .
B Preparing for installation Ensure that the pavement pavement markers and replacement lens are free of dirt dust oil grease moisture curing compound loose or unsound layers or any other material that would interfere with proper bonding of the marker to the pavement or the lens to the marker .
C Removal of Existing Pavement Markers Remove the existing raised pavement markers or the snowplowable pavement markers including the castings before overlaying an existing roadway with pavement .
Repair the pavement by filling holes as directed by the Engineer .
When traffic patterns are changed in work zones due to construction or reconstruction remove all raised pavement markers or snowplowable markers including castings that conflict with the new traffic pattern before switching traffic to the new traffic pattern .
Properly dispose of the removed pavement markers .
No direct payment will be made for removal or disposal of existing pavement markers or repair of pavement as such work will be incidental to other items in the contract .
D Installation General Install all pavement markers and adhesives per manufacturers specifications .
Color Ensure that the color of the reflector corresponds to the pavement marking that the marker supplements .
Appearance Remove any adhesive from the reflective lens of the marker otherwise replace the reflector lenses of a snowplowable pavement marker or the entire raised pavement marker .
Spacing Space pavement markers as shown in the plans .
Position pavement marker lenses perpendicular to the flow of traffic as shown in the Roadway Standard Drawings .
Adjust marker longitudinal spacing up to foot in either direction andor adjust Section marker lateral spacing up to inches to avoid installation of the marker at a pavement construction joint or surface defect .
E Pavement Marker Installer Qualifications Ensure at least one member of every pavement marker crew is certified through the NCDOT Pavement Marking Technician Certification Process .
SECTION RAISED PAVEMENT MARKERS DESCRIPTION Furnish install maintain and remove temporary and permanent raised pavement markers in accordance with the contract .
Item Section Temporary Raised Pavement Markers Permanent Raised Pavement Markers Use pavement markers that are on the NCDOT APL .
CONSTRUCTION METHODS Install temporary raised pavement markers on the nonfinal pavement surfaces with epoxy pressure sensitive adhesives or hot bitumen adhesives .
Install permanent raised pavement markers using a hot bitumen adhesive in accordance with Article .
On final pavement surfaces install temporary raised pavement markers using a pressure sensitive adhesive or hot bitumen adhesive .
MAINTENANCE Maintain all installed temporary raised pavement markers .
Replace all damaged or missing temporary raised pavement markers if any of the following occurs A Three segment failures occur in any roadway section .
Maintain all installed permanent raised pavement markers until final acceptance of the project .
MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT Temporary Raised Pavement Markers will be measured and paid as the actual number of temporary raised pavement markers satisfactorily placed and accepted by the Engineer .
Permanent Raised Pavement Markers will be measured and paid as the actual number of permanent raised pavement markers satisfactorily placed and accepted by the Engineer .
Payment will be made under Section Pay Item Pay Unit Temporary Raised Pavement Markers Each Permanent Raised Pavement Markers Each SECTION SNOWPLOWABLE PAVEMENT MARKERS DESCRIPTION Furnish install and maintain snowplowable pavement markers in accordance with the contract .
Item Section Snowplowable Pavement Markers Epoxy Use snowplowable pavement markers that are on the NCDOT APL .
CONSTRUCTION METHODS A General Bond marker castings to the pavement with epoxy adhesive .
Install snowplowable pavement marker castings into slots sawcut into the pavement .
Make slots in the pavement to exactly duplicate the shape of the casting of the snowplowable pavement markers .
Promptly remove all debris resulting from the saw cutting operation from the pavement surface .
Install the marker castings within calendar days after sawcutting slots in the pavement .
Fill the cleaned slots totally with epoxy adhesive flush with the surface of the existing pavement .
Install snowplowable pavement markers according to the manufacturers recommendations .
Protect the snowplowable pavement markers until the epoxy has initially cured and is track free .
This work will be paid for under the pay item for the type of reflector replacement if the damage occurred after the initial installation of the snowplowable pavement marker .
Section C Recycled Snowplowable Pavement Marker Castings Use properly refurbished snowplowable pavement marker castings as approved by the Engineer such that approved new reflectors can be installed inside the castings .
MAINTENANCE Maintain all installed snowplowable raised pavement markers before acceptance .
MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT Snowplowable Pavement Markers will be measured and paid as the actual number of snowplowable pavement markers satisfactorily placed and accepted by the Engineer .
CONSTRUCTION METHODS Secure tubular markers to the pavement surfaces using epoxy or other approved types of adhesives .
Use tubular markers affixed to pavement surfaces as a supplement to pavement markings to channelize traffic .
Use tubular marker such that the color of the tubular marker and retroreflective sheeting would match the color of the pavement markings they supplement except as noted below A Use yellow tubular markers with white and crystal retroreflective sheeting on top of asphalt islands as shown in the plans .
B Use orange tubular markers affixed to pavement surfaces with white and crystal retroreflective sheeting to separate opposing traffic placed on one side of a lane divided highway .
C Gray tubular markers with whitecrystal retroreflective sheeting may be used to supplement white pavement markings .
Section D AsBuilt Plans Submit two complete sets of asbuilt plans for review upon completion of the work showing the location of all buried electrical circuits with pavement crossings dimensioned from fixed objects or from survey stations .
Mounting height is defined as vertical distance from luminaire to surface of pavement of heaviest traveled lane in area illuminated by the luminaire .
Jacked duct may be installed by either of the following methods at the Contractors option when placement of electrical duct beneath pavement by jacking is noted in the plans .
A The duct may be pushed beneath the pavement through earth without prior construction of an opening .
Do not locate boxes in useable shoulders or pavements or other areas where they may be subjected to traffic loadings .
SECTION EXCAVATION TRENCHING PIPE LAYING AND BACKFILLING FOR UTILITIES DESCRIPTION Perform all excavation undercut foundation conditioning pipe laying bedding backfill and pavement sidewalk and driveway repair necessary for installation of utilities .
Roadbed and Foundation Protection Provide shoring of excavations less than one horizontal to one vertical from existing or proposed pavement to prevent failure or weakening of the roadbed .
Use asphalt plant mix to repair or replace pavement damaged by utility work .
Immediately upon completion of the utility removal or installation make repairs to the pavement .
Asphalt Plant Mix for pavement repair will be measured and paid as provided in Article .
Install small diameter pipe inches or less under existing pavement by a trenchless method at no additional cost to the Department .
A Valves Install all valves with an approved valve box set flush with the ground or pavement .
Place a inch diameter precast concrete ring flush with the ground around all valve boxes not in pavement .
Do not locate cleanouts within the roadway pavement or shoulders .
Install small diameter pipe inches or less under existing pavement by a trenchless method at no additional compensation .
TABLE MANHOLE CONSTRUCTION Location Top height above finished grade Roadway pavement Driveways Sidewalks Parking lots Flush Vehicle Recovery Area Flush Manicured Areas such as lawns Flush to with concrete pad Flood Zones less than ft above finished grade ft above year flood elevation Flood Zones greater than ft above finished grade ft above finished grade with watertight frame and cover and vent pipe to ft above year flood Other areas ft above finished grade For manholes installed before finished grading or paving construct the top flush with the current grade to provide access during all phases of construction and adjust as grading and paving work progresses in accordance with Section .
For drilled holes greater than inches simultaneously pull the pipe or casing into the hole as reaming occurs When under pavement or within a one horizontal to one vertical distance from pavement maintain the depth of cover in Table .
Limit seedbed preparation to within feet of the edge of any pavement to a depth of inches to inches .
feet above the pavement .
feet above the pavement directly below the signal head .
Install vehicle signal heads such that the bottom of the signal housing including brackets of a signal head that is vertically arranged and not located over a roadway is as follows a A minimum of feet and a maximum of feet above the sidewalk or if there is no sidewalk above the pavement grade at the center of the roadway .
Install vehicle signal heads such that the bottom of the signal housing including brackets of a signal head that is horizontally arranged and not located over a roadway is as follows a A minimum of feet and a maximum of feet above the sidewalk or if there is no sidewalk above the pavement grade at the center of the roadway .
Install longitudinal runs of conduit a minimum of one foot from back of curb or feet from edge of pavement in the absence of curb .
Provide a feet clearance to conduit from back of curb or from edge of pavement .
Coordinate sawcutting and loop placement with pavement markings .
On unmarked pavement premark locations of stop lines and lane lines before locating inductive detection loops .
Sawcut pavement at approved premarked locations .
Install conduit with bushings from edge of pavement to junction box .
Ensure conduit maintains a minimum inches of cover from the edge of pavement structure to the junction box .
Between where loop conductor pairs leave saw cut in pavement and junction boxes twist loop conductor pairs a minimum of turns per foot .
Index Abandoned wells sealing Abbreviations Abrasive materials for cleaning steel Abutting jointssteel Acceptance Of asphalt materials Of concrete Of project Of signs Tests for concrete Access to the work Accident protection Act of God Additional work Adhesive for pavement markers Adhesively anchored boltsdowels Abandon or remove utilities Adjustment of basins valve boxes Admixture Set retarding Advertisement Age of pavement Aggregate Base course Fine subdrain For asphalt plant mixes For asphalt surface treatment For Portland cement concrete For nonasphalt type bases General requirements for Gradation Handling and storing Quality controlassurance Size Stabilization Subgrade Testing Agreement supplemental Air content of concrete Air pollution Alaska rail Alkyd finish paint Alkydmaleic thermoplastic pavement Alleged suspension Aluminized pipe Aluminum alloy corrugated culvert pipe Amount bid Anchor bolts Anchor bolts and bearing areas Anchors expansion Antistrip additive to Approach slabs bridge Approval of borrow source Arrow boards flashing Artifacts Asbestos to Asphalt Binder Binder for plant mix Concrete plant mix pavements Curing seal Friction course types FCFC Hauling Mat and seal Materials Materials reclaimed Opengraded friction course Pavement milling Pavementquality management system Placement temperatures Plant Plant mix pavement repair Primer Seal coat Surface treatment Tack coat Assembled productsgalvanizing Assignment of claims void Attenuator truck mounted Authorityduties of the inspector Authority of the Engineer Award Award and execution of contract Award of contract Award limits Backfill Backfill material Backfilling Concrete curb and gutter Paved ditch Pipe Sidewalks and driveways Trench and excavation for utilities Balled and burlapped plants Bar supports reinforcing steel Barbed wire Barbed wire for fences Bare rooted plants Barricades traffic control Barrier Delineators Portable concrete Water filled Base Course Incidental stone Soilcement Batch type plant Batching plant Beads glass Index Bearing And bearing materials Areas anchor bolts Elastomeric Pads preformed Plate Plate assemblies Bids Bond Combination Consideration of Delivery of Deposit Rejection of Bins and hoppers Blasting Blending of aggregates Block Laying concrete Masonry construction reinforced Block masonry general Blotting sand Board of Health Board of Transportation Bolt tension Bolted parts Bolts Anchor High strength Bond breaker Bonds Bore and jack Borrow Excavation Material Sources Box culvert excavation Bracing Breach of contract Brick Brick masonry general Brick masonry castinplace concrete Brick laying Construction general Construction reinforced Protection from cold weather Bridge Approach slabs Railing Buffer zones Burlap Burnin tests Burning Cable FiberOptic Guiderail Leadin Messenger Signal Transfers Underground installation Calcium chloride Cancellation of award Capacity mixers agitators Caps Carrier pipe installation Cashier check Casting bed and forms Catch basins Cellulose fibers Cellulose pellets Cement Base soil Concrete Portland Grout Certification material Certificationretroreflective sheeting Certificationsigning material Certified check Certified test reports Chain link fabric Chain link fence Changeable message signs Channel excavation Channel preservation of Character of workmen and equipment Chief Engineer CIP gravity retaining walls Claims to Classification select material Clay pipe Cleaning pavement Clearing and grubbing Clear span guardrail sections Coal tar epoxy paint Coarse aggregate Coat prime Coating materials epoxy Coatings thermal sprayed Cofferdams Coir fiber matbaffle Cold Applied plastic marking Drawn steel wire and wire fabric Weather protection concrete Collusion to Combination bids Communications cable remove Compacting shaping and finishing Compaction Aggregate base course Asphalt mixture Around funnel drains For endwalls For sidewalk and driveways Embankment Equipment Existing base Field quality control Limetreated soil Roadbed Stabilized subgrade Subgrade Index Compensation and record keeping Compensation paid at contract prices Completion date Completion date intermediate to Completion time intermediate to Composition Of concrete Of mixtures Pavement markings Compound curing Comprehensive grading Concrete Anchors for fence posts And masonry Aprons Barrier Bridge railing Median Precast reinforced single faced Rail with moment slab Brick and block masonry Building block Calcium chloride for Cold weather protection Construction incidentalconcrete Cored slabs prestressed Culvert pipe Curb Curb and gutter Curb ramps Curing agents for Curing polyethylene film for Driveways Encasement of utility lines End sections Finishing Flexural strength Fly ash in Forms Gutter Hauling equipment Islands and medians Joint construction Parapet Paved ditch Pavement Cores Curb ramps and driveways Field laboratory for cement Finishing Flexural strength Forms for Hauling equipment Joints Pavement markings Placing concrete for Preparation of aggregate base Protection from conditions Repair Slip form paver for Subgrade for preparation of Surface testing final Thickness tolerances Vibrating concrete for Pipe for subsurface drainage Placing For concrete pavement In cold weather Precast Prestressed cored slabs Paved ditch concrete Placing concrete Production equipment Pumping Reinforcement Rip rap Sidewalks Shoulders Shoulders milled rumble strips Slag in Slump Strength Structures Valley gutter Vibrating Cones traffic control Conditioning culvert foundation Conditioning existing base Conditions of employment Conduit installation Connections and fittings installation Connections using high strength bolts Consideration of bids Consistency tests for concrete Construction Block masonry Conference Easement Easement temporary Entrance gravel Joints Reinforced brick masonry Stakes lines and grade Contaminated material Contract Contract Award of Bonds Intent of Item minor Items eliminated Items major Lump sum price Subletting of Termination of Time days Contractor Contractor Furnished certification Furnished sources Supervision by Contractors License Responsibility for process control Index Control Limits Of material Of work Plan transportation management Strips Unit for asphalt binder Controllers with cabinets Converting catch basinsdrop inlets Cooperation Between contractors By contractor With utility owner Coordination Plans specificationsprovisions With Railway With seeding operations Copper arsenate chromated Copyright Correction of bid errors Corrective action Cored slabs prestressed concrete Corrugated Aluminum alloy Culvert pipe Pipe elbows Pipe tees Structural plate pipe and arch Metal culvert pipe Plastic pipe and fittings Steel Pipe Course base Covering of signs Crash cushions temporary Creosote Criteria for withdrawal of bid Cross sections Crushed stone or gravel Culvert Culvert Excavation box Foundation conditioning Pipe Pipe vitrified clay Curb ramps Curing Agents for concrete Compound Compound removal Concrete Current controlling operations Damage Claims responsibility Liquidated Dampproofing Dampproofing Materials Method B Data sheet safety Date of availability Date intermediate completion Day calendar Debris Deck drains Default Default of contract Defective material Definition of terms Deformed steel bar for structures Deleterious substances Delineation Delineator markers Delineators Delineators Barrier Drum Flexible Guardrail and barrier Delivery And handling of materials Of bids Demolition of buildingsappurtenances Demountable sheeting Density Density determination Conventional method Nuclear Method Department Furnished material Furnished signs Legal rights waiver of Deposit bid Details of construction plans Detectable warnings Detours Diesel hammers Digital Terrain Modeling DTM Dimensionsprecast concrete units Dimensional tolerances Directional drilling Direct tension indicators Disadvantaged Bus .
Enterprise Disposal Disposal of materials Disposal of waste debris Disposition of surplus property Disqualification of contractors Ditch excavation Ditches berm Ditches silt Division of Highways Documentation Records Documents required for final estimate Domestic steel Dowelstie bars for pavement Drains in walls and culverts Drains shoulder Drawings Shop Working Index Drilled piers Driving equipment pile Dropon beads pavement marking Drums Skinny Drumstype delineators Dryer Duct and conduit sealer Ductile iron pipe Dust control Easement Eccentric reducers corrugated steel Edge planing Elapsed time for placing concrete Elastomeric bearings Electrical Duct Inspections and testing Junction boxes lighting Service pole and lateral Embankments Embankment monitoring Emulsified asphalt anionic Emulsified asphalt cationic Encasement Encroachment on right of way End sections pipe Endwalls Engineer Engineering fabrics see Geotextiles .
Fabricated metal stayinplace forms Fabricated steel grates Fabricating and placing reinforcement Fabrication of steelreinforcing Fabrication of structural steel Facing or bearing surfaces Failure To furnish contract bonds To maintain satisfactory progress To perform erosion control work Falsework and forms Federal participation Feeder circuits Fence Barbed wire Chain link Gates for Posts Reset Special Sediment Control Temporary silt Woven wire Fertilizer Topdressing Fiber Optic cable Optic splice centers Optic transceivers Field Erection of steel structures Laboratory for concrete pavement Field Laboratory requirements Painting Welding Filled joints Final Acceptance date Cleaning up Estimate Estimate assembly Finish Payment Surface testing Fine aggregate Finishing concrete Fire hydrant Fittings and accessoriesfence Fittings and manhole installation Flaggers Flashing arrow boards Flexible delineators Float finish concrete Flowable fill to Fly ash concrete Force main sewer Force account Force account notice Index Forms for concrete bridge decks Formsinplace method Forms stay in place metal Formula job mix Foundation Conditioning to Excavation Ground mounted signs Fuel price adjustments Funnels and funnel drains Furnishing right of way Galvanized high strength bolts Galvanizing Gauges settlement Geophytes to Geotextile Geotextile interlayer nonwoven Girder assembly Glass beads Gradation aggregate Grading comprehensive Graves Gravity retaining walls CIP Precast Segmental Ground mounted sign supports Ground mounted signs Grounding electrodes Grout cement Guardrail Anchors and anchor assemblies Delineators Extra length post Relapping Remove existing Reset existing Repair of galvanizing Temporary Tubular triple corrugated beam Guiderail cable Guy assemblies Guying Materials for staking or Hand or power tool cleaning Handling And storing aggregates And storing sod Transporting and storing Unloading and Waste Hardware For timber structures Hazardous contaminated material Hazardous paint removal Hazards protection of Health and safety responsibility Health boards of Hearing Herbicides High Mount foundation Mount standard Strength bolts Strength bolts nuts and washers Highly reflective media Holes for bolts and other fasteners Holiday work weekend and night Hot bitumen Hot inplace recycled asphalt concrete Hot mix storage systems Hour Hydrated lime Hydrostatic testing Identification of members concrete Impact attenuator truck mounted Incidental Concrete construction general Milling Stone base Inductive detection loops Inplace measurement Inspection And acceptance At source Bolt By the department Drilled piers Electrical and testing Falsework Galvanizing Lime Maintenance Paint and paint materials Painting steel structures Precast concrete units Of prestressed concrete Of structural steel Of work Steel structures Inspector Installation Erection and Of precast units Sanitary sewer Trenchless Insulation Insurance liability Intent of contract Interest on final payment Intermediate Completion date Completion time Contract time Interpretation of quantitiesproposal Invert Invitation to bid Index Iron castings Item pay Items specialty Job mix formula Jointed concrete pavement slab repair Joints Construction Expansion Longitudinal Transverse Junction boxes electrical Junction boxes signals Keyed footings Laboratory Landscape development materials Laws to be observed Laying Brick Concrete block Leadin cable Legal relationsresponsibilitypublic Legal rights by Department waiver Length pile Level spreader apron preformed scour hole Liability Insurance Of public officials personal To third parties Licenses Lift holes handling Light Control system Standards Lighting Portable construction Systems sign Roadway general Underpass Wiring methods Lime Hydrated Limestone Limetreated soil Limitations of operations Line water Liquid membrane curing compounds Liquidated damages Load indicating bolts Load limits Local traffic Location and field verification Logo to attach mainline signs Longitudinal joints Lot definition Low modulus silicone sealant Lowering devices high mount Lumber for Bridges Fence posts Fender systems Guardrail posts Sign posts Lumber structural Lumber treated timber and Lump sum Machine construction lighting Mailboxes Main sewers force Maintenance Of the project Of traffic Major contract item Major structures Manholes Adjustment Utility Manufactured sand Markers Control of access Object Right of way Tubular fixed Masonry Mat coat asphalt Material And equipment storageparking Certification Control of Defective Delivered on the project Matting for erosion control Median Membrane curing compound Message signs changeable Messenger cable Metal posts and railsfence Metal rail bridge Metal stay in place forms Metals and hardware misc .
Meter boxes Microsilica Milemarkers Milled rumble strips Milling asphalt pavement Mineral fibers Mineral filler Minor drainage structures Mix design criteriajob mix formula Mixers and agitators Mixers rotary selfpropelled Mobilization Monitoring embankment Mortar Mowing Specialized Hand Mulch for planting Multiple adjustments in price Multiple vehicle hauling Index Natural sand Navigable waters Night work Noncollusion certification Nondiscrimination Nonwoven geotextile interlayer Notification of determination Nuts for high strength bolts Object markers Obligation of contractor and surety Oregon metal rail Organic content high Opening of bids receipt and Operations seeding Ordinary surface finish Organic impurities Organic zinc repair paint Outlet pipe Overhead sign structures Overruns of contract quantities Oxygen cutting Packaging for shipmentpavement markings Packing and markingpaint material Paint And other protective coatings And paint materials Epoxy coal tar For vertical markers Markings Organic zinc repair Primer Vehicles thinners and driers Painting steel structures Parking of personal vehicles Partial payments Patching concrete pavement spalls Patching materialepoxy Patented devices materials processes Paved ditch backfilling Pavement markers Pavement markers general Adhesive for Epoxy Raised Snowplowable Temporary raised Pavement marking general Cold applied plastic Color Lines and symbols Paint Polyurea Reflective media Removal Tape Thermoplastic Pavement markingsdelineators Pavement repair asphalt plant mix Pavement repair for utility work Pavement removal of existing Paver slip form Pedestals Permanent raised pavement markers Permeable asphalt drainage course Permits and licenses Personal vehicles parking of Personnel Pigment compositionpaint Pile driving equipment Pile driving equipment setup Pile length Piles Prestressed concrete Sheet Steel Pins for bearing assemblies Pipe Aluminum alloy Aluminized Clay Clean out Coated paved lined corrugated steel Collars Concrete Corrugated Aluminum alloy HDPE Steel Directional drilling Ductile iron End sections Foundation preparation Bore and jack Mechanical joints Pipe ramming PVC to to Rail bridge Removal Sewer and fittings Side drain Steel Tees and elbows Concrete Corrugated aluminum alloy Corrugated steel Tunneling Water and fittings Welded steel Placing Concrete Load on structure members Strands ties and reinforcing steel Plain rip rap Plain steel bars with threaded ends Plan holder lists Plan requirements precast units Plan traffic control Plans and working drawings Plantasphalt Asphalt Mix antistrip additive for Mixed cement treated base course Index Plantvegetation Balled and burlapped Bare rooted Container grown Materialsnursery grown Planting Backfilling and watering Initial Mulch for Replacement Water for PVC to Plasticity index Plate assemblies bearing Plate bearing Poles Electrical service Wood Pollution Control equipment Air Water Polyester resin epoxy adhesive Polymer slurry PE pipe Polyethylene film concrete Polymeric coated corrugated steel culvert pipe and pipe arch Polyurea markings Portable Concrete barrier Construction lighting Drive high mount standard Portland cement Portland cement Concrete aggregate for Concrete pavement Concrete for precast units Concrete for structuresincidental Concrete pavement field lab Concrete production and delivery Postemergent herbicide Posts And offset blocks Fence Uchannel sign supports Prebid conference Precast Concrete units Gravity retaining walls Prestressed concrete panels Units Installation of Precastprestressed members Preconstruction conference Preemergent herbicide Preformed bearing pads Preformed scour hole level spreader Preformed weighted base ballast Premarking pavement materials Premelting kettle thermo materials Preparation And submission of bids Of aluminum sign surfaces Of roadbed Of subgrade and base Prequalification of contractor Preservation of channel Preservative treatmenttimberlumber Presplit Pressure test water system Prestressed concrete Bearing piles Cored slabs Girder Girder web splitting Members erecting Panels Sheet piles Prestressing strands Prime coat Primer paint red Primer asphalt Primersealer pavement marking Progress schedule Progresssatisfactoryfailure to maintain Project special provisions Proof rolling Properties of epoxies Protection Of hazards Of materials Of property and restoration Of public lands Slope Public convenience and safety Pumping Pumping concrete Purchase order bidder Qualification of personnelwelders Qualification of weldsprocedures Quality Assurance Control Control epoxy coating Controlprestressed concrete members Management for asphalt payment Quicklime Radio Spread Spectrum Rail Alaska Oregon metal Rail elements for guardrail Railing aluminum bridge Railing bridge Railroad preemption Railway coordination with Receipt and opening of bids Reclaimed Asphalt pavement RAP Asphalt shingles RAS X Record keeping Recruitmentdepartment employees Recycled products Index Red primer paint Reflectance values pavement markings Reflective sheeting barricades Reflective requirementsdelineators Reinforcement Reinforcement Fabricating and placing Wire Reinforcing steel Reinforcing steel epoxy Reinforcing steel bar supports Rejection of bids Relapping Guardrail Relationwater mainssanitary sewers Relations legal Removal Of curing compound markings Of existing buildings Of existing equipmentmaterials Of existing pavement Of existing pavement markers Of existing structures Of forms and falsework Of hazardous paint Selective vegetation Select tree Remove and reset existing guardrail Remove adjust abandon or utilities Removing forms concrete paving Rental rates equipment Repainting of existing steel structures Repair Of concrete Of epoxy coating Of galvanizing Of pavementssidewalksdriveways Seeding Resistance to abrasion course aggregate Responsibility for damage claims Restriction of load limits Retainage Retaining walls sheet pile Retroreflective sheeting Retrofit existing curb ramps Return of bid bond or bid deposit Revision of bids withdrawal or Right of Contractor to file verified claim Right of way markers Right of way encroachment on Rip rap Riser assemblies Riser basin Rivets for sign overlays Road closures temporary Roadway Excavation Lighting Rock Inlet sediment trap Pipe inlet sediment trap Presplitting of Sediment dams temporary Silt checks temporary Rod and Lug Coupling Bands Rolling proof Rumble strips milled Safety And accident protection Index rating Sanctions Salt and lime stabilizers Sand Manufactured Mortar Natural Sanitary provisions Sanitary sewer Pipe and fittings Relation of water mains to Satisfactory progress failure to maintain Scales and public weighmaster Schedule progress Scope of payment Scope of work Scour protection substructure Seal coat asphalt Seal triple Sealant low modulus silicone Sealing existing pavement cracksjoints Sealing joints concrete paving Seasonal limitations Asphalt Pavements Pavement markings Sections of projects to traffic opening Sections pipe end Sediment trap Seed Seedbed preparation Seeding Segmental gravity retaining walls Select Backfill material Granular Material Material classification Tree removal Selective vegetation removal Selfcuring inorganic zinc paint Septic tank Service poles Set retarding admixture for concrete Settlement gauges Setup pile driving equipment Sewer Force main Line to Relation of water mains to sanitary Shapes plates bars and sheets Shaping and compaction Shear connectors Shear connectors welded stud Sheet piles Sheet piles prestressed conc .
Sheet pile retaining wall Sheeting retroreflective Sheets iron or steel galvanizing Index Shipping structural steel Shop assembling of structural steel Shop drawings Shop painting Shoulders Shoulder Borrow Construction Deficient in thickness Drains Drains filter for Milled rumble strips concrete Side drain pipe Sidewalk Signs Acceptance of Alternative design of Changeable message Covering Disposal and stockpiling Erection Fabrication Foundation for ground mounted Foundation overhead signs Hardware mounting Installed for signals LED blankout Lighting systems Overhead structure Overlays Overlays rivets for Posts and battens Posts timber preservation Quality Retroreflective sheeting Structures overhead Supports ground mounted Supports overhead Supports work zone Silk screening Welding Work zone Signal Backplates Cabinet foundations Cable Controllers Heads Pedestrian Vehicle Junction boxes Pedestals Railroad preemption Removal of existing Timing of Signals and traffic systems Signing General requirements for Materials Silica fume Silicone Silicone sealant low modulus Silicone sealant types Silt Accumulation Basins Detention devices Ditches Fence Temporary Rock checks Single vehicle hauling Skew angle Skimmer Slabs bridge approach Slope drain Slope protection Sluice gate Slump tests concrete Snowplowable markers Sod Sodding Sodium chloride Solid waste materials Soilcement base Soundness to Source inspection at Specialty items Specific intensity Specifications Splicing reinforcing bars Spreading and vibrating concrete Sprigs Stabilization aggregate Stakes Staking or guying Standard foundation lighting State Steel Bar reinforcement Bars threaded ends Beam sign supports Domestic Forms Grates Pipe welded Plates Shapes Sheet piles Sheets Spiral column reinforcing Sheets galvanizing Structural camber Structural field welding Structural Structures Structures painting Structures repainting existing Wire for reinforcement UChannel Sterilizing water lines Stilling basin Stockpilingsign components Stone For erosion control Screenings Sediment control Index Storage Lifepavement markings Of materials Straight seal Straightening bent material Straightnesscambertolerancessteel Strands prestressing Straw matting Stream crossing temporary Street Structural Lumber Steel Camber Erection diagrams Fabricator qualification Inspection of Marking Shipping Shop assembling Welding Timber and lumber Structure excavation unclassified Structures Drainage minor Drainage minor steps for Existing widening Major backfilling Temporary Removal of existing Undercutfoundationdrainage Stud shear connectors welded Stumps Subdrain fine aggregate Subgrade Subgrade preparation Subletting of contract Submission of bids preparation and Submittals Substructure Substructure scour protection Subsurface drainage Subsurface drainage at weep holes Subsurface drainage materials Subsurface information Successful bidder Suitable material wasting Superintendent Superpave Superstructure Supervision by Contractor Supplemental agreements Supplemental seeding Supplemental specifications Supports reinforcing steel bar Surcharges and waiting periods Surety Surface Finish Finish class and Preparation Preparationcuring removal Preparationprotectionweathering Preparation of barsepoxy Requirements pavement Tolerances Treatment asphalt Treatmentasphalt aggregate Surplus property disposition of Suspension of work Suspensions work ordered by Engineer Tank nonregulated Tank septic Tap saddlessleevesvalves Target density Tax Temperature Temporary Construction easement Crash cushions Guardrail Lane closures Mulching Raised pavement markers Road closures Rock sediment damsType AB Rock silt checks Seeding Seeding Mowing and repair of Silt fence Slope drains Steel covermasonry drainage str .
Stream crossing Structures Suspension of the work Traffic signal installation Tensile strengthelongationepoxy Tensioning devices Tensioning procedure Termination of contract Termination contractor responsibility Terminology Roadway lighting Terms definition of Testing Integrity Aggregate Epoxies Sewer line Markings Thermal sprayed coatings Thermometric equipment Thermoplastic marking Thickness compaction Thickness tolerances Third parties liability of Through traffic Tie bars pavement Timber Piles Structural Time limitations for marking placement Time of availability Tire sidewall ballast method Title VI and nondiscrimination Tolerances Topdressing fertilizer Topography Index Total amount bid Tower light portable lighting Toxic material Trademark Traffic Barrier grout for concrete Control Control Devices Gen. requirements work zone Plan TMP Supervision Work zone Control failure to maintain Islands and medians Stoppage Maintenance of Opening sections of project to Soilcement base Through Transfer of load Transformers Transverse joints Trash racks Travelway excavation within Travelway pedestrian Treated Base course cement Soil lime Tree removal select Trenching Excavationbackfilling for utilities Paved Unpaved Trenchless methods Truck measurement Truck mounted attenuators Trust account Tubular markers fixed Tubular triple steel beam guardrail Tunneling trenchless method Type A B devices Temporary rock silt III barricades Uchannel posts sign supports Ultrathin Bonded Wearing Course Unauthorized work Unclassified excavation Unclassified structure excavation Uncoated steel sheet and light plates Undercut excavation Underdrains Underground conduit Underground storage tank Undergrowth removal Underpass lighting Underruns of contract quantities Unit bid price Unloading and handling Unpaved trenching Untreated Timber and lumber UtilitiesExcavationtrenching etc .
