Definitions and Terms Acronym or Short Form Full Name or Meaning PAV pressure aging vessel PCI PrecastPrestressed Concrete Institute PE polyethylene PGAB performance graded asphalt binder PLS pure live seed PTC positive temperature coefficient PVC polyvinyl chloride RAP reclaimed asphalt pavement RC reinforced concrete RCP reinforced concrete pipe RPCCP reclaimed portland cement concrete pavement RSC rigid galvanized steel conduit RTFO rolling thin film oven SAE Society of Automotive Engineers SBL southbound lane SE service entrance SI International System of Units metric system SME steel mitered end SSPC Society for Protective Coatings TAPPI Technical Association of the Pulp and Paper Industry TBC timebased coordination TCD traffic control device U.S. United States UBC Uniform Building Code .
A single continuous layer of soils aggregate or plant mix pavement to which the same compactive effort is applied during placement .
Do not allow loads on concrete pavement base or structures before the strength or time requirements for the concrete has been met .
Crushed base .. Plant mix pavement .. Seeding fertilizer or mulch and .. Royalty. . All costs associated with .. A change in the type of seed fertilizer or mulch .. Development costs ..
When constructing pavements thicker than in mm under traffic schedule the work in accordance with Subsection ..
Do not taper temporary pavement ends more steeply than VH .
If placement of concrete pavement or a full lift of plant mix pavement is not completed before delays or suspension of work provide place maintain and remove temporary plant mix pavement in accordance with Subsection Temporary Surfacing .
If the contract does not include a plant mix pavement mix design obtain the engineers approval of the proposed design before use .
The department will reimburse the contractor for increases in material costs for overruns of plan quantity for corrugated metal pipes steel piling dowel bars tie bars for concrete pavement corrugated guardrail wood and steel posts for guardrail reinforced concrete pipes geotextiles geogrid paving fabric wood and steel fence posts fence wire seed and mulch .
Acceptance of Aggregate The department will accept the gradation of crushed or screened aggregates used for pavements bases subbases chip seals and stockpiled materials with a gradation specification based on random samples taken at the direction of the engineer and a quality level analysis of the test results .
When testing is required ensure the presence at the production site of a certified or qualified technician during production of aggregate or plant mix pavement .
The engineer will mark seven randomly selected locations using a table of random numbers and with the exclusion of locations within in mm of the pavement edge. . Take one pair of core samples from each sample location in the presence of the engineer . .
Provide galvanized nuts screws bolts and hardware. . EQUIPMENT If the contract includes pay items Milling Plant Mix or Profile Milling Plant Mix remove the existing pavement using a poweroperated milling machine .
Establish a profile grade by referencing from either the existing pavement or from an independent grade control and with a positive means of controlling cross slope elevations. . For Profile Milling Plant Mix ensure the machine is equipped with a foot m minimum mobile reference ski unless otherwise approved by the engineer .
Cut bituminous pavement with a saw .
Sawcut concrete pavement fulldepth .
Repair at no additional cost to the department spalling cracking breaking or similar damage of the existing pavement or appurtenances that are to remain in place. . Milling Plant Mix and Profile Milling Plant Mix .
If surfacing is to be removed next to surfacing that is to remain cut the pavement along the limits of removal .
Make a vertical cut deep enough to allow removal of the pavement and base if applicable without leaving a ragged edge or damaging the adjacent pavement .
Vary the depth of cut as dictated by changes in the thickness of the pavement .
Protect the pavement with blast mats or other protective systems .
Repair damaged pavement at no additional cost to the department .
DESCRIPTION This section describes the requirements for furnishing and placing blended base or blended subbase on a prepared surface. . MATERIALS Provide materials in accordance with the following Material Subsection Aggregate Reclaimed Asphalt Pavement RAPExisting asphalt pavement milled from the roadway within the project limits .
Reclaimed Portland Cement Concrete Pavement RPCCPExisting concrete pavement removed from the roadway within the project limits. . EQUIPMENT Unless otherwise approved by the engineer use a pugmill capable of thorough and consistent blending to mix aggregate RAP RPCCP and water for blended bases and subbases. . CONSTRUCTION .. General Remove the existing plant mix pavement concrete pavement or both from the roadway haul it to the plant site and stockpile it in accordance with Subsection ..
Minimize contamination of the milled asphalt pavement or removed concrete pavement .
DESCRIPTION This section describes the requirements for construction of one or more courses of plant mix pavement or recycled plant mix pavement placed on a prepared foundation. . MATERIALS ..
Recycled Plant Mix Pavement Provide aggregates for recycled plant mix pavement in accordance with Section Aggregate with the gradation bands modified as specified .
Use reclaimed asphalt pavement RAP from specified sources .
A tightly stretched wire or string line offset paralleling true line for pavement edge or .
Do not use rollers that adversely affect the surface of the plant mix pavement .
Weather and Seasonal Limitations Place plant mix pavement surface courses between May and October .
Ensure the quality of the plant mix pavement materials and constructed pavements whether produced and constructed by the contractor or procured from subcontractors or vendors .
The contractor may use at no additional cost to the department recovered PGAB for the samples of record when original samples indicate removal and replacement of plant mix pavement .
Obtain three to five core samples in accordance with ASTM D from the appropriate portion of plant mix pavement corresponding to the original PGAB sample ..
The engineer will mark the sample location for the quality acceptance and verification cores with a in in mm mm square painted at least in mm from the pavement or ribbon edge .
For the specified class of pavement compose the plant mix of virgin aggregate RAP when specified asphalt binder and hydrated lime and meet the requirements of the tables for the class of pavement specified .
Cold Milling Plant Mix Pavement Remove the existing pavement specified as the source of the RAP in accordance with Subsection .. Milling Plant Mix and Profile Milling Plant Mix .
Paving Leveler to level pavement before placing the first layer of plant mix .
The first ton t of plant mix pavement placed at the specified depth constitute the test strip .
Do not place additional pavement of the type in the test strip until the engineer accepts the strip as necessary construct additional test strips for no additional pay for the item Test Strip until specifications are met .
Upon acceptance the test strip will remain in place and become part of the pavement . .
the pavement may be left in place as approved by the engineer at the reduced price determined by the pay factor and construct a new test strip for no additional pay for the item Test Strip .
Produce finished pavement with a uniform and dense appearance .
When pavement is placed adjacent to curb and gutter construct the top of the final lift of surfacing flush with the top of the front edge of the gutter or as directed by the engineer .
Control the placement of the first layer of pavement material by the independent control reference .
Position the longitudinal construction joint in the top lift of plant mix pavement on the lane lines unless a plant mix wearing course is specified in which case offset the joint in mm from the lane lines .
When constructing pavements thicker than in mm under traffic do not leave a longitudinal exposed vertical dropoff between adjacent travel lanes at days end .
Do not construct more than one days paving run .. Plant Mix Pavements and Recycled Plant Mix Pavements with a taper before completing the plant mix pavement course on the adjacent travel lane .
At no additional cost to the department remove the taper before placing plant mix pavement on the adjacent travel lane .
Do not open the new pavement to traffic before the plant mix has cooled to ºF ºC or less .
Ensure that compactive effort does not result in distress to the pavement .
Do not use equipment that results in excessive crushing of the aggregate and do not operate or park rollers in a manner that adversely affects the surface of the pavement .
Temporary Surfacing If placement of plant mix pavement has not been finished by October or work on the project is suspended for any reason provide and place temporary plant mix pavement on uncompleted portions and designated approaches before suspending work .
Repair defective work before placing chip seal or plant mix wearing course by milling diamond grinding or fulldepth removal and replacement of the plant mix pavement .
If the newly placed pavement thickness is inadequate to allow grinding and maintain the design thickness within in .
mm of the thickness designated in the contract or if the surface deviation is a dip remove the defective area of pavement and replace it .
Ensure grinding equipment is capable of establishing a profile grade by referencing from either the existing pavement or from the independent grade control .
Plant Mix The engineer will determine a pay factor for aggregate gradation and asphalt binder content for level of control and mixes and a pay factor for inplace density for inplace density I pavements as follows .
PMPAP PFAC LSAC MLQ Where PAA Pay Adjustment for Aggregate Gradation dollars PAD Pay Adjustment for InPlace Density PAAC Pay Adjustment for Asphalt Binder Content PMP Unit Contract Price for the respective Plant Mix Pavement pay item PMPAP Unit Contract Price for the respective Plant Mix Pavement Approaches pay item RPMP Recycled Hot Plant Mix Pavement Unit Contract Price PFA Aggregate Gradation Pay Factor for evaluated lot RPF Virgin Aggregate Gradation Pay Factor for evaluated lot PFD InPlace Density Pay Factor for evaluated lot PFAC Asphalt Binder Content Pay Factor for evaluated lot LSA Lot Size for Aggregate Gradation evaluated lot short ton metric ton LSD Lot Size for InPlace Density evaluated lot short ton metric ton LSAC Lot Size for Asphalt Binder Content evaluated lot short ton metric ton APQ Quantity of Plant Mix Pavement from the lot placed as approach pavement short ton metric ton MLQ Quantity of Plant Mix Pavement from the lot placed as mainline pavement short ton metric ton For the Hot Plant Mix Leveling Hot Plant Mix Leveling Superpave and Hot Plant Mix Leveling Recycle pay items the engineer will make pay adjustments for aggregate gradation and asphalt binder content but not for inplace density .
DESCRIPTION This section describes the requirements for sealing cracks in plant mix pavement. . MATERIALS Provide materials in accordance with the following Material Subsection Aggregate for Blotter Backer Rod .
Do not use equipment that damages pavement including spalling and overcutting .
Removing Existing Sealant When specified remove existing sealant from cracks without damaging the pavement .
Prepare cracks by using compressed air heat lances but do not overheat the pavement .
Ensure that pavement inside the crack is at least ºF ºC unless the manufacturer requires a higher temperature if necessary heat the pavement .
When using squeegees smooth sealant tightly against the pavement .
Flush with the pavement and is not recessed into the crack by shrinkage. . Recessed Configuration .
Recess below the pavement in mm .
Install backer rod with the top edge recessed in mm below the pavement .
The department does not require recorrelation before placement if correlation testing for aggregate tests has already been performed with placement of plant mix pavement and the contractors and departments personnel and equipment have remained unchanged .
Example min ton min t. If the first three tests for LL PI and coarse aggregate angularity fine aggregate angularity and flat and elongated are within specification and there are no changes in the crushing process test at a frequency of ton t. Not required if these tests were performed and found acceptable during production of the plant mix pavement .
.. Seal Coat Place seal coat when the application surface is dry and the air and pavement surface temperature are at least ºF ºC .
DESCRIPTION This section describes the requirements for providing hauling and placing one or more courses of commercial plant mix on a prepared foundation. . MATERIALS Provide plant mix pavement composed of a mixture of aggregate and asphalt binder from a commercial source .
At least calendar days before use submit the name of the proposed commercial source and a proposed mix design for the plant mix pavement to the engineer for approval .
Clean edges of existing pavements that will border new pavement to allow adhesion of tack coat .
Limit application to the area that can be covered by that days production equal in width to a single paving ribbon of plant mix pavement .
Chip Seal .. Air and pavement surface temperatures at least ºF ºC or higher .. No fog .. Precipitation not expected within hours and ..
Air and pavement surface temperatures at least ºF ºC .
Use of a type VI vibratory roller will only be allowed by the engineer if the chip seal is placed during the same construction season as the plant mix pavement and the plant mix pavement has been in place less than calendar days .
The department does not require recorrelation before placement if correlation testing for aggregate tests has already been performed with placement of plant mix pavement and the contractors and departments personnel and equipment have remained unchanged .
Apply when pavement temperature is at least ºF ºC or higher and the air temperature is ºF ºC and rising .
Taper the material onto the existing pavement on both edges of the rut to provide a smooth transition .
At the end of each pass taper the mixture and construct a transition to the existing pavement .
Extend material in mm from lane edges and taper onto the existing pavement to form a smooth transition .
At the beginning and end of each pass taper and apply the mixture to form a transition with the adjacent microsurfacing or existing pavement .
Taper the material onto the existing pavement at both edges of the lane to form a smooth transition .
At the beginning and end of each pass taper the mixture and form a transition to the adjacent microsurfacing or existing pavement .
This applies to fabric membranes used for full coverage of the pavement or as strips over transverse and longitudinal pavement joints. . MATERIALS Provide materials in accordance with the following Material Subsection Glass Fiber Reinforced Paving Fabric .
Install fabric when pavement and air temperatures are ºF ºC and rising and the surface is dry .
At no additional cost to the department provide specified temporary traffic control including flagging to route traffic through the construction area where fabric is in place and not covered with a lift of plant mix pavement .
Use brooming to maximize fabric contact with the pavement surface .
Additional Requirements for Glass Fiber Reinforced Paving Fabric Fill cracks greater than in mm in width or holes greater than in mm in diameter in the existing pavement with bituminous filler material that contains no solvents .
Ensure end joints and joints from the repair of wrinkles overlap or shingle in the direction that the pavement overlay will be placed .
If it rains on the composite material before the new plant mix pavement is placed allow the composite material to dry completely before placing the pavement .
DESCRIPTION This section describes the requirements for construction of portland cement concrete pavement on a prepared subgrade base course or other prepared surface. . MATERIALS Provide materials in accordance with the following Material Subsection Admixtures .
For texturing pavement in locations with a design speed limit less than or equal to mph kmh provide carpet drag brooming or tining equipment .
During the test section placement achieving satisfactory performance in meeting tolerances of final dowel position and concrete pavement smoothness as specified in the contract .
Do not place pavement during rainy weather .
Do not place concrete when the ambient temperature is below F C. Cover and heat the pavement if the temperature drops below F C and ensure a minimum pavement surface temperature of F C for hours and above F C for an additional hours .
Do not place pavement on frozen subbase or base .
Replacement of to percent of cement with class F fly ash by mass is allowed for concrete pavement mix designs. . Levels of Control I II and III .
Design concrete pavement mixes using a cement content or combined cement plus fly ash content between lbyd and lbyd kg m to kgm .
Provide a concrete pavement mix that meets a design day flexural strength of psi .
Ensure all concrete materials mixtures and constructed concrete pavements submitted for acceptance conform to the contract and either bring into compliance or reject outofspecification material .
Ensure all concrete materials mixtures and constructed concrete pavements meet the requirement of the contract .
Smoothness Quality Control Testing For levels of control I and II test each lane of pavement as soon as possible to monitor placement .
For level of control III test each lane of pavement as soon as possible to monitor placement .
Use a slipform paver for level I pavements .
Mixing and Delivery Produce concrete for slipform pavement in a central mixing plant at or near the project site .
For projects that overlay concrete or plant mix pavements provide the required preparatory work as shown in the contract .
Ensure the slipform paver operation will spread consolidate grade and finish the pavement so that there is a minimal amount of hand finishing required .
Portland Cement Concrete Pavement .. Portland Cement Concrete Pavement Ensure the previously placed pavement is at least hours old or the concrete has reached percent of the design strength as determined from field cured samples when paving adjacent to previously placed concrete .
Apply the compound with a mechanical sprayer covering the entire width and sides of the pavement .
Apply curing compound to the edges of the pavement upon removal of the forms .
If weather conditions do not allow uniform placement of the curing compound immediately place wet burlap followed by plastic sheeting over the pavement and halt paving operations until conditions improve .
Joints Concrete pavement joints are designated as transverse expansion and weakened plane joints longitudinal weakened plane joints and construction joints .
Secure tie bars by chairs or supports or insert them during the paving operation to ensure placement within in mm of the midpoint of the pavement Portland Cement Concrete Pavement Portland Cement Concrete Pavement section .
Insert the tie bars in drilled holes when the pavement is being placed adjacent to an existing concrete pavement as shown in the contract .
Ensure the preformed expansion joint filler is continuous through the pavement .
Furnish preformed expansion joint filler in lengths equal to the pavement width or equal to the width of one lane .
Use an installing bar to secure the joint filler at the proper grade and alignment during placement and finishing of the pavement .
Securely anchor and construct the dowel bar assemblies to firmly hold all the dowel bars at a depth of T concrete thickness parallel to each other and parallel to the pavement grade and alignment .
Suspend operations after the placement of the concrete pavement test section until the engineer has completed the dowel positioning evaluation .
Core the concrete pavement placed in the test section as directed by the engineer as a part of the dowel placement tolerance verification .
Ensure the pavement and saw cuts are dry before the final cleaning is done .
For any liquid applied sealant fill the joint until the sealant is c in mm below the top surface of the pavement and ensure it does not spill over on the surface of the pavement .
If overfilled remove all material spilled on the surface of the concrete pavement and clean the pavement surface .
Install the joint sealant when the weather is dry and the ambient temperature is above F C. Do not seal joints until the pavement is at least days old .
Do not allow traffic on the pavement until the sealant has cured for at least hours. . Elastomeric Compression Joint Seal .
Do not seal joints until the pavement is at least days old .
Do not allow traffic on the pavement until the sealant has cured for at least hour .
.. Quality Acceptance The engineer may isolate and reject obviously defective material and pavement without regard to testing procedures .
The engineer will perform quality acceptance testing for air content strength and pavement thickness based on paved lots .
Measuring Length of Drilled Concrete Cores of the Materials Testing Manual using pavement cores .
Provide pavement meeting PI acceptance requirements and mustgrind limits shown in Table MustGrind and PI Acceptance Levels .
inch in ft mm in m S . inch in ft . mm in m S . inch in ft mm in m Portland Cement Concrete Pavement .. Corrective Actions Make corrections using an approved grinding device or by removing and replacing the pavement .
Diamond groove all ground locations to match adjacent concrete pavement texture including tine spacing and straightness requirements .
.. Repair of Defective Pavement Replace areas with uncontrolled cracking corner cracks rough areas that grinding does not correct or other unacceptable pavement sections .
Determination of Pay Factors for Levels of Control I II and III for each paved lot to determine the pay for that lot in accordance with the following Lot Pay PF LSp UP Where PCCP Pay Total pay for concrete placement PF Individual pay factor LSp Paved Lot Size square yard UP Unit Contract Price for the concrete pavement The total project payment will then be determined by summing all lot payments. . Level IV .
UP F PFgf LSg and Portland Cement Concrete Pavement PAc Pay adjustment for coarse aggregate PAf Pay adjustment for fine aggregate UP Concrete pavement unit price dollars C Percent coarse aggregate of total aggregate in mix design F Percent fine aggregate of total aggregate in mix design PFgc Pay factor for coarse gradation for lot max .
LSg Gradation lot size in square yards Determination of Pay Adjustment for Smoothness Pay adjustments apply only to locations accepted based on PI and are assessed per pavement segment as defined in Subsection Quality Acceptance Testing for Smoothness .
DESCRIPTION This section describes the requirements for removing and replacing existing concrete pavement slabs full depth repair repairing spalled locations in concrete pavement partial depth repair and grinding and texturing the surface of existing concrete pavement. . MATERIALS .. Slab Replacement Provide materials in accordance with the following Material Subsection Admixtures .
.. Grinding and Texturing Provide grinding equipment with diamond blades mounted on a minimum foot m wide head mounted on a selfpropelled machine designed for grinding and texturing concrete pavements .
km. . CONSTRUCTION .. General Repair damage caused by the work to existing concrete pavement reinforcing bars and joints outside the limits of the slab replacement spall repair or grinding and texturing area at no additional cost to the department .
Haul dispose of and furnish waste locations for removed concrete pavement excavated material and slurry from grinding operations .
Use the approved mix design and place concrete pavement that achieves a compressive strength of at least psi Mpa in hours .
Mix Design Submit the following to the engineer for approval at least calendar days before the placing concrete pavement Concrete Pavement Repair .
Replace areas with uncontrolled cracks corner cracks rough areas not corrected by grinding or other unacceptable pavement sections .
Place patching material continuously in each repair area until the entire area is finished to grade and sloped to match the adjacent pavement surface .
Grind the entire surface width specified until the pavement surfaces on both sides of all transverse joints and random cracks are on the same plane and meet surface tolerance requirements .
Use grinding equipment that does not strain or damage concrete pavement .
Leave neat rectangular ground areas with a uniform surface appearance uniformly tapered to adjoining pavement .
Perform additional grinding as necessary to extend the ground area so that lateral limits of grinding are at a constant offset distance from and parallel to the nearest pavement edge .
Grind mainline pavement to produce a skidresistant surface consisting of grooves from in to c in .
Remove grinding slurry and residue continuously and immediately leave pavement clean and dispose of slurry as approved by the engineer .
In operation move the profilograph longitudinally along the pavement surface no faster than mph kmh .
For purposes of calculating the average profile index and where additional pavement grinding is required determine the average profile index for each .
m Concrete Pavement Repair Surface Tolerance Leave the concrete pavement surface with an average profile index of in mi mmkm or less on travel lane pavement segments grind smooth deviations greater than .
Ensure the concrete pavement surface meets mustgrind and profile index acceptance levels in accordance with Table .. Must Grind and PI Acceptance Levels .
In the transverse slope of the pavement do not leave deviations in the traveled way greater than .
inches in ft mm in m when tested by a string line or straightedge placed perpendicular to the pavement centerline .
Regrind and texture the concrete pavement until all areas meet the surface tolerance requirements .
Conc Pvmt Spall Repair by the square foot square meter or the cubic foot cubic meter measured in the plane of the existing concrete pavement surface. . Conc Slab Replacement by the square yard square meter measured parallel to the paved surface. . GrindTexture Conc Pvmt by the square yard square meter of pavement surface ground .
DESCRIPTION This section describes the requirements for installing epoxycoated dowel bars into existing transverse joints in concrete pavement. . MATERIALS Provide materials in accordance with the following Material Subsection BondBreaking Compound .
Cut slots in the pavement parallel to the centerline of the roadway to place the center of the dowel at middepth in the concrete slab .
Use a pound kg jack hammer when breaking the concrete out of the slot if the pound kg hammer damages the pavement .
Parallel to the pavement surface ensure that the bar does not deviate more than in mm from a plane parallel to the pavement surface when measured along the length of the bar .
DESCRIPTION This section describes the requirements for removing existing joint sealant and sawing cleaning and sealing existing concrete pavement joints and random concrete cracks. . MATERIALS Provide materials in accordance with the following Material Subsection Backer Rod .
Sealing Existing Concrete Pavement Joints and Cracks . . CONSTRUCTION .. General Seal joints and cracks when air and pavement temperatures are at least ºF ºC unless the sealant manufacturer requires a higher temperature and the weather and pavement are dry .
Do not use equipment that causes spalling of concrete pavement surface beyond the limits of the proposed joint widths .
Repair damage to the pavement such as spalling cracking breaking or overcutting caused by the work operations at no additional cost to the department .
.. Sawing General For joints between concrete pavement and plant mix pavement completely remove the plant mix pavement from the concrete face during sawing .
Remove raveled edges in the plant mix pavement with the saw cut .
For joints between concrete pavement and plant mix pavement saw the plant mix pavement adjacent to the concrete pavement to a width of in mm and a depth of in mm .
For joints between concrete pavement and plant mix pavement saw the plant mix pavement adjacent to the concrete pavement to a width of in mm and a depth of in mm .
Cleaning Thoroughly clean each sawed joint or random crack and the adjacent pavement surface immediately after sawing with a water wash not exceeding psi kPa .
Relative to the surface of the adjacent concrete pavement place the sealant to obtain a finished sealant surface in in mm mm deep .
Sealing Existing Concrete Pavement Joints and Cracks HotPoured Elastic Sealant Seal flush with the existing pavement surface .
Recess the sealant below the pavement surface in mm .
DESCRIPTION This section describes the requirements for cutting rumble strips in plant mix pavement and concrete pavement. . MATERIALSVacant .
For portland cement concrete pavement provide a grinder with carbidetipped grinding drum .
For plant mix pavement provide a mill with steel milling head .
Repair or replace damaged pavement at no additional cost to the department .
Demonstrate to the engineer on an initial test section of ft m that the equipment and methods provide the desired rumble strip and surface inside each depression without tearing or snagging the plant mix pavement .
Secure castinplace barrier forms for roadway barrier without damaging roadway pavement .
In line with expansion joints in adjacent concrete pavement .. At intervals not to exceed ft m in continuous runs of concrete paving and ..
Between back of curb and sidewalk if the adjacent roadway pavement is concrete and there is lateral constraint other than soil on the opposite side of the sidewalk .
When constructing gutter next to existing pavement locate the top front edge of the gutter flush with the top of the surfacing .
If the top lift is wearing course locate the top front edge flush with the contact point between the plant mix pavement and the wearing course or in mm below the wearing course surface whichever is lower .
When placing curb gutter and concrete pavement monolithically match the depth of the curb and gutter section to the pavement depth and delete the longitudinal curbandgutter joint if the overall concrete slab width does not exceed ft . m. ..
In line with expansion joints in existing adjacent concrete pavement and at both sides of driveways and .
Between back of curb and sidewalk if the adjacent roadway pavement is concrete and there is lateral constraint other than soil on the opposite side of the sidewalk .
Space joints to coincide with joints in adjoining concrete and at intervals from ft . m to ft m. Construction Joints Make construction joints between curb and gutter and concrete pavement that are .
For multistrand shielded insulated cable used as a leadin cable from the pull box where detector cables enter from the pavement to the amplifier in the controller cabinet provide a conductor No .
Is moisturecuring and selfleveling cures without heat and remains flexible after curing to withstand normal pavement movement .
Backfill excavations and restore sidewalks pavement and landscaping at each location before excavating elsewhere .
The department considers the term prefab loop detector to refer to the complete installation before pavement placement of a preformed loop detector consisting of loop detector wire installed in sealed PVC conduit with a diameter no greater than in mm .
Before turning on install specified equipment signs and pavement markings and verify its operability .
When conditions preclude trenching install rigid conduit using approved jacking or boring methods without disturbing pavement .
With the engineers approval and at no additional cost to the department small test holes may be cut in the pavement to locate obstructions .
Construct required jacking or boring pits at least in mm clear of pavement edges on urban projects and at least ft . m from shoulder edges on rural projects .
Do not undermine pavement or soften subgrade with excessive water .
.. Striping Paint and Glass Beads Use commercially manufactured yellow or white highway striping paint for temporary pavement markings and apply it without dilution .
Make the painted pavement markings reflective by dropping or spraying glass beads onto the wet paint .
Temporary Pavement Striping Tape Use temporary retroreflective pavement striping tape that is pressuresensitive and manufactured for use as pavement striping .
Temporary Raised Pavement Markers Use temporary raised pavement markers that are the same color on the face and body as the markings for which they are substituted have a dimension of at least in in mm mm are constructed of a high impactresistant plastic material and have at least .
Use an adhesion method that allows for easy removal of markers without pavement damage .
Use bidirectional delineators approved by the State Traffic Engineer that match the color of the adjacent edgeline pavement stripe .
Use temporary pavement markings if nopassing zones are required for durations longer than those specified in the previous paragraph .
Temporary Pavement Markings General Use retroreflective temporary pavement markings that are paint tape raised pavement markers or motorist guidance markers either white or yellow as specified .
Use paint with beads for temporary pavement markings on all pavement lifts except the final surface treatment plant mix wearing course chip seal seal coat or concrete pavement .
When interstate divided highway traffic is placed twolane twoway use white edge lines and yellow pavement markings dividing opposing traffic .
Ensure that the application surfaces for temporary pavement markings are free of foreign matter which would interfere with adhesion .
Apply temporary pavement markings in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
Place temporary pavement markings to provide delineation by the end of each days operations .
Motorist guidance markers or temporary raised pavement markers may be approved for final lifts of plant mix pavement chip seals seal coats and concrete pavement surfaces .
Temporary Traffic Control Temporary Traffic Control Maintain the temporary pavement markings in their proper location and in a clean undamaged effective condition while in use .
Collect and properly dispose of removed temporary pavement markings and their protective coverings .
When pavement markings are required but can not be applied because of the surface type install channelizing devices for the following .
Temporary Pavement Striping Tape Temporary pavement striping tape may be used in the following circumstances .
If a removable type is used remove it before placing the next lift of plant mix pavement . .
After the permanent striping operations remove temporary pavement striping tape without damaging the pavement surface .
Conflicting Pavement Markings Remove or cover conflicting pavement markings as approved by the engineer for work zone traffic control anticipated to be in place longer than three calendar days .
Remove the markings without damaging the pavement surface or cover the markings with removable nonreflective preformed tape in accordance with the MUTCD and approved by the engineer .
Use temporary striping that consists of paint removable tape temporary motorist guidance markers or raised pavement markers .
Ensure that aggregates for plant mix base pavement wearing course microsurfacing and chip seal do not have adherent films of clay or other matter that could prevent thorough coating with asphalt .
When crushed aggregate is specified for subbases bases or plant mix pavements crush boulders with diameters up to in mm and distribute uniformly throughout the material .
Table .. Gradation Requirements Coarse Aggregate for Concrete For these and for class A concrete used for pavement ensure that at least percent of the material retained on the No. . mm sieve has at least one fractured face . .
Plasticity index NP NP .. Reclaimed Asphalt Pavement Crush and screen reclaimed asphalt pavement RAP greater than in mm so that all material is prepared for recycling and a uniform mixture is maintained .
Ensure that percent of RAP used for recycled plant mix pavement passes through a in mm sieve .
.. Base the skid number on historical skid numbers accumulated for a period of at least five years for a pavement that has carried traffic exceeding accumulated kip equivalent single axle loads . .
Silicone Joint Sealant Provide and use a nonsag or selfleveling onepart silicone that is formulated specifically for sealing sawed joints in portland cement concrete pavement and in accordance with ASTM D except as noted in Table .
For existing pavement thicker than in mm provide and use inch mm diameter bars in mm long .
For existing pavement equal to or less than in mm thick provide and use inch mm diameter bars in mm long .
General. . AntiStripping Additive for Plant Mix Pavement As an antistripping additive to plant mix pavement ensure the use of hydrated lime of which no less than percent passes through a No .
