The Department engineer responsible for statewide guidance on bituminous mixtures and pavements .
The Department engineer responsible for statewide guidance on concrete mixtures and pavements .
The trace of a vertical plane intersecting the top surface of the roadbed or pavement structure usually along the longitudinal centerline of the traveled way .
The graded portion of a highway within top and side slopes prepared as a foundation for the pavement structure and shoulders .
The portion of the roadway contiguous with the traveled way for accommodation of stopped vehicles for emergency use and for lateral support of the pavement structure .
A Department manual that establishes determines and communicates standards and specifications concerning standard dimensions colors and other requirements of the various types of highway signs and pavement messages .
The top surface of a roadbed upon which the pavement structure and shoulders are constructed .
CONSTRUCTION STAKES LINES AND GRADES The Engineer will set construction stakes to establish lines slopes elevations and continuous profile grades for grading base and pavement construction to establish the field control for the Project .
RESTRICTIONS ON MOVEMENT AND STORAGE OF HEAVY LOADS AND EQUIPMENT The Contractor shall haul Materials and move and store equipment in accordance with the Minnesota Highway Traffic Regulation Act and applicable provisions of Minnesota Rules when using public Roads or completed Structures base courses and pavements within the Project that are open to traffic and becoming a part of the permanent improvement .
The Contractor shall comply with legal load restrictions and with special restrictions required by the Contract when hauling or storing Materials and moving or storing equipment on Structures completed Subgrades base courses and pavements within the Project under construction or completed but not yet open to traffic .
When construction operations require crossing an existing pavement Bridges or completed portions of the Pavement Structure with otherwise prohibited equipment or loads the Contractor shall submit methods of load distribution or bridging in writing and obtain the Engineers written approval .
MAINTENANCE DURING CONSTRUCTION At the Contractors own expense and initiative the Contractor must maintain Project Roadway on which it has performed Work when the Contract requires placing Materials on or the use of constructed Subgrade base course pavement or Structure .
This responsibility for maintenance includes not only Roadway where construction is complete but also temporary unfinished Roadway surface used by traffic where the existing pavement has been removed but the final surface has not yet been placed .
Submission of job mix formula for asphalt pavement .
Slope pavement or riprap .
DESCRIPTION This work consists of the maintenance repair and restoration of designated haul roads for materials hauled for the work covered by the contract. . DEFINITIONS The Department defines designated haul road as any public road or street officially designated as a haul road except for a Minnesota trunk highway or road officially designated by the Commissioner as a detour around a construction project over which the following materials are hauled Soil or other material for embankment construction Sand gravel or other material for backfill Sand gravel or crushed rock for base or surfacing courses Aggregates for bituminous surfacing including hauling bituminous mixtures from the mixing plant Aggregates for concrete base or pavement including hauling concrete batches from batch plants and Bituminous materials and portland cement for paving mixtures .
DESCRIPTION This work consists of removing temporary and permanent pavement markings except for removable preformed plastic pavement markings that conflict with revised traffic patterns. . MATERIALS BLANK .
CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS Before making a change in traffic pattern fully remove conflicting pavement markings as required by the contract and as directed by the Engineer minimizing damage to the pavement structure or surface texture .
Remove irregular shaped pavement messages with a rectangular shape per the Plan or of least dimensions as determined by the Engineer .
Remove expended materials or agents used in the pavement marking removal process from the pavement surface as the work progresses .
Removed pavement marking material shall become the property of the Contractor . .
The Engineer will measure removal areas on the basis of nominal widths and actual lengths as originally applied and still visible at the time of pavement marking removal .
The Engineer will measure removal length by the actual length of each in wide pavement marking removed .
The Engineer will measure longitudinal pavement marking removal quantities greater than in wide based on a ratio of actual pavement marking width relative to in .
The Department will include the cost of removing removable preformed pavement marking tape with the relevant contract unit prices in accordance with Removable Preformed Pavement Marking Tape . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT The contract unit price for Pavement Marking Removal includes the cost of obliterating the markings as required by the contract and for restoring the pavement texture as directed by the Engineer .
The Department will pay for pavement marking removal on the basis of the following schedule Item No .
DESCRIPTION This work consists of removing and disposing of pavement sewers culverts guardrails abandoned structures and other obstructions on the rightofway except as specified in Removal of Existing Bridges and Building Removal .
C. Pavements and Sidewalks Saw the existing concrete pavement or sidewalks or bituminous pavement at the locations as shown on the plans and as staked by the Engineer to establish a neat line for extending the new work .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT A Area The Engineer will measure pavements sidewalks surfacing and other uniform thickness items by area without specifying the thickness .
The Engineer will classify pavement removal by kind of paving material when the material is comprised entirely of portland cement concrete remove concrete pavement or entirely of bituminousaggregate mixtures remove bituminous pavement .
If the pavement is comprised of a combination of different paving materials such as a concrete base or pavement overlaid with bituminous surfacing the Engineer will measure the removal of the entire structure as the unclassified item of remove pavement .
Regardless of classification the Engineer will include the removal of integrant curb removed as a part of pavement removal .
The Engineer will separately measure the removal of pavement as part of the excavation of trenches for installation of drainage structures or utility items as the pay item for remove trench pavement .
Remove trench pavement will include the removal of paving courses including unclassified materials .
The Engineer will measure sawing of concrete and bituminous pavements by length along the saw cut lines as staked by the Engineer if included as contract items .
The contract unit prices for sawing only includes sawing of concrete and bituminous pavements using a saw .
The Department will pay for removing pavement and miscellaneous structures on the basis of the following schedule Item No .
Abandon each Specify item name such as culvert pipe sewer pipe drain pipe curb and gutter curb sidewalk fence concrete or masonry structures railway track manholes or catch basins integrant curb concrete pavement bituminous pavement pavement trench pavement guardrail water well etc .
The Department considers the cost of water used for the following as included in the contract unit prices for the relevant contract pay items Water used for sprinkling Water used in the construction of concrete pavements Water used in the production or curing of concrete Water used to maintain plant life Water used in compacting soil and aggregate and Water used for dust control on Contractorselected haul roads detours or work sites outside of the project and .
Minnesota Standard Specifications Water applied for dust control or pavement cleaning caused by the Contractors equipment and operations including abatement of nuisance dust for adjacent landowners and dust conditions detrimental to the safety of the traveling public as directed by the Engineer .
DESCRIPTION A Description All Reclamation A. Definitions A .. a Pulverized unstabilized Material Pulverized material is produced by grinding the bituminous pavement with a portion of the underlying granular material .
B Description Full Depth Reclamation FDR This work consists of pulverizing and blending the inplace bituminous pavement with a portion of the underlying material to produce a uniformly mixed aggregate base .
C Description Stabilized Full Depth Reclamation SFDR Construct a stabilized full depth reclamation SFDR layer by Pulverizing and blending the inplace bituminous pavement structure with a portion of the underlying material mixing it with a specified bituminous material and additional materials if required shaping and compacting .
General FDR Requirements Remove all reclaimed pavement pieces that would be retained on a three inch sieve from the rightofway .
Equipment Requirements B .. a Reclaiming Machine Use a road reclaiming machine capable of uniformly pulverizing the pavement and the underlying layer to the specified depth and gradation .
Uniformly pulverize the pavement and the underlying layer to the specified depth and gradation requirements of Table . .
Thoroughly mix the reclaimed pavement while injecting the liquid bituminous material and automatically metering it with a variation of not more than .
C .. e Motor Grader Use a selfpropelled motor grader with a minimum foot wide blade C. Pulverization Pulverize grind and uniformly blend the inplace bituminous pavement with the underlying granular base to the gradation requirements of Table .
C. MixingInjecting Produce the SFDR layer by mixing and injecting the liquid bituminous material into the pulverized pavement .
Demonstrate that the asphalt stabilizing agent is uniformly blended into the inplace recycle pavement .
Place the asphalt pavement a No sooner than three calendar days and no later than calendar days after SFDR at any location has been injected and compacted note that the day requirement may be extended with concurrence of the Engineer if large rainfall events hinder the curing of the SFDR b When the SFDR surface does not deflect under construction equipment and meets quality compaction per .. F .. c When the SFDR is capable of meeting the required bituminous placement and compaction requirements .
BASIS OF PAYMENT A All Reclamation The contract unit prices for reclamation includes the cost of production testing placement occasional variations in the bituminous pavement thickness removing vegetation and topsoil adjacent to the surface repair to Structures damaged by Contractors operations or negligence and necessary maintenance .
DESCRIPTION This work consists of placing shoulder base aggregate adjacent to pavements. . MATERIALS A Aggregate Use the class of aggregate required by the contract. . CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS A General All forms and the Grading and Base Manual are available on the Grading and Base Website .
Shape the bottom of the proposed shoulder aggregate to the grade and cross section as shown on the plans. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Do not place shoulder aggregate on the existing pavement surface .
Immediately sweep spilled material from the pavement surface .
DESCRIPTION This work consists of reconditioning the existing pavement surface before constructing a bituminous overlay or surfacing courses. . MATERIALS A Bituminous Patching Mixture Provide bituminous patching material matching the type of material used in the first layer of bituminous surfacing placed on the reconditioned surface. . Minnesota Standard Specifications B Mixture for Joints and Cracks Provide a mixture for joints and cracks consisting of a prepared mix of fine aggregate and bituminous material in accordance with the following requirements Table Joint and Cracks Mixture Requirements Material Requirement Aggregate gradation ½ in sieve No .
C Joint and Crack Filler Provide joint and crack filler in accordance with the special provisions. . CONSTRUCTION A Surface Repair Remove loose unstable or deteriorated portions of the existing pavement to provide a stable surface after completion of the patching operation .
If the contract does not specify a specific contract pay item for removing concrete base or pavement in accordance with Removing Pavement and Miscellaneous Structures the Department will pay for the removal of a concrete base or pavement to full depth and width between existing joints or by sawing as extra work in accordance with Contract Revisions .
DESCRIPTION This work consists of removing the existing pavement by cold milling. . Minnesota Standard Specifications .
CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS A Equipment Mill the existing pavement with a power operated selfpropelled cold milling machine capable of removing concrete and bituminous materials to the profile crossslope grade and elevation uniformly across the pavement surface as shown on the plans .
Use a machine with ski matching shoe or an independent grade control to reference the existing pavement and automatically establish profile grades along each edge of the machine within ¼ in .
B Operations Mill the pavement surface to the depth width grade and crossslope as shown on the plans .
Mill the entire pavement width to a flush surface at the end of each work period when the pavement is open to traffic .
Taper transverse cutting faces at the end of each working period where pavement is open to traffic .
Mill previously patched areas to the specified depth below the pavement surface that existed before placement of the previous patch and not from the surface of the patch .
Keep the milled pavement surface free of all loose materials and dust . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT The Engineer will measure pavement milling by the area of each type of surface removed .
BASIS OF PAYMENT The contract unit price for pavement milling includes the cost of traffic safety cleanup and disposal operations .
The Department will pay for mill pavement surface on the basis of the following schedule Item No .
DESCRIPTION This work consists of constructing portland cement concrete pavement on a prepared base .
Integrant curb is a curb constructed monolithically with the pavement .
L. Concrete Mix Design Requirements The Department defines the concrete mix design requirements for concrete pavement in accordance with Table . . Minnesota Standard Specifications .
Determined by multiplying the planned pavement area by the planned pavement thickness .
The Concrete Engineer considers minor work or fillins as gaps in concrete pavement turn lanes intersections or other pavement sections as determined by the Engineer in conjunction with the Concrete Engineer .
yd of concrete calculated by multiplying the planned pavement area by the planned pavement thickness of paving concrete .
Refer to Table to determine if concrete provided by the Primary Concrete Plant is eligible for concrete pavement incentives and disincentives .
If the project is planned for construction over multiple years and before placing any concrete pavement request that the Engineer calculate the incentivedisincentive payment on a yearly basis .
If satisfactory finishing and curing of the pavement does not occur as determined by the Engineer suspend batching and mixing operations .
Each day of concrete pavement production provide the Engineer with a production summary in an electronic format that includes the following Daily total concrete produced in cubic yards for each concrete mixture type .
D Subgrade and Aggregate Base Preparations Prepare the subgrade and aggregate base in accordance with Excavation and Embankment Subgrade Preparation and Aggregate Base and the following Fine grade the aggregate base to the shape and grade shown on the plans allowing construction of the pavement to the thickness and cross section shown on the plans .
Complete base construction of a sufficient width outside the edge of the pavement to support the slipform paver treads without distortion of the alignment or grade line .
Shape and maintain the shoulders to allow surface water to drain away from the pavement and off the shoulders .
For slipform concrete pavement placement place the concrete with a slump value that optimizes placement except ensure the concrete does not slough or slump and is adequately consolidated and meets all other requirements of Concrete Pavement .
Place the concrete pavement before placing curb and gutter .
If the sequence of operations includes placing the curb and gutter before the concrete pavement submit a jointing plan to the Engineer for approval .
Tightly stretch a string line set parallel to the established grade for the pavement surface to achieve the grade reference .
Consolidate the full width and depth of concrete pavement placed by a single pass of a series of internal vibrators .
Do not allow vibrators to come in contact with preset dowel basket assemblies the grade pavement reinforcement or side forms .
yd provide an electronic monitoring device meeting the following characteristics and requirements to display the operating frequency of each individual internal vibrator for concrete pavement placed by the slipform method Contains a readout display near the operators controls visible to the paver operator and to the Engineer Operates continuously as the paving machine operates Displays all the vibrator frequencies with manual and automatic sequencing for each of the individual vibrators and Records the following at least every ft of paving or at least every min of time .
E. Fixed Form Construction E .. a Setting Forms Provide forms meeting the following requirements and characteristics Steel straight edge sides Depth equal to the pavement thickness shown on the plans Smooth and free of localized indentations and deformities Top face with deviations no greater than ⅛ in in any ft section Faces of straight forms with deviations no greater than ¼ in in any ft section Forms containing no damaged joint locks or pin pockets and Form lengths at least ft long with vertical joint .
For pavements with radii no greater than ft use flexible or curved forms approved by the Engineer .
E .. c Removal of Forms Do not remove side forms of pavement and back forms on integrant curb earlier than h after placing the concrete unless otherwise approved by the Engineer .
Remove forms without exerting shock or strain including temperature variations on the pavement or curb .
F Placing Concrete Construct mainline pavement in a single layer of concrete .
Place the concrete pavement in one complete pass of the paving machine to minimize the need for hand finishing .
The Engineer will not allow the edges of the pavement including longitudinal joints to deviate from the line shown on the plans by greater than ½ inch at any point .
If the Contractor adds water to the pavement surface without approval by the Engineer the Engineer will not pay watercement or pavement smoothness incentives on sections where the water is added and the Engineer may reject the pavement in accordance with Unacceptable and Unauthorized Work .
Geotextile must drain into subsurface drains or a drainable pavement layer as shown in the plan .
Place the geotextile interlayer to a grade and tolerance such that the overlying PCC pavement thickness will meet minimum design requirements .
Screed newly placed pavement to the same elevation as the inplace concrete to in or less .
The Engineer will allow sawing through the existing joint when sawing the newly placed concrete and The inplace pavement to prevent damage .
The Engineer will not allow incorporating any concrete accumulated in the grout box of the paver into the pavement .
Provide and place supplemental pavement reinforcement as shown on the plans .
H Dowel Bar Placement Place dowel bars parallel to the substrate surface and parallel to the centerline of the pavement .
Space contraction joints at the intervals shown on the plans except shorten the spacing at the following to provide panel lengths at least ft Adjacent to header joints Reinforced panels Railroad grade crossings and Free ends of pavement .
Type location number and length of anchors are dependent upon field conditions Before the beginning of concrete pavement placement and each day prior to beginning paving demonstrate the fastening method to the Engineer for approval .
The Contractor may use a mechanical dowel bar inserter to place dowel bars in the pavement as approved by the Engineer in conjunction with the Concrete Engineer .
If using a dowel bar inserter initially and on each production day demonstrate to the Engineer that the inserted dowel bars in the completed concrete pavement are parallel to the surface and centerline slab and are located at middepth of the slab thickness .
Action plan if misaligned baskets are identified during concrete pavement placement .
Lot Establishment The Engineer will select random locations for locating dowel bars reinforcement LT steel pavement texture and concrete probing testing .
The Department defines a lot as all concrete pavement of a single lane added together lineally into a lot .
The Department defines a single lane in accordance with the following From the pavement edge to the adjacent longitudinal joint From one longitudinal joint to the next or In the absence of a longitudinal joint between pavement edges Each ramp and loop ft in width Doweled concrete shoulder ft in width .
The Engineer will provide the sublot testing locations to the Contractor prior to pavement placement .
yd provide a MITScanT nondestructive testing device in accordance with this section for concrete pavement placed by the slipform method .
J. MITSCANT NonDestructive Testing Device The Contractor shall furnish a MITSCANT nondestructive testing device or approved equal as determined by the Concrete Engineer having the ability to locate pavement reinforcement dowel bars and measure concrete pavement thickness in a single device .
Agency and Contractor personnel shall mutually use this nondestructive testing device to locate dowel bar and tie steel placement in the plastic concrete during pavement construction .
In addition the Engineer reserves the right to reject the pavement in accordance with Conformity with Plans and Specifications and Unacceptable and Unauthorized Work .
If the concrete pavement is constructed utilizing a slip formpaving machine locate the entire span of the dowel bar and machine placed tie bar LT steel in the plastic concrete utilizing a walk bridge that spans the width of the pavement and the following .
The Engineer will consider concrete pavement that fails to comply with the alignment tolerances as Unacceptable Work in accordance with Unacceptable and Unauthorized Work .
The Engineer in conjunction with the Concrete Engineer will evaluate the defective concrete pavement in accordance with .. Q Workmanship and Quality .
K Surface Finishing Use a ⅜ in radius edging tool to finish edges of the pavement .
If satisfactory finishing of the pavement does not occur as determined by the Engineer suspend batching and mixing operations .
After consolidating screeding and floating the concrete give the pavement surface a final finish texture in accordance with .. K. Pavement Texture .
Maintain continual contact between the drag and the pavement surface at all times during texturing .
Apply down pressure on the pavement surface as necessary to achieve uniform texturing .
The Contractor may use manual methods including brooms to achieve similar results on the edges of the pavements and ramps and other locations as approved by the Engineer .
For concrete pavements with a posted vehicle speed less than or equal to mph use either a carpet drag or broom drag longitudinally to achieve a uniform final finish textured surface .
Offset the texture test at a point located transversely in the outside wheel path. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Perform surface texture testing of the concrete pavement and provide the test results to the Engineer no later than h after pavement placement unless otherwise approved by the Engineer .
If the Contractor fails to correct the operation the Engineer will suspend the paving operation until corrections produce the required results. . mm Perform concrete grinding of the pavement represented by this test to attain the minimum texture of .
L Pavement Thickness Requirements Provide pavement with a finished pavement thickness as shown on the plans or as modified in writing by the Engineer .
L. Thickness Evaluation Procedure The Engineer will evaluate each differing concrete pavement thickness required on the project .
The Engineer will evaluate the concrete pavement through random probing and core measurements in accordance with the following Contractor Quality Control Probe QCP Probe Verification Core PVC and Quality Acceptance Core QAC .
Adjust the location to ensure the Contractor takes no measurements within ft of the pavement edge and takes no measurements within ft of any transverse or longitudinal joint or other obstructions .
L. Contractor Quality Control Probing QCP Measure the pavement thickness of freshly finished concrete pavement at a rate of at least one probe measurement per sublot .
Length capable of completely penetrating the pavement for measuring .
Tape measure accurate to nearest ⅛ in and with a length capable of measuring the depth of penetration of the probing device into the plastic concrete pavement .
Keeping the probing rod perpendicular to the pavement surface insert the rod into the plastic concrete until the rod strikes the base plate .
Slide the top plate down the probing rod until it contacts the pavement surface then lock to the probing rod .
L .. b Individual Deficient Probe If an individual probe measurement shows a thickness deficiency greater than ½ in from plan thickness take a core QCPCore at the probe location to determine if the pavement is defective .
L. Quality Acceptance Testing Coring After concrete pavement placement the Engineer will mark the core locations identified on the Field Coring Report generated from the MnDOT Probing Coring Texture MITSCANT Workbook .
The Engineer will not require the storage of cores in a curing condition for concrete older than days The Engineer will transport the cores in a curing condition unless older than days to the MnDOT Office of Materials and Road Research and L .. d Final Pavement Thickness Core Measurement The MnDOT Office of Materials and Road Research will determine the final pavement thickness by measuring the length of the PVC and QAC cores in accordance with the following Use nine probe testing device to obtain the average length of the core in one operation .
Take exploratory cores in accordance with the following procedure At any location within ft on each side of the deficient thickness location and at the same distance from the pavement centerline .
If any cores do not fall within the plan thickness minus ½ in take additional exploratory cores at ft intervals and at the same distance from the pavement centerline as directed by the Engineer .
The Engineer will use exploratory cores to determine the extent of deficient pavement thickness for adjusting the contract unit price or requiring pavement removal and replacement .
L. Nonconforming Thickness The Department defines the defective pavement area as the entire area surrounding the deficient core within the entire width of the traffic lane and between acceptable cores .
The Department considers the pavement acceptable to remain in place in the remaining areas as the increment where the cores show a thickness deficiency no greater than plan thickness minus ½ in .
L .. a Defective Pavement Area between ½ in and in For cores showing a pavement thickness greater than the plan thickness minus ½ in to in the Contractor may choose one of the following Remove and replace the defective pavement area at no additional cost to the Department or Leave the pavement in place with a monetary deduction of .
yd for the defective pavement area as approved by the Engineer .
L .. b Defective Pavement Area in For cores showing a pavement thickness greater than in below the plan thickness the Engineer in conjunction with the Concrete Engineer will determine whether the Contractor will do one of the following Remove and replace the defective pavement area at no additional cost to the Department or Leave the pavement in place at no cost to the Department and apply a monetary deduction of .
yd for the defective pavement area in accordance with Conformity with Contract Documents .
Minnesota Standard Specifications If exploratory cores are taken to identify the defective pavement area substitute the two outside exploratory cores that are within plan thickness minus ½ in for the deficient PVC or QAC .
in the Engineer will pay for the pavement by the plan thickness at the contract unit price less the monetary deductions in Table excluding areas of defective pavement as indicated above .
Do not allow the sprayer to ride on the pavement surface .
For applying the curing compound on pavements that are ft wide or less and irregular shaped surfaces the Engineer will allow an airless spraying machine that complies with the following .
Immediately after completing the joint sawing use water under nozzle pressure to remove the sawing residue from each joint and the pavement surface .
Extend transverse joints constructed in the pavement through the integrant curb .
Perform joint sealing as shown on the plans and in accordance with the following Seal joints after the Engineer inspects and approves the joints Perform joint sealing on surface dry concrete after cleaning the joints of debris dirt dust and other foreign matter including accumulations of concrete Lightly sandblast the joint walls before final compressed air cleaning Immediately before sealing the joints clean the joints with a jet of compressed air under pressure of at least psi Seal transverse integrant curb joints and shoulders with the same joint sealer used to seal the pavement joints Seal joints in accordance with the tolerances shown on the plans Provide backer rod material compatible with the sealer as shown on the plans and Remove and replace sealer at joints filled above the permissible level shown on the plans at no additional cost to the Department .
Apply sealant to the pavement at ambient pavement temperatures greater than F. N .. b Silicone Sealers Install silicone sealers as recommended by the manufacturer .
O Opening Pavement to Traffic Do not open a new pavement slab to general public traffic or operate paving or other heavy equipment on it for days or until the concrete has reached a minimum flexural strength meeting the requirements of Table or minimum compressive strength of psi whichever occurs first. . Minnesota Standard Specifications If the pavement joints are widened seal the joints before operating paving or other heavy equipment and general public traffic on the pavement .
Cure the field control specimens in the same manner and under the same conditions as the pavement represented .
Perform operations on new pavement as approved by the Engineer and in accordance with the following When moving on and off the pavement construct a ramp to prevent damage to the pavement slab .
Protect the concrete pavement surface and joints from damage due to heavy loads or equipment in accordance with Restrictions on Movement and Storage of Heavy Loads and Equipment .
Sweep the pavement surface free of debris prior to placing the protective material or tracked paving equipment onto the slab .
When hauling aggregate and other materials across newly constructed joints keep the pavement surface free of debris by sweeping or other method as approved by the Engineer to prevent spalling of the pavement joints .
Early Opening of Pavement to Traffic For early use of the pavement as required by the Engineer construct a section of pavement of highearly strength concrete in accordance with .. L Concrete Mix Design Requirements at important road crossings intersections driveway entrances or other locations as shown on the plans or directed by the Engineer .
Take precautions to satisfactorily finish cure and protect highearly strength concrete pavements .
P Pavement Smoothness IRI International Roughness Index Provide concrete pavement smoothness in accordance with Pavement Surface Smoothness .
For any pavement sections not subjected to Pavement Surface Smoothness the Engineer will use a ft straightedge to evaluate the hardened concrete pavement in accordance with .. Q Workmanship and Quality .
Defective Pavement The Engineer will pay for concrete pavement meeting the requirements and tolerances in accordance with this section at the contract unit price .
The Engineer may reject or adjust the payment for defective concrete pavement in accordance with Conformity with Contract Documents and Unacceptable and Unauthorized Work .
The Engineer will determine the limits of each individual defective pavement area .
The Engineer will determine the condition of each individual defective area of pavement based on the calculation of greatest deficiency within the area .
Random or Uncontrolled Cracking Repair or replace pavement with random or uncontrolled cracks as directed by the Engineer .
If repairing the pavement as directed by the Engineer use a dowel bar load transfer technique in accordance with the MnDOT Concrete Pavement Rehabilitation Details .
Perform pavement repairs at no additional cost to the Department .
If the repair fails replace the pavement at no additional cost to the Department .
Q. Pavement Smoothness after Corrective Work In any location where the Contractor must remove and replace concrete full depth pavement due to Workmanship the Engineer will require reprofiling in accordance with Pavement Surface Smoothness . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT A Concrete Pavement If the contract includes the contract item Concrete Pavement or Concrete Pavement High Early the Engineer will measure in accordance with the following Measure the concrete pavement placed to a uniform crosssection thickness by the surface area of the pavement as constructed including integrant curb Include measurements for concrete pavement without regard to grade strength or type of concrete width or thickness of the pavement in a single measurement except if the plans include a contract item for highearly strength concrete and Apply incentive or disincentive for Concrete Pavement based on the theoretical volume of concrete used by multiplying the measured square yard of concrete by the thickness shown on the plans .
B Place Concrete Pavement If the contract includes the contract item Place Concrete Pavement the Engineer will measure concrete pavement placed by area based on specified dimensions including integrant curb .
This measurement will represent the surface area of the pavement as constructed .
Include the volume of all specified concrete pavements into a single item without regard to grade strength width or thickness of the concrete pavement except if the plans include a contract item for highearly strength concrete .
C Supplemental Pavement Reinforcement The Engineer will measure supplemental pavement reinforcement over culverts storm sewers and water mains by weight .
BASIS OF PAYMENT A Concrete Pavement Unless the plans include a separate contract item the Engineer will consider the contract square yard price for Concrete Pavement to include the cost of constructing the pavement including the cost of batch materials and mixing operations plantlab office producing the concrete fine grading forming including all headers providing and installing keyway and keyway bars tie bars taper steel stopper bars and other reinforcement bars delivering depositing placing spreading screeding vibration monitoring finishing curing protecting sawing and sealing the concrete .
The contract square yard price for Concrete Pavement HighEarly includes the cost of constructing the pavement including the cost of batch materials and mixing operations plantlab office producing the concrete fine grading forming including all headers providing and installing keyway bars tie bars taper steel stopper bars and other reinforcement bars delivering depositing placing spreading screeding vibration monitoring finishing curing protecting sawing and sealing the concrete .
B Place Concrete Pavement Unless the plans include a separate contract item the Engineer will consider the contract square yard price for Place Concrete Pavement to includes the cost of constructing the pavement including fine grading forming including all headers providing and installing keyway and keyway bars tie bars taper steel stopper bars and other reinforcement bars placing spreading screeding vibration monitoring finishing curing protecting sawing and sealing the concrete .
The relevant contract unit price for Concrete Pavement or Place Concrete Pavement includes the cost of coring including the cost of material labor equipment delivery core hole filling and traffic control. . Minnesota Standard Specifications The Department will pay for concrete pavement on the basis of the following schedule Item No .
DESCRIPTION This work is the construction of an ultrathin bonded wearing course on a prepared pavement .
If the request meets the requirements in Table UTBWC Aggregate Gradation Broadband and Table UTBWC Mixture Requirements a revised Mixture Design Report will be issued. . CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS A Weather Restrictions The pavement surface temperature and ambient air temperature shall be at least F. A damp pavement surface is acceptable if it is free of standing water and favorable weather conditions are expected .
Clean the pavement surface .
The screed shall have the ability to crown the pavement at the center both positively and negatively and have vertically adjustable extensions to accommodate the desired pavement profile .
Use a metered mechanical pressure spray bar at a temperature of F. Accurately and continuously monitor the rate of spray and provide a uniform application across the entire pavement width .
Make adjustments based upon the existing pavement surface conditions and recommendations of the polymer modified emulsion membrane supplier .
Open the new pavement to traffic after the rolling operation is complete and the material has cooled below F. . Minnesota Standard Specifications E Thickness The minimum finished wearing course thickness is in with a maximum ½ inch vertical edge at the adjacent shoulder pavement edge .
with the following For Ultra Thin Bonded Wearing Course projects ALR will be collected only on asphalt pavement laid during this project before the UTBWC .
No smoothness will be paid for on that asphalt pavement .
with the following Evaluate smoothness requirements after the UTBWC is laid using equations and criteria in accordance with the following tables Table for bituminous pavements Table for percent improvement projects .
Replace the second and third paragraphs in section .E with the following Perform corrective work for ALR on the asphalt pavement before placing the UTBWC .
Remove and replace at no expense to Department The Department will reduce payment if the mat thickness is less than inch or greater than inch or the pavement edge is greater than ½ inch .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT Measure the Ultrathin Bonded Wearing Course by area of pavement surfaced . .
DESCRIPTION This work consists of constructing microsurfacing on a prepared pavement. . MATERIALS Microsurfacing is a mixture of polymer modified asphalt emulsion wellgraded crushed mineral aggregate mineral filler water and other additives .
Rut fill pavement segments longer than ft if the average rut depth is greater than ½ in .
Limit the daily application of fog seal to the pavement area receiving micro surfacing that day .
Surface Quality Except for areas within in of the edge line lane line or center line ensure the transverse cross section of the restored pavement surface is no greater than ⅜ in if measured using a ft straight edge or in if measured with a ft straight edge .
Weather and Time Limitations Begin construction when the air and pavement surface temperatures are at least F and rising .
Begin fog seal operations when the pavement and air temperatures are F and rising .
B Road Surface Preparation Clean pavements including depressions before fog sealing .
Base the mix design on the traffic volume and pavement conditions .
A Weather Time and Date Limitations A. Bituminous Seal Coat Apply the bituminous seal coat in accordance with the following From May to August if located in the North or NorthCentral Road Spring Restriction Zone Zones are defined on the MnDOT Pavement Design Website From May to August if located south of the North and NorthCentral Spring Road Restriction Zone Work only during daylight hours Begin work when the pavement and air temperatures are º F and rising .
C Road Surface Preparation Clean pavements including depressions before seal coating .
Cover iron fixtures in or near the pavement to prevent adherence of the bituminous material .
D Application of Bituminous Material D. PreTreat Longitudinal Pavement Markings Apply bituminous material one foot wide over all longitudinal pavement markings .
Apply bituminous material for seal coat immediately after pretreating pavement markings. . Minnesota Standard Specifications D. Application of Bituminous Material for Seal Coat Begin the rate of application for the bituminous material as determined by the mix design .
I Protection of Motor Vehicles The Contractor is responsible for claims of damage to vehicles until the roadways and shoulders have been swept free of loose aggregate and permanent pavement markings have been applied .
If the Department applies the permanent pavement markings the Contractors responsibility ends after completion of the fog seal and placement of temporary pavement markings .
Apply fog seal to seal coated areas after sweeping and before placement of permanent pavement markings .
Place interim pavement markings after the fog seal cures and before removal of traffic control .
Do not place permanent pavement markings using latex paint before three days after placing the fog seal .
Place all other types of permanent pavement markings at least days after placement of the fog seal .
The Engineer will measure the bituminous material for seal coat by volume at º F. The Engineer will measure the seal coat by area of pavement surfaced . .
DESCRIPTION This work consists of applying bituminous material emulsion or cutback asphalt on a bituminous or concrete pavement prior to paving a new lift of Plant Mixed Asphalt. . MATERIALS A Bituminous Material The bituminous material for tack coat will be limited to one of the following kinds of emulsified asphalt .
D Application of Bituminous Tack Coat Material Unless otherwise indicated in the Plans or provisions apply the bituminous tack coat material within the application rates shown below in Table Tack Coat Application Rates as based on pavement type or condition and type of bituminous material .
DESCRIPTION This work consists of treating a prepared base with bituminous material prior to placing a bituminous pavement. . MATERIALS A Medium Curing Liquid Asphalt Provide Medium Curing Liquid Asphalt in accordance with .. B Medium Curing Liquid Asphalt for MC or MC. . CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS A Restrictions A .
DESCRIPTION This work consists of constructing plant mixed asphalt pavement on a prepared surface .
Plant mixed asphalt pavement designed according to a gyratory mix design method for use as a pavement surface .
lb Recycled asphalt pavement RAP lb Recycled asphalt shingles RAS lb sample of representative RAS material E .. a Mixture Sample At least working days before the start of asphalt production submit the proposed Job Mix Formula JMF in writing and signed by a Level II Quality Management mix designer for each combination of aggregates to be used in the mixture .
Provide and maintain a QC program for plant mix asphalt production including mix design process control inspection sampling and testing and adjustments in the process related to the production of an asphalt pavement .
Do not place asphalt pavement final wearing course lift after October north of an eastwest line between Browns Valley and Holyoke or after November south of an eastwest line between Browns Valley and Holyoke .
C. Longitudinal Joint Construct the longitudinal joint between strips and parallel to the pavement centerline .
The Contractor will align longitudinal joints in multiple lift construction over portland cement concrete pavements directly over the concrete pavement longitudinal joints as approved by the Engineer .
When constructing a strip adjoining a previously placed strip or a concrete pavement remove to the longitudinal joint line any fresh mixture that overlaps a previously placed strip or pavement before rolling .
Do not allow rollers to stand on the uncompacted mixture or newly rolled pavement with a surface temperature greater than F. Do not roll with steelwheeled rollers if rolling produces aggregate that is crushed cracked or pulverized or causes displacement of the mixture .
When spreading mixtures with a motor grader compact the mixture with pneumatic tired rollers simultaneously with the spreading operation. . Minnesota Standard Specifications D. Maximum Density Compact the pavement to at least the minimum required maximum density values in accordance with Table Required Minimum Lot Density Mat and Table Longitudinal Joint Density Requirement .
Table Required Minimum Lot Density Mat Design Voids Design Voids One Percent Reduced Density Design Voids Design Voids Gmm Reduce density required on the first lift constructed over PCC pavements .
The Department defines confined as the edges of the placed mat abutting another mat pavement surface or curb and gutter .
The Department defines unconfined or unsupported as no abutment on the side of the mat being placed with another mat or pavement surface .
One percent reduced density is required for the first lift constructed over PCC pavements .
The Department will calculate the area of unacceptable pavement as the product of the longitudinal limits as determined by the ft cores and the full width of the paver pass laying in the traffic lane or lanes .
Establish an additional density lot for the pavement that has been removed and replaced .
Reduce the minimum by percent on the first lift constructed on PCC pavements reduced density can not be waived on PCC .
The Department will calculate the area of unacceptable pavement as the product of the longitudinal limits as determined by the ft cores and the full width of the paver pass laying in the traffic lane or lanes .
Establish an additional density lot for the pavement that has been removed and replaced .
Provide a new control strip in accordance with the following If using a new JMF with a proportion change greater than percent when compared to the currently produced mixture for a single stockpile aggregate If changing the source of either aggregate or binder or After days of production. . Minnesota Standard Specifications D .. b Equipment Use rollers that meet the requirements in .. B .. e. Use the same equipment type and weight on the remainder of the pavement course that was used to construct the control strip .
Correction by diamond grinding required unless the Engineer and the Contractor agree to a deduct of .. ¼ in ft. pavement section excluded from IRI and ALR testing in Table .
See Description Final wear adjacent to concrete pavements .
After compaction the final lift wear adjacent to concrete pavements must be slightly higher but not to exceed inch than the concrete surface .
After compaction the final lift wear adjacent to gutters manholes pavement headers or other fixed structures must be slightly higher but not to exceed inch than the surface of the structure .
When is required in Special Provisions but no pavement smoothness equation is specified evaluate using equation HMAB .
The Department will pay for plant mixed asphalt pavement on the basis of the following schedule .
PASB is typically constructed on a prepared base under a new concrete or bituminous surface to quickly drain surface infiltrated water accumulating under the pavement. . MATERIALS A Aggregate .
The contractor is responsible to maintain the integrity of the PASSRC or PASB until the concrete or bituminous pavement is placed on it .
PASSRC and PASB need to be dense and stable after construction so it will not rut when the overlying pavement is placed. . Damage .
Provide and maintain a QC program for stone matrix asphalt pavement production including mix design process control inspection sampling and testing and adjustments in the process related to the production of the stone matrix asphalt pavement .
Do not allow rollers to stand on the uncompacted mixture or newly rolled pavement with a surface temperature greater than F. To maintain a true surface correct the following by removing and replacing the material in the defective areas as directed by the Engineer at no additional cost to the Department Variations such as depressions or high areas which may develop during rolling operations and Lean fat or segregated areas .
E. Maximum Density Compact the pavement to at least the minimum required maximum density values in accordance with Table Required Minimum SMA Lot Density .
¼ in ft. pavement section excluded from IRI and ALR testing in Table .
See Description Final wear adjacent to concrete pavements .
After compaction the final lift wear adjacent to concrete pavements must be slightly higher but not to exceed than the concrete surface .
After compaction the final lift wear adjacent to gutters manholes pavement headers or other fixed structures must be slightly higher but not to exceed than the surface of the structure .
When is required in Special Provisions but no pavement smoothness equation is specified evaluate using equation HMAB. . Minnesota Standard Specifications F. Lift Thickness After compaction the thickness of the SMA will be within a tolerance of ¼ in of the thickness shown on the plans .
Mill the existing pavement to the plan depth and width .
gallons per square yard immediately prior to placing the asphalt pavement. . Minnesota Standard Specifications If required of the Contract place the next layer of material HMA seal coat etc. . No sooner than three calendar days and no later than calendar days after the CIRCCPR at any location has been injected and compacted note that the day requirement may be extended with concurrence of the Engineer if large rainfall events hinder the curing of the CIR .
Extra Work. . Minnesota Standard Specifications The contract unit price for the CIRCCPR includes the cost of milling production testing placement occasional variations in bituminous pavement thickness compacting removing vegetation and topsoil adjacent to the surface water and required and necessary maintenance including cleaning the surface .
D. Upon Completion of Pavement Placement Within calendar days of the placement of all mainline pavement and before beginning corrective work submit a paper ProVAL summary report for each lane indicating the results of the Smoothness Assurance analyses .
The worksheet should match the type of construction and the letting year of the project. . CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS Using an IP measure the final pavement surface for MRI unless otherwise excluded in Table .
Reprofile any pavement profiled in the absence of the Engineer as directed by the Engineer at no additional cost to the Department .
A Pavement Surface Testing Remove objects and foreign material from the pavement surface before performing the pavement surface evaluation .
Provide traffic control required for testing and performing corrective work on the final pavement surface .
Table Areas Excluded from Smoothness Evaluation For All Pavements Paving in areas with a posted vehicle speed less than or equal to mph Ramps and loops Acceleration and deceleration lanes less than or equal to ft in length Projects less than ft in length For Bituminous Pavements Single lift overlays placed directly on concrete For Concrete Pavements Intersections constructed under traffic begin and end exclusion ft from the intersection radius Doweled shoulders greater than or equal to ft in width Table Areas Excluded from Smoothness and ALR Evaluation For All Pavements Paving in areas with a posted vehicle speed less than or equal to mph Paving in areas with a cautionary vehicle speed less than or equal to mph Turn lanes crossovers ft on either side of obstructions in lane that obstruction is located Side streets side connections ft before stop signs at an intersection ft before yield signs at a roundabout Bridge decks and approach panels ft from bridge decks and approach panels ft from terminal headers tying into existing pavement For Bituminous Pavements Paved shoulders Intersections where mainline profiles are merged or blended into the cross street profile begin and end exclusion ft from the intersection radius For Concrete Pavements Doweled shoulders less than ft in width Undoweled shoulders Headers adjacent to colored concrete C Calculations C. Smoothness Obtain Smoothness values in an individual lane using the ProVAL Smoothness Assurance analysis with the mm filter .
Minnesota Standard Specifications D. Smoothness Evaluate Smoothness requirements using the equations and criteria in accordance with the following tables Table for bituminous pavements Table for concrete pavements and Table for percent improvement projects .
The Engineer will base pay adjustments on the segment Smoothness value or percent improvement value for percent improvement projects measured at the completion of surface pavement unless corrective work is required by the ProVAL summary report results .
D .. a Bituminous Pavements Table contains pay adjustments for bituminous pavements .
D .. b Concrete Pavements For concrete pavements the Engineer will use equation PCCA. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Table Smoothness Pay Adjustments and Corrective Work for Concrete Pavements Equation Smoothness inmi Pay Adjustment .
inmi If the Contractor adds water to the pavement surface without approval by the Engineer the Engineer will not pay any positive Pay Adjustments for .
mile segments where the water was added and the Engineer may reject the pavement in accordance with Unacceptable and Unauthorized Work .
Repair and replace joint sealant damaged by diamond grinding on concrete pavement as directed by the Engineer and at no additional cost to the Department .
The Contractor may correct bituminous pavements by overlaying the area or replacing the area by milling and inlaying as approved by the Engineer .
Maintain the pavement cross slope through corrective areas .
Perform coring to determine if diamond grinding corrective work results in thin pavements as directed by the Engineer .
The Department may reduce the payment for thin pavement sections after diamond grinding .
Perform surface corrections before placing permanent pavement markings .
Replace permanent pavement markings damaged or destroyed by corrective work at no additional cost to the Department. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Reprofile segments containing corrected areas with the same certified IP in accordance with .. A Inertial Profiler within calendar days of the completion of corrective work required by the Engineer .
After consolidating screeding and floating the concrete draw a carpet drag longitudinally along the pavement before the concrete attains its initial set .
Perform operations on new bridge approach panels as approved by the Engineer and in accordance with the following When moving on and off the bridge approach panel construct a ramp to prevent damage to the pavement slab .
If the contract does not contain this contract item the Engineer will measure their construction under the relevant contract items provided for pavement construction .
If removing part of an existing concrete pavement remove the pavement to an existing joint or cut the pavement on a straight line at right angles to the centerline of the road .
If cutting use a saw to cut the top surface at least inch deep without damaging the pavement remaining in place .
During excavation prevent undermining or disturbing the foundation material under pavement remaining in place .
DESCRIPTION This work consists of producing providing placing curing and protecting castinplace portland cement concrete for placement in structures pavements and incidental construction. . MATERIALS A Cementitious Materials Provide cementitious materials from certified sources listed on the ApprovedQualified Products list .
Determine the strength development criteria based on the type of concrete in accordance with the following For concrete pavement .. O Opening Pavement to Traffic For concrete pavement repairs .. B .
G .. b Estimating InPlace Strength Using Maturity Place concrete maturity meters or temperature sensors within the concrete in accordance with Table . . Minnesota Standard Specifications Table Maturity Meter or Temperature Sensor Placement and Frequency Maturity Application Placement Frequency Concrete Paving Embed at approximately middepth and approximately but no less than inches from the edge of the pavement .
Full Depth Concrete Pavement Repairs Embed at approximately middepth and approximately but no less than inches from the edge of the pavement .
Sidewalk Driveway Entrances Curb and Gutter Embed at approximately middepth and approximately but no less than inches from the edge of the pavement .
DESCRIPTION This work consists of producing providing placing curing and protecting precast portland cement concrete in structures pavements and incidental construction .
When specified precast bridge deck precast pavement panels and any other special precast product requirements are included in the Special Provisions of the Contract .
DESCRIPTION This work consists of constructing subsurface drains and installing plantfabricated pipe and appurtenant materials to perform the following Collect and discharge water infiltrating the pavement system pavement edge drain Collect and discharge water accumulated in the bottom of a granularbackfilled subcut cut off or intercept ground water flowing toward the roadway subcut drain and Collect and discharge water coming from a permeable aggregate base system permeable aggregate base drain .
Place the tape at the outside edge of the bituminous shoulder at right angles to the roadway and roll the tape into the shoulder while the bituminous pavement surface temperature is from F to F. If two runs of drain pipe come together at a low point and discharge via a Y to a single outlet place two markings sidebyside with a in spacing .
Minnesota Standard Specifications bituminous pavement or spray a white paint strip on concrete pavements .
Place pipes in grades following pavement grades at the design depth shown on the plans .
The Contractor may trench drains constructed in conjunction with stabilized PASB immediately adjacent to the placed pavement .
Place drains constructed in conjunction with unstabilized OGAB or DSB in away from the pavement edge to minimize undercutting .
Place drains constructed in conjunction with PCC pavement after pavement placement .
Place drains constructed in conjunction with bituminous pavement after placement of the wearnonwear courses and before placement of the final wearing course to avoid damage to the finished pavement .
Sweep trenching spoils off the bituminous pavement before placing the wearing course as approved by the Engineer .
On the pavement side of the trench terminate the geotextile within the aggregate base located below the permeable aggregate base .
On the side of the trench farthest from the pavement the Contractor may terminate the geotextile within or above the aggregate base but not below it .
In addition to the required trench compaction make at least one pass of the roller as directed by the Engineer over the trench before placing the overlying pavement structure as shown on the plans .
Use pavement edge drains to collect and discharge water infiltrating into the pavement system from rain or snow melt and springthaw seepage .
Fine Filter Aggregate. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Place drains adjacent to new pavements after constructing the pavement to prevent damage to the drain or discharge pipe .
If pipe grades do not follow pavement grades at a constant depth provide and use laser grade control equipment to place pipe .
Install the edge drains before pavement cracking when cracking inplace PCC pavement before overlay .
If placing drains in conjunction with pavement widening place the drains before excavating the wideningtrench .
Use an approved device on the trenching machine to ensure that the pipe is located at the design distance from the edge of the inplace pavement .
After compaction ensure the filter aggregate in the drain extends at least in above the bottom of the pavement widening trench .
For drains placed next to a PCC pavement run the trenching head tight against the pavement to completely excavate all adjacent soil .
If placing the drain next to a new bituminous pavement construct the drain after placing the pavement base and leveling courses but before placing the wearing course to avoid damage to the finished pavement .
For new and retrofit construction ensure the trenching head continuously intercepts and cutsoff the rollover portion of at least the lower bituminous pavement course .
Clean spoils from the pavement before placing the wearing course for new pavements or the first bituminous lift for overlays as approved by the Engineer .
For bituminous shoulders remaining in place after drain placement use a coulter saw milling mandrel or other method by the Engineer on the bituminous shoulder to leave a smooth edge and to prevent disturbance to the bituminous pavement .
For new construction place the aggregate base before trenching except for bituminous pavements place the aggregate base to the height of the adjacent layer at the time of trenching .
After compaction and leveling extend the filter aggregate up onto the adjacent pavement as shown on the plans .
Do not deposit or mix aggregates or other soils on the adjoining concrete or bituminous pavement .
Remove material spilled on the pavement surface by sweeping .
Allow the drain to remain open and operational after installation to prevent water from collecting in the pipe. . Minnesota Standard Specifications H Interceptor Drains Install narrow aggregatefilled Interceptor Drains as described herein and as shown in the plan at the end of each pavement joint and at midpanel cracks or at other major cracks as designated by the Engineer .
H. Materials Requirements A Provide Medium Filter Aggregate meeting .. J .. H. Installation Requirements Cut trenches for the interceptor drains to inches in width centered on the joint or crack cut normal to the pavement edge and installed prior to placing a stress relief layer or any other overlaying work .
Cut trenches inches deeper than the adjacent pavement and running the fulldepth from the in place pavement edge to at least inches beyond the edge of the unbonded concrete overlay .
Clean all soil or debris from the exposed pavement crack or joint prior to backfilling the trench .
I Blank J Construction in Conjunction with Pavement Construction If constructing reconstructing or adjusting manholes and catch basins in connection with the construction of a concrete pavement or base use the telescoping type of ring unless otherwise shown on the plans .
If using the telescoping type of ring set the frame or ring casting to the proper elevation before placing the pavement .
The contract unit price for reconstructing drainage structures includes the costs of removing and replacing all or a portion of the structure as shown on the plans adjacent pavement aggregate base and excavation if except for the structure construction the surface would not otherwise have been disturbed .
The Department will include the cost of removing and replacing pavement outside of these limits or for replacing any other type of surfacing with other applicable pay items .
Place consolidate strikeoff and hand float the concrete to provide a dense pavement relatively free of voids and cavities and to produce a uniform surface appearance .
DESCRIPTION This work consists of constructing castinplace concrete curbs curb and gutter solid medians driveway pavement and other similar traffic delineation or service items. . MATERIALS A Concrete For each method of placement use the following mix designations A. Manual Placement Mix No .
Provide contraction joints at the following intervals except as otherwise shown on the plans Adjacent to bituminous mainline every ft maximum Adjacent to concrete mainline match the adjacent concrete pavement joints and In solid median construction where the width is at least feet wide install joints not to exceed a maximum of square feet .
Use an edging tool with a radius no greater than ½ in to round edges of longitudinal construction joints between a concrete median or gutter section and a concrete pavement .
Do not saw or seal longitudinal construction joints between a concrete median and concrete pavement or between a gutter section and concrete pavement unless specified otherwise in the plans .
The Engineer will separately measure driveway pavement of each specified thickness . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT Payment for concrete curb and gutter concrete curb concrete medians and concrete driveway pavement at the contract price per unit of measure is full compensation for all cost of providing concrete curb and gutter concrete curb concrete medians and concrete driveway pavement to the specified lines grade and minimum thickness specified in the Plans including but not limited to Forming joint filler material furnishing and placing concrete concrete compaction by vibration concrete curing and protecting the completed work from damage .
The Engineer will take both measurements at the interface of the barrier and adjacent pavement .
DESCRIPTION This work consists of constructing a curb using bituminous material. . MATERIALS Use the same type of bituminous mixture for the curb as the type specified for the pavement wearing course in accordance with Plant Mixed Asphalt Pavement. . CONSTRUCTION A Tack Apply a tack coat as specified in Bituminous Tack Coat on the pavement wearing course beneath the curb .
The Contract unit price for Conduit Systems includes the cost of conduit trenching jacking augering conduit sleeves couplings weatherheads elbows bushings sealing around the conduit where it enters a pull box sealing conduit ends in concrete foundations and in pull boxes grounding and bonding of conduit backfilling and restoring sod sidewalks pavements and other miscellaneous items required for a complete installation of the conduit .
For bridgemounted Type OH signs with sign lighting install the overhead sign identification plate ft above the edge of the pavement on the lighting system identification plate delineator post as specified in this section .
Install the plate so the bottom is ft above the edge of pavement .
Construct or replace concrete pavement or base removed for trenching or construction operations with Mix No .
Locate trenching at the distance from the edge of the pavement back of curbing or edge of surfaced shoulders as specified in the Contract or directed by the Engineer .
Ensure the trenching operation does not cause damage to the pavement curbing or surfaced shoulders .
If trenching and excavation operations require the removal of concrete pavement or concrete sidewalk cut the concrete with a concrete saw to a depth of at least percent of the thickness of the concrete along the removal lines before breaking and removing or remove the concrete to existing joints .
Restore the following to the original condition as specified in the Contract to the Engineers satisfaction and at no additional cost to the Department Roadway surfacing including concrete pavement bituminous surface or gravel surface Sidewalk Curb and gutter Sod and Railway .
Only place conduit under existing pavement or sidewalk by directional boring .
Except under existing pavements when placing High Density Polyethylene HDPE continuous length conduit use trenching vibratory plow or directional boring installation methods .
Place Department furnished locator balls at open ends of conduit under roadways or slope pavement that do not terminate in handholes pads or foundations .
Provide vertical clearance from the bottom of the signal heads including the backplates to the pavement from ft to ft. L. Signal and Pedestrian Indication Labeling Label the indications with the installation date as follows Place a date of installation on the back of the indication .
Install crosswalk block markings in accordance with and as follows Groove the block markings into the pavement surface to protect the marking from snow and ice removal operations and Mobile retroreflectometer measurements MRM are not required for crosswalk block markings .
BB Restoration and Cleanup Replace or repair sidewalks curbs gutters pavements base materials sod or plants damaged or removed during the Contractors operations as approved by the Engineer .
DESCRIPTION This work consists of placing interim pavement markings on those pavements prior to opening them to traffic where the inplace surface is to be covered by a subsequent paving course or the permanent lane markings are to be placed at a future date. . MATERIALS A Removable Preformed Plastic Pavement Marking inch wide Tape in accordance with MnDOT . . Minnesota Standard Specifications B MultiComponent Liquid Pavement Markings in accordance with MnDOT and .
D Temporary Raised Pavement Markers TRPMs in accordance with the Temporary raised pavement markers ApprovedQualified Products List. . CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS A Application When centerline or lane markings excluding edge lines are removed apply the interim pavement markings prior to opening the roadway to traffic .
Apply the interim pavement marking on a clean dry pavement surface free of dirt and foreign matter as recommended by the material manufacturer and as required by contract .
Interim markings shall consist of center line markings including no passing zone markings painted islands and lane lines excluding edge lines crosshatching and pavement messages in accordance with the Minnesota Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices MN MUTCD .
Provide interim markings with a width equal to the corresponding permanent pavement marking and with a cycle length as indicated in the Plan .
Place all longitudinal markings in in from the edge of pavement or longitudinal centerline joint .
Interim markings on the final pavement surface shall match the location of the final markings .
Remove pavement markings utilizing equipment that is not detrimental to the final surface as required by the Engineer .
This would include any costs associated with repairing damage caused to the wearing course after pavement marking removal .
C Temporary Raised Pavement Markers When TRPMs are used as interim markings install per the Plan or the TRPM usage document found on the Temporary raised pavement markers ApprovedQualified Products List .
D Maintenance and Removal Maintain and replace the interim markings without additional compensation until they are covered by the next paving course are replaced with permanent pavement markings or final acceptance of the Project is made .
Remove TRPMs and Pavement Marking Tape between pavement courses except for TRPMs used with seal coats .
Remove any solid line delineations on the final pavement surface marked with Pavement Marking Tape prior to placing the Permanent Pavement Markings .
Removal of interim pavement markings if required shall be incidental and shall be in accordance with MnDOT .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT Interim pavement markings will be measured by the actual length in linear feet of each line marked as indicated in the Plan and will not include the gap between line segments .
No measurement will be made of any individual pavement markings placed maintained and removed . .
DESCRIPTION This work consists of providing placing maintaining and removing temporary pavement marking material on pavement open to traffic and without permanent traffic markings. . MATERIALS Provide removable preformed pavement marking tape for traffic lane delineation and legends in accordance with Removable Preformed Pavement Marking Tape for Traffic Lane Delineation and Legends. . CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS Placemaintain and remove removable preformed pavement marking tape as shown on the plans or as directed by the Engineer before modifying traffic flow .
The Department will base acceptance of pavement marking materials on the certification and quality control testing verified by the Materials Laboratory testing of verification samples and spot checks on samples obtained from contractor stock or from the project site in accordance with the Pavement Marking Qualification and Acceptance Program . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT The Engineer will measure removable preformed pavement marking tape by the actual length of pavement marking provided placed maintained and removed as required by the contract .
The Engineer will base the measurement of removable preformed pavement marking tape on equivalent lengths of inch wide marking regardless of the color or type .
The Engineer will adjust the measured length of removable preformed pavement marking tape with a width differing from the inch width by the ratio of the actual tape width to the in width .
The Department will pay for removable preformed pavement marking tape on the basis of the following schedule Item No .
DESCRIPTION This work consists of providing permanent and temporary pavement markings for roadways including pavement messages linear pavement markings and crosswalks .
The Department defines pavement messages as word and symbol pavement markings installed in the roadway including word and symbol messages that are not line segments or crosswalks. . Minnesota Standard Specifications The Department defines linear pavement markings as line segments of various widths installed in the roadway including lane lines center lines no passing zone lines edge lines airplane markings and stop lines .
The Department does not consider crosswalks or pavement messages as linear pavement markings .
The Department defines crosswalks as blocks installed in the roadway parallel to the direction of travel in a pattern that is transverse to the direction of travel. . MATERIALS A Preformed Pavement Marking Tape for Permanent Traffic Lane Delineation and Legends PREF TAPE B Preformed Thermoplastic PREF THERMO C MultiComponent Liquid Pavement Markings MULTI COMP D WaterBased Traffic Paint PAINT E DropOn Glass Beads Provide and use pavement marking materials listed on the ApprovedQualified Products List .
Submit proposed changes to the Materials Laboratory for further evaluation. . CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS A Certification of Materials The Department will base acceptance of pavement marking materials under the Pavement Marking Qualification and Acceptance Program on the product certification and quality control testing verified by Materials Laboratory testing of verification samples and spot checks on samples obtained from contractor stock or from project sites .
B Application Apply on a clean dry pavement surface free of dirt and foreign matter and as required by the contract .
Apply all surface treatments prior to pavement marking installation .
Notify Engineer one business day prior to installation of pavement markings .
Manufacturers Specifications Apply the pavement marking as recommended by the material manufacturer in regards to pavement type pavement composition environmental conditions placement within a rumble and other relevant factors in order to meet the requirements detailed in .. C Acceptance .
Concrete Surface Preparation Before applying MULTI COMP or PAINT markings on new portland cement concrete surfaces remove surface treatments or laitance unless the marking is recessed per .B .. B. Bituminous Surface Cure Before applying nonrecessed permanent pavement markings allow bituminous pavement to cure a minimum of days or follow manufacturers specifications for pavement cure time whichever is greater unless otherwise directed by the Engineer .
Apply at a greater wetfilm thickness as recommended by the material manufacturer based on pavement type pavement composition environmental conditions placement within a rumble and other relevant factors .
B. Recessing For Ground In GR IN pavement markings recess the pavement marking utilizing the following equipment and details Recessing Equipment For PREF TAPE or PREF THERMO the recessing shall be performed by a selfpropelled machine equipped with gang stacked diamond cutting blades mounted on a floating head with controls capable of providing uniform depth and alignment .
If multiple passes are used the ridge between passes shall be mechanically removed prior to recess cleaning and pavement marking application .
The equipment shall be selfvacuuming and leave the cut recess ready for pavement marking installation .
Use the equipment and method approved by the pavement marking manufacturer .
The pavement marking system shall be applied so that it is centered within the recess .
For MULTI COMP GR IN or PAINT GR IN pavement markings provide a recess depth of mil mil .
Since pavements are irregular the depth of recess across the width may vary .
Clean the recess completely prior to pavement marking application using an air compressor with at least CFM air flow and PSI air pressure .
Place all pavement markings to be recessed in accordance with pavement marking or retroreflective media manufacturers instructions except for recess depth .
Do not construct a recess in new bituminous pavement unless the pavement is cured enough to handle the weight of the equipment .
Recessing operations are incidental to the pavement marking unit price .
If the pavement markings are to be installed in the same location where there are existing pavement markings including interim or temporary the removal of the existing pavement markings shall be incidental .
Evenly distribute retroreflective media on pavement markings .
C Acceptance C. Alignment Provide linear pavement marking in the width specified in the contract varying by no greater than ¼ in per ft .
Ensure the transverse position of linear markings varies by no greater than in per ft. Do not apply pavement marking material over a longitudinal joint .
C. Color Provide pavement markings in the color specified in .
C. Retroreflectivity Initial pavement marking retroreflectivity is defined as the pavement marking retroreflectivity as measured between days and days after pavement marking installation prior to snow and ice maintenance operations .
Provide pavement markings meeting the following minimum initial pavement marking retroreflectivity when tested using m geometry in accordance with ASTM E . Measurement of pavement message retroreflectivity is done via ASTM DDM .. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Table Minimum Initial Pavement Marking Retroreflectivity White Yellow PREF TAPE mcdsq .
mlux Remove and replace pavement markings not meeting the minimum initial pavement marking retroreflectivity values in accordance with Table as approved by the Engineer at no additional cost the Department .
D Pavement Marking Warranty For permanent pavement markings transfer pavement marking warranties to the Department or other appropriate road authority after construction .
E Correction of Defects Remove and replace pavement markings not meeting the contract requirements as approved by the Engineer at no additional cost to the Department .
F Pavement Marking Installation Record For permanent pavement markings provide a record of the pavement marking installation .
The Department will not pay for pavement markings unless the Contractor has submitted the installation record .
F. Striper Computerized Data Logging System for Liquid Markings DLS For projects with a liquid pavement marking material such as PAINT or MULTI COMP and is at least centerline mile in length utilize a Striper Computerized Data Logging System for Liquid Markings .
The pavement marking device shall have an onboard monitoring system for the purpose of managing the amount of striping materials being applied to the pavement surface .
Collect data for any pavement marking application of feet drive length or greater .
The formats of the required data file and summary can be found at the following website httpwww.dot.state.mn.ustrafficengpavementpavementmarkingmanagement.html .
The DLS equipment shall be operational calibrated and in use during pavement marking operations .
Verify that the physical and electronic measurement of distance travelled is consistent by travelling a foot distance prior to the start of pavement marking operations .
F. Construction Striper Operations Daily Log For projects with a liquid pavement marking material such as PAINT or MULTI COMP and is less than centerline mile in length utilize either a DLS from .F .
Striper Computerized Data Logging System for Liquid Markings DLS or complete the Construction Striper Operations Daily Log form after applying the pavement markings .
This form can be found at the website httpwww.dot.state.mn.usproductspavementmarkingspdfconstructionstriperoperationsdailylog.pdf .
For nonliquid linear pavement markings such as PREF TAPE Pavement Messages of any material and Crosswalks of any material complete the Construction Striper Operations Daily Log form after applying the pavement markings .
This form can be found at the website httpwww.dot.state.mn.usproductspavementmarkingspdfconstructionstriperoperationsdailylog.pdf .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT A Pavement Messages The Engineer will measure pavement messages by the area in square feet of material installed as required by the contract .
B Lines The Engineer will measure pavement marking lines by the length in feet of each type constructed in place as required by the contract .
BASIS OF PAYMENT The contract unit price for pavement markings includes the costs of materials installation traffic control surface preparation and primers as required by the contract .
The Department will pay for pavement markings on the basis of the following schedule Item No .
SCOPE Provide dry bagged concrete patching mix U for repairing Portland cement concrete pavement and UM for repairing portland cement concrete bridge decks bridge deck overlays and approach panels . .
SCOPE Provide hydrated lime for use in soil drying or stabilization and for use in mortar for nonsewer applications or road pavement mixes . .
Table Gradation Requirements Sieve Size in Percent Passing Note Exclude rock that is larger the inches in the gradation calculations when it originates from material below the reclaimed bituminous pavement .
sieve. . Minnesota Standard Specifications D. Coarse Aggregate for Concrete Pavement Provide coarse aggregate in accordance with .. D. Coarse Aggregate for General Use except as modified by Table for use in the following Concrete pavement and Concrete pavement rehabilitation .
C Recycled Materials The Contactor may substitute recycled aggregates for virgin aggregates if meeting the following requirements Recycled aggregates contain only recycled asphalt pavement RAP recycled concrete materials recycled aggregate materials or certified recycled glass and Must meet the requirements of Table .
Recycled Materials For products not required to be virgin aggregates the Contractor may substitute recycled aggregates for virgin aggregates if the recycled aggregates meet the following requirements Recycled aggregates uniformly blended consisting only of recycled asphalt pavement RAP recycled concrete materials and recycled aggregate materials The bitumen content of the blended material is no greater than .
SCOPE Provide dowel bars for use in portland cement concrete pavements and other concrete applications as shown on the plans . .
SCOPE Provide white and yellow retroreflective pavement marking tape prefabricated for recessed traffic marking on bituminous and concrete pavements . .
REQUIREMENTS A General Provide pavement marking tape meeting the following requirements and characteristics Made of prefabricated retroreflective pliant polymer material Provides a cushioned resilient substrate that reduces bead crushing and loss Weather resistant Under traffic wear shows no appreciable fading in accordance with the color requirements in .. C Color lifting or shrinkage throughout the life of the marking Shows no significant tearing roll back or other signs of poor adhesion Underside of the pavement marking tape precoated with pressure sensitive adhesive and Protected during shipment and in storage .
Apply the preformed pavement marking tape as recommended by the manufacturer to provide a neat durable marking that will not flow or distort due to temperature if the pavement surface remains stable .
B Retroreflectivity Provide preformed pavement marking material meeting the minimum initial pavement marking retroreflectivity values using m geometry and meeting the testing procedures of ASTM E Table Minimum Initial Pavement Marking Retroreflectivity White Yellow Tape mcdsq .
mlux C Color Provide preformed pavement marking tape meeting the following requirements White color no darker or yellower than of Federal Standard Number C Daytime color of yellow meeting the following CIE Chromaticity limits using illuminant D Table Daytime Chromaticity Coordinates Corner Points x . . . . y . . . . Luminance Factor Cap Y meeting the requirements of ASTM D Table and Nighttime color of yellow meeting the following chromaticity limits as specified in ASTM D Table Table Nighttime Chromaticity Coordinates Corner Points x . . . . y . . . . D Tensile Stress Provide preformed pavement marking tape with a tensile stress of at least psi kPa at maximum load when tested in accordance with ASTM D . Test a sample in in .
E Elongation Provide preformed pavement marking tape with an elongation of at least percent at maximum load when tested in accordance with ASTM D . . Minnesota Standard Specifications F Skid Resistance Ensure the surface of the retroreflective pliant polymer provides a skid resistance value of at least British Pendulum Number BPN when tested in accordance with ASTM E . G Thickness G. Unpatterned Provide unpatterned retroreflective pavement marking tape at least .
G. Patterned Provide patterned retroreflective pavement marking tape at least .
SCOPE Provide white and yellow removable retroreflective preformed pavement marking tape for use as temporary traffic markings . .
REQUIREMENTS A General Provide removable retroreflective preformed pavement marking tape listed on the ApprovedQualified Products List and meeting the following requirements and characteristics Precoated with a pressure sensitive adhesive Capable of adhering to asphalt concrete and portland cement concrete surfaces as recommended by the manufacturer without the use of heat solvents or other additional adhesive means and immediately ready for traffic after application Capable of performing for the duration of six nonwinter months Capable of being removed intact or in large pieces without the use of heat solvents grinding or blasting Reinforced by a nonmetallic medium to facilitate removal Provided in the widths and shapes required by the contract Available in preformed words and symbols meeting the requirements for the applicable shapes and sizes in accordance with the MN MUTCD Packaged in a way that the chemical composition is not altered or compromised and Meets all requirements in this specification for at least year after the date of purchase when stored in a cool dry indoor area .
B Color Provide white retroreflective preformed pavement marking tape no darker or yellower than of Federal Standard Number C. Provide yellow retroreflective preformed pavement marking tape meeting the following requirements Daytime color meeting the following CIE Chromaticity limits using illuminant D Table Daytime Chromaticity Coordinates Corner Points x . . . . y . . . . . Minnesota Standard Specifications Luminance Factor Cap Y meeting the requirements of ASTM D Table and Nighttime color meeting the following chromaticity limits as specified in ASTM D Table Table Nighttime Chromaticity Coordinates Corner Points x . . . . y . . . . C Retroreflectivity Provide retroreflective preformed pavement marking material meeting the minimum initial pavement marking retroreflectivity values using m geometry and meeting the testing procedures of ASTM E Table Minimum Initial Pavement Marking Retroreflectivity White Yellow Tape mcdm²lux mcdm²lux D Frictional Resistance Ensure the surface of the retroreflective pavement marking film provides a frictional resistance value of at least British Pendulum Number BPN when tested in accordance with ASTM E . E Thickness Provide retroreflective pavement marking film including beads at least mils thick. . SAMPLING AND TESTING Submit samples at least ft long of each color to be used .
SCOPE Provide retroreflective thermoplastic pavement marking product prefabricated for recessed traffic marking on bituminous and concrete pavements . .
REQUIREMENTS A General Provide thermoplastic pavement marking product meeting the following requirements and characteristics Made of prefabricated retroreflective resilient thermoplastic material Contains glass beads uniformly distributed through the entire cross sectional area Does not require preheating unless used for the removal of moisture Capable of being affixed to bituminous or concrete pavement by heating Resistant to deterioration due to exposure to sunlight water salt and adverse weather conditions Under traffic wear shows no appreciable fading in accordance with the color requirements in .. C lifting or shrinkage throughout the life of the marking Capable of conforming to pavement contours breaks and faults through the action of traffic at normal pavement temperatures Possesses resealing characteristics such that it is capable of fusing with itself and previous thermoplastic markings when heated and Protected during shipment and in storage. . Minnesota Standard Specifications B Retroreflectivity Provide preformed thermoplastic pavement marking material meeting the minimum initial pavement marking retroreflectivity values using m geometry and meeting the testing procedures of ASTM E Table Minimum Initial Pavement Marking Retroreflectivity White Yellow Thermoplastic mcdsq .
mlux C Color Provide preformed thermoplastic pavement marking material meeting the following requirements White color no darker or yellower than of Federal Standard Number C Daytime color of yellow meeting the following CIE Chromaticity limits using illuminant D Table Daytime Chromaticity Coordinates Corner Points x . . . . y . . . . Luminance Factor Cap Y meeting the requirements of ASTM D Table of min for white and min for yellow and Nighttime color of yellow meeting the following chromaticity limits as specified in ASTM D Table Table Nighttime Chromaticity Coordinates Corner Points x . . . . y . . . . D Glass Beads Ensure intermixed glass beads provided in the preformed thermoplastic material meet the requirements of AASHTO M Type andor Type to meet the retroreflectivity requirements of section .B above and have a minimum of rounds .
F Thickness Provide retroreflective thermoplastic pavement marking material at least mils thick. . SAMPLING AND TESTING Submit a sample measuring at least x of precut legends or sheet of precut line material of each color used to the Materials Laboratory .
SCOPE Provide reflectorized white and yellow multicomponent percent solids MultiComponent Liquid pavement markings that are free of toxic heavy metals for installation on bituminous and concrete pavement surfaces . .
REQUIREMENTS A General Apply MultiComponent Liquid pavement markings including lines legends symbols crosswalks and stop lines in accordance with Pavement Markings .
Use materials capable of producing pavement markings of specified thickness in accordance with .. B. Thickness Requirements and retroreflectivity in accordance with .. C. Retroreflectivity unless otherwise required by the contract .
Provide yellow markings distinguishable from white markings in the dark. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Provide Slow Dry material from the MultiComponent Liquid pavement markings ApprovedQualified Products List unless otherwise required by the contract .
B MultiComponent Liquid Material Provide multicomponent liquid material meeting the following requirements and characteristics Composed only of multicomponent liquids and pigments Does not emit or leach solvents into the environment upon application to a pavement surface The infrared spectrum for all components shall match the reference sample provided by the manufacturer for the product tested and approved by the Department Free of lead cadmium mercury hexavalent chromium and other toxic heavy metals as defined by the Environmental Protection Agency White material no darker than or no yellower than of Federal Standard Number C Colors Daytime color of the yellow epoxy meeting the following CIE Chromaticity limits using illuminant D Table Daytime Chromaticity Coordinates Corner Points Yellow x . . . . y . . . . White daylight directional reflectance Y of least percent Yellow daylight directional reflectance Y of at least percent Nighttime color of yellow meeting the following chromaticity limits in ASTM D Table Table Nighttime Chromaticity Coordinates Corner Points Yellow x . . . . y . . . .
Apply MultiComponent Liquid pavement markings during the test to concrete pavements with a tensile strength of at least psi kPa and ensure the failure of the system occurs in the concrete during testing .
Submit to the Engineer a manufacturers Certificate of Compliance for all components of the MultiComponent Liquid pavement marking system .
SCOPE Provide fastdry white and yellow acrylic latex traffic marking paints for use with dropon glass beads for application on concrete and bituminous pavements . .
SCOPE Provide treated glass beads for retroreflectorizing liquid pavement markings . .
For pavement construction provide filler in lengths equal to the width of the pavement lanes .
SCOPE Provide hotpoured crumbrubber type crack sealer for sealing cracks in concrete and bituminous pavements and miscellaneous structures . .
B Methods of Test Perform tests meeting the requirements of ASTM D except perform the bond test using sawed cement mortar blocks or asphalt HMA blocks consistent with the pavement type prepared in accordance with the methods in the Laboratory Manual .
SCOPE Provide preformed polychloroprene elastomeric joint seals for use in sealing joints in concrete pavements bridges and other structures . .
SCOPE Provide a silicone joint sealant for use in concrete pavement joints and cracks to protect the pavement from intrusion of water and incompressible material . .
SCOPE Provide hotpoured elastic type joint and crack sealer to seal joints and cracks in concrete and bituminous pavements bridges and other structures . .
Bond Test Perform tests meeting the requirements of ASTM D except perform the bond test using sawed cement mortar blocks or asphalt HMA blocks consistent with the pavement type prepared using the methods found in the Laboratory Manual .
SCOPE Provide hotpoured extra low modulus elastic type joint and crack sealer to seal joints in concrete pavement bridges other structures and rout and seal applications on bituminous pavements . .
Perform tests meeting the requirements of ASTM D except perform the bond test using sawed cement mortar blocks or asphalt HMA blocks consistent with the pavement type prepared using the methods found in the Lab Manual .
Type for use as a bond breaker interlayer for concrete overlays over existing concrete pavement . .
