On a roadbed it is typically indicated at the longitudinal centerline of the top layer of pavement .
Graded portion of a highway within top and side slopes prepared as a foundation for the pavement structure and shoulders .
The soil or embankment upon which the pavement structure is constructed .
The point at which the project can be safely and effectively used by the public without further delays disruption or other impediments and pavement structure shoulder drainage sidewalk permanent signing and markings guardrail and other traffic barrier safety appurtenance utilities lighting and all bridge deck and parapet work is complete .
Top homogenous layer of the pavement structure .
The Engineer may permit oversize and overweight vehicle movements within the project limits provided the Contractor submits a written request and an acceptable Traffic Control Plan under Subsection .. No overloads will be permitted on a pavement base or structure that will remain in place in the completed project .
Remove and dispose or salvage all buildings fences guardrail structures old pavements abandoned utilities and any other obstructions which are not designated or permitted to remain except for the obstructions to be removed and disposed of under other items in the Contract .
Dispose of all pavement base course sidewalks curbs gutters etc .
In removing pavements curbs walks driveways and similar structures make all cuts clean vertical and true to designated lines where an abutting structure or a part of a structure is to be left in place . .
Use excavated native material for the remainder of the backfill if it meets the requirements of Selected Material Type C. Use bedding material and backfill material within the pavement structure meeting the requirements for the applicable lift of material .
Native material may be utilized for electrical conduit backfill outside the pavement structure if it meets the minimum requirements of Selected Material Type C as specified in Subsection .. Compaction may be as approved by the Engineer .
Construct a base course using pulverized asphalt pavement to the grades shown on the Plans .
Use materials that conform to the following Asphalt Concrete Existing asphalt pavement material Aggregate Base Course Subsection .
Crush or process the existing asphalt pavement so that percent by weight passes the inch sieve and percent by weight passes the inch sieve .
Construct one or more courses of plantproduced Hot Mix Asphalt HMA pavement on an approved surface to the lines grades and depths shown on the Plans .
Recycled asphalt pavement RAP may be used in the production of HMA .
The RAP may be from pavements removed under the Contract or from an existing stockpile .
Submit a paving plan and pavement inspection plan per .
Any other information or procedures necessary to provide completed HMA construction that meets the contract requirements Include the following elements in the pavement inspection plan and address these elements at the meeting SECTION ALASKA a .
Clean the edges of existing pavements which are to be adjacent to new pavement to permit the adhesion of asphalt materials .
Prelevel remaining ruts pavement delaminations and depressions having a depth greater than inch with an approved HMA . .
Notify the Engineer of pavement areas that appear thin or unstable .
Where milling operation creates thin or unstable pavement areas or where it breaks through existing pavement remove thin and unstable pavement and inches of existing base material compact and replace with an approved HMA . .
Remove joint adhesive applied to the top of pavement surface .
After surface sealing inlay by grinding pavement striping into the sealed HMA .
The finished surface of all HMA paving must match dimensions shown in the contract for horizontal alignment and width profile grade and elevation crown slope and pavement thickness .
Water must drain across the pavement surface without ponding .
The Engineer will identify pavement areas that deviate more than inch from the straightedge including joints as defective work .
Profiler measurements will not be taken in turn lanes intersections ramps lane transitions or within feet of bridge abutments and transverse joints with preexisting pavement .
SECTION ALASKA The Engineer will measure the pavement smoothness in both wheel paths of each lane .
If the required pavement thickness is not decreased by more than .
Mill or sawcut the existing pavement to provide a vertical transverse joint face to match the overlay to the existing pavement .
Apply tack coat on the milled surface and joint adhesive to all vertical joints and overlay the full width of the underlying pavement surface .
Mill the existing pavement to provide a vertical transverse joint face .
Apply tack coat to the milled surface and joint adhesive to all vertical joints prior to inlay new HMA to match the existing pavement .
After completion of corrective work the Engineer will measure the pavement surface with an inertial profiler for a smoothness price adjustment .
Price adjustments for pavement smoothness will be calculated according to Subsection .
Cut the pavement so that edges are vertical and the sides are parallel to the direction of traffic .
Inspect daily according to pavement inspection plan .
Remove and dispose of project materials incorrectly deposited on existing and new pavement surfacess inside and outside the project area including haul routes .
By the surface area of pavement repaired according to .
Asphalt binder HMA and removal of pavement and base course will not be measured separately but are subsidiary . .
These methods describe how price adjustments are determined based on the quality of the HMA longitudinal joint density and pavement smoothness .
Pavement smoothness will be measured by the Engineer and reported as IRI inchesmile according to Subsection .. Incentive for pavement smoothness shall apply only if both the project average CPF and DPF are greater than or equal to .. Disincentive for pavement smoothness shall apply regardless of the project average CPF or DPF .
The Engineer will calculate the pavement smoothness price adjustment according to Method or Method below as identified in the bid schedule .
Driveway HMA and SECTION ALASKA Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit _ HMA Type __ Class __ Ton HMA Leveling Course Type __ Class __ LaneStation HMA Leveling Course Type __ Class __ Ton _ Asphalt Binder Grade __ Ton HMA Temporary Type __ Class __ Ton HMA Type __ Class __ Square Yard Liquid AntiStrip Additive Contingent Sum _ HMA Price Adjustment Type __ Class __ Contingent Sum Longitudinal Joint Density Price Adjustment Contingent Sum Pavement Smoothness Price Adjustment Method __ Contingent Sum HMA Driveway Type __ Class __ Lump Sum HMA Driveway Type __ Class __ Ton Job Mix Design Each Joint Adhesive Linear Foot Asphalt Material Price Adjustment Contingent Sum Crack Repair Linear Foot Prelevel for Ruts Delaminations and Depressions Square Yard Repair Unstable pavement Square Yard ALASKA SECTION TACK COAT .
Clean the edges of existing pavements which are to be adjacent to new pavement to permit the adhesion of asphalt materials . .
Form a series of indentations into both shoulders of the pavement and clean up debris where indicated on the Plans. . MATERIALS .
The pavement should be compacted and be at a temperature below F. Make the edges of the indentation straight smooth and free of spalling .
Clean milling debris off pavement .
In roadways set the manhole frame and cover flush with or no more than inch below the finished pavement surface .
Choose an installation method that does not damage the post adjacent pavement structures utility conduits and final slopes .
When the curb is to be constructed on a cured or aged portland cement concrete base asphalt pavement or asphalt treated base thoroughly sweep and clean the bed using compressed air .
Where the concrete barrier is not placed on pavement shape compact and finish the supporting material to the lines and grades shown on the Plans or as directed .
Place a concrete collar on valve boxes installed in pavement as shown on the Plans .
By the surface area of pavement covered .
The TCP includes but is not limited to signs barricades traffic cones plastic safety fence sequential arrow panels portable changeable message board signs special signs warning lights portable concrete barriers crash cushions flaggers pilot cars interim pavement markings temporary lighting temporary roadways and all other items required to direct traffic through or around the traffic control zone according to these Specifications and the ATM .
Existing striping width lane width and road surfacing. . Construction lane widths striping layout and temporary pavement marker layout . .
Locate the bottom of the sign panel at least feet above the pavement k. Operate with a battery pack a minimum of hours under full load .
Furnish haul and place water for dust control and pavement flushing as directed .
Use water trucks that can provide a highpressure water stream to flush the pavement and a lightwater spray to control dust .
Place permanent or interim pavement markings according to this Subsection details shown on the Plans approved TCPs and Parts III and VI of the ATM before opening existing paved roadways temporary paved roadways detours interim paving lifts and roadways with seal coats and surface treatments for more than one continuous work shift .
Remove conflicting pavement markings according to Subsection .
Maintain all interim pavement markings for their intended life including reapplication when necessary .
There will be no compensation to upgrade interim pavement markings required for work operations lasting up to weeks .
Use only temporary raised pavement markers or removable preformed retroreflective marking tape as interim pavement markings on final pavement surfaces .
Place final pavement markings on finished pavement surfaces and interim pavement surfaces before suspending work for the winter .
Use only temporary raised pavement markers meeting Subsection .
as interim markings on seal coat and surface treatment pavements .
Remove the vinyl protective covers after applying the asphalt pavement .
On multicourse surface treatments install the temporary raised pavement markers after applying the full width of the first layer of cover coat .
Do not place final pavement markings until traffic has traveled over the seal coat or surface treatment for at least days .
Apply final pavement markings within days of completing the final sweeping or brooming of the mainline seal coat or surface treatment . .
Rolling pavement sweeping At least sealed beam halogen lamps in the front and four in the back .
A single stripe is a marking or a temporary raised pavement marker inches wide .
Install detector loops and underground conduit before applying new pavement .
Replace or reconstruct improvements damaged by your operations such as sidewalks curbs gutters pavement base material lawns and plants and other improvements that are removed or broken with the same kind of material as found on the work or with materials of equal or better quality .
Before removing the sidewalk driveways or pavement material cut the outline of all areas to be removed in concrete sidewalks driveways and in pavements through completely with a saw .
However under paved areas behind a curb bury the conduit at least inches below the top back of curb or abutting pavement whichever is lower .
Install rigid metal conduit under existing pavements which are feet wide or less by jacking .
Unless trenching is called for in the Plans install conduits under existing pavements greater than feet wide by boring or drilling methods . .
When encountering obstructions during jacking or drilling operations obtain approval and cut small test holes in the pavement to clear the obstruction .
Locate the bottom inside face of the borepit no closer than the catch point of a slope from the edge of pavement .
Provide overhead equipment a minimum vertical clearance of feet from bottom of equipment to the pavement .
Provide illumination of the pavement and pedestrian openings through or under falsework hours a day .
Construct the iron casting for the raised pavement markers of modular iron meeting ASTM A .
Install interim pavement markings meeting Section if permanent markings are not installed prior to opening the roadway to traffic . .
Apply paint only to pavements that are clean dry and warmer than F. b .
Use the overlay method to apply markings to existing pavement .
For the inlay method embed the pavement markings in the asphalt concrete surface with a conventional steel wheeled roller .
When applying pavement markings by the overlay method ensure the surface is clean and dry and is at least F and rising .
Install raised and recessed pavement markers per the manufacturers instructions .
Cut or dado the finished pavement surface with a concrete saw to produce a slot with dimensions as shown on the Plans or recommended by the manufacturer .
Prepare the roadway areas to receive methyl methacrylate pavement markings according to the manufacturers recommendations .
Remove contaminants such as curing agents surface oils or existing road marking materials prior to applying pavement marking material .
SECTION ALASKA Remove pavement markings to the fullest extent possible without materially damaging the pavement surface color or texture .
As the work progresses remove sand or other material deposited on the pavement as a result of removing markings .
Before making any change in the traffic pattern remove or obliterate pavement markings that may create confusion to motorists .
Where using blast cleaning to remove pavement markings or objectionable material within feet of a lane occupied by public traffic immediately remove the residue including dust after contact between the sand and the surface being treated .
Repair any damaged pavement or surfacing caused by the pavement marking removal operation . .
inches from the widths shown on the Plans measured from the edge of pavement or edge of traveled way to center of lane line or between the centers of adjacent lane lines .
Transverse pavement marking lines inches or more wide will be measured by nominal width times actual length. . Each .
Raised or recessed pavement markers will be measured per each unit installed complete . .
Accept payment as full compensation for cleaning of pavement painting traffic markings application of preformed pavement markings glass beads installing raised or recessed pavement markers furnishing paint glass beads preformed marking tape and all other materials necessary to complete the work prescribed in this Section .
The current State of Alaska DOTPF maintenance specification for pavement marking paint . .
Securely selvedge or bind all perimeter edges so that the joints formed by tying the selvedges have approximately the same strength as the body of the mesh. . PREFORMED PAVEMENT MARKING TAPE. . General Requirements a. Reflectorized plastic pavement markings and legends .
Furnish type that is designed to be inlayed on hot asphalt pavement or attached to existing bituminous pavement with a precoated pressure adhesive or liquid contact cement as herein specified .
c. Ensure that the plastic marker will mold itself to pavement contours breaks faults etc .
at normal pavement temperatures and fuse with itself and with previously applied markings of the same composition under normal conditions of use . .
Provide a neat durable marking that will not flow or distort due to temperature if the pavement surface remains stable .
Use reflectors for both raised and recessed pavement markers consisting of an acrylic plastic shell filled with tightly adherent potting compound .
Install pavement markers with an epoxy adhesive recommended by the marker manufacturer and approved by the Engineer. . Color .
Match the color of the raised pavement markers to the color of the marking for which they supplement substitute or serve as a positioning guide. . Filler .
Where chip seals slurry seals or tack coats are to be utilized after placement of the temporary raised pavement markers furnish markers with a protective cover made of clear flexible polyvinyl chloride. . Adhesive .
