The Contract includes the advertisement Proposal Certification as to Publication and Notice of Advertisement for Proposal bid Appointment of Agent by Nonresident Contractors Resolution of Award of Contract Executed Form of Contract performance and payment bonds Specifications Plans RightofWay Plans permits boring logs pavement core records addenda Change Orders and Field Orders all of which are to be treated as one instrument whether or not set forth at length in the form of Contract .
pavement structure .
The combination of pavement base courses and when specified a subbase course placed on a subgrade to support the traffic load and distribute it to the roadbed see Figure .
pavement .
One or more layers of specified material of designed thickness at the top of the pavement structure. . base course .
The surface of the roadbed upon which the first layer of the pavement structure is constructed see Figure .
The boring logs and pavement cores are part of the Contract but any reports or interpretations of them are provided for information only .
The RE may limit hauling of materials over the pavement structure .
Maintaining a safe and unobstructed passageway through the construction area for public traffic including but not limited to constructing escape ramps at the edges of pavement . .
When excavation or embankment construction reaches the finished subgrade areas where pavement is to be placed are exempt from the above stabilization requirements .
Prepare the pavement surface to provide a clean sound area to affix the post .
Apply an epoxy or butyl adhesive according to the manufacturers recommendations and bond the base of the post to the pavement surface .
Temporary Pavement Markers Apply temporary pavement markers with butyl adhesive pads to clean dry pavement surfaces free of cracking checking or spalling .
Replace lost or damaged temporary pavement markers .
Only remove temporary pavement markers that will be replaced by striping in the same day .
If striping can not be finished in the same day reinstall temporary pavement markers before opening the road to traffic .
Immediately before marking the pavement surface clean the surface of dirt oil grease and foreign material including curing compound on new concrete .
.. HMA Patch The RE may direct the Contractor to sawcut existing HMA pavement to the depth of the area to be repaired .
Ensure that the remaining pavement is not damaged .
Compact until the top of the patch is flush with the adjacent pavement surface .
The Department will not measure replacement temporary pavement stripes and markers for payment .
In fill sections the Contractor may leave tree stumps extending less than foot above the original ground surface in those areas where the proposed subgrade or proposed finished grade in nonpavement sections is greater than feet above the original ground surface .
Repair damage to adjacent pavement courses caused by removal operations .
DESCRIPTION This Section describes the requirements for stripping excavating removing pavement reusing excavated material for backfill and embankments and disposing of excess material. . MATERIALS Provide materials as specified Coarse Aggregate No .
Using Contractor established grade stakes set outside the pavement box and at breaklines the RE will check elevations within the roadbed limits using a stringline drawn taut between these stakes .
Immediately following remediation place topsoil fertilizer seed and mulch over APS not under pavement for permanent erosion control .
Removing Pavement Before removing HMA concrete or composite pavement wet sawcut .
Do not use equipment that involves a ball weight or punch to break or remove the concrete within feet of a transverse joint or within feet of any structure or pavement that is to remain in place .
Break up or remove the concrete within restricted areas so as not to damage the adjacent joint structure pavement or other structure that is to remain .
When placing more than inches of embankment on existing pavement break the pavement into pieces that are a maximum of feet in any dimension .
Continue placing lifts approximately parallel to the finished pavement grade line .
MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT The Department will measure and make payment for Items as follows Item Pay Unit BREAKING PAVEMENT SQUARE YARD ___ SOIL AGGREGATE CUBIC YARD The Department will not include payment for breaking pavement in ___ SOIL AGGREGATE .
The Department will make payment for breaking pavement under BREAKING PAVEMENT .
Only allow equipment on the drainage course that is necessary for the construction of the subsequent pavement course . .
DESCRIPTION This Section describes the requirements for rubblizing existing concrete pavement and seating before placing a HMA overlay. . MATERIALS .. Materials Provide materials as specified DGA .. Equipment Provide equipment as specified Resonant Method Breaking EquipmentA Smooth Drum Vibratory Roller .. B MultiHead Method Breaking Equipment .. B ZGrid RollerA Smooth Drum Vibratory Roller .. B Provide breaking equipment as required by the TCP capable of operating within foot of barrier curbs and structures. . CONSTRUCTION .. Rubblizing A .
Before beginning rubblization remove existing HMA overlays and HMA surface patches from the concrete pavement surfaces to be rubblized .
If the limit of the rubblization is not at an existing joint or if the concrete being rubblized abuts concrete pavement to be rubblized in a subsequent stage sawcut the concrete fulldepth .
Rubblize the test strip using varying intensities of energy until a technique is established that will rubblize the pavement as specified .
Rubblize the pavement fulldepth in a manner that eliminates all slab action by fracturing into pieces inches or less in any dimension in the top third of the pavement and inches or less in any dimension in the bottom twothirds of the pavement .
In areas where the roadway must be overlaid lane at a time extend initial rubblization a minimum of inches beyond the width of the pavement to be overlaid .
The RE may require additional test holes to ensure that pieces are free of bond with reinforcement and to ensure that the pavement is being rubblized to the specific dimensions .
Seat rubblized pavement with rollers operating at a speed not exceeding miles per hour .
Seat rubblized pavement using the applicable method .
Roll the rubblized pavement with a minimum of passes over the entire width of the rubblized pavement with a vibratory roller. . MultiHead Method .
Roll the entire width of the rubblized pavement with passes of a ZGrid roller followed by passes of a smooth drum vibratory roller .
The RE may require additional passes in order to seat the rubblized pavement and provide a smooth surface that is ready for the HMA overlay .
If the rubblized pavement becomes unstable due to excess moisture cease rolling until the RE allows the operation to resume .
For reinforced concrete pavement leave debonded reinforcement steel in place unless exposed .
Compact DGA in lifts using the directed method as specified in C. If the seated rubblized pavement is more than inch below grade correct with DGA as approved by the RE .
Protect the rubblized pavement from contamination and damage .
Correct areas of the rubblized pavement damaged by construction operations or contamination before placing HMA .
Only allow equipment on the rubblized pavement that is necessary for the construction of the subsequent pavement course .
Ensure that no more than hours elapse between rubblizing the pavement and the placement of the first lift of the HMA overlay .
If precipitation occurs before placing the HMA overlay the RE may extend the time restriction to allow the rubblized pavement to dry . .
DESCRIPTION This Section describes the requirements for constructing base course intermediate course and surface course of HMA. . MATERIALS .. Materials Provide materials as specified Tack Coat PG Prime Coat CutBack Asphalt Grade MC or MC Tack Coat CutBack Asphalt Grade RC Emulsified Asphalt Grade RS SS SSh Grade CSS or CSSh HMA Joint Sealer HotPoured Polymerized Joint Adhesive Use HMA specified for the roadway surface as patching material for HMA pavement repair .
If the longitudinal edge height of a milled surface exceeds inches slope the edge to provide a smooth transition from the milled surface to the remaining pavement .
At transverse edges of milled areas provide a smooth transition from the milled surface to the remaining pavement .
Mill concrete pavement to inch depth at the locations shown on the Plans without damaging the underlying pavement .
Based on the condition of the remaining pavement the RE may direct additional areas to be milled .
If the longitudinal edge height of a milled surface exceeds inches slope the edge to provide a smooth transition from the milled surface to the remaining pavement .
At transverse edges of milled areas provide a smooth transition from the milled surface to the remaining pavement .
Sawcut existing HMA pavement to a maximum depth of inches or to the full depth of bound layers whichever is less .
For larger areas the Contractor may use a milling machine for removal of HMA pavement .
Ensure that the remaining pavement is not damaged .
Compact until the top of the patch is flush with the adjacent pavement surface .
Submit an adjusted pavement plan before making adjustments to the paving operation .
Test strips are not necessary for temporary pavement .
Use drilling equipment with a watercooled diamondtipped masonry drill bit that shall produce inch nominal diameter cores for the full depth of the pavement .
Remove the core from the pavement without damaging it .
Fill the hole with HMA or cold patching material and compact the material so that it is inch above the surrounding pavement surface .
If echelon paving is not possible construct the pavement using cold longitudinal joints .
Ramp pavement lots are defined as approximately square yards of pavement in ramps .
Other pavement lots are defined as approximately square yards of pavement in shoulders and other undefined areas .
PD Calculate the PPA for other pavement lots as specified in Table Table .. PPA for Other Pavement Lots Quality PPA PD PPA .
If the initial series of cores produces a percent defective value of PD for mainline or ramp lots or PD for other pavement lots the Contractor may elect to take an additional set of cores at random locations chosen by the ME .
Thickness requirements will apply when fulldepth uniformthickness HMA pavement construction is shown .
The ME will accept pavement lots with PD and will reject pavement lots with PD .
The Department will test the full extent of the pavement in the direction of travel in each wheel path .
The single IRI value reported for each .mile lot of pavement is the average of runs. . Control Testing .
.. Sawcutting and Sealing of Joints in HMA Overlays Before paving over concrete pavement identify joint locations and maintain references throughout paving operations .
Ensure that the HMA overlay is sawcut directly over the existing concrete pavement joints .
After sawcutting immediately collect the slurry from the sawcut cavity and surrounding pavement surface and dispose of as specified Clean sawcuts with a poundspersquareinch water blast to remove remaining debris in the sawcut cavity and then blow sawcuts with a hotair lance to provide a dry surface .
Use drilling equipment with a watercooled diamondtipped masonry drill bit that shall produce inch nominal diameter cores for the full depth of the pavement .
Remove the core from the pavement without damaging it .
Fill the hole with HMA or cold patching material and compact the material so that it is inch above the surrounding pavement surface .
If thickness acceptance testing is required as specified in I drill the surface course air void cores for the full depth of pavement .
OGFC or MOGFC may be used as a porous surface. . MATERIALS .. Materials Provide materials as specified Tack Coat PG OpenGraded Friction Course Modified OpenGraded Friction Course Use HMA specified for the roadway surface as patching material for HMA pavement repair .
Clean the surface of existing pavement using a selfpropelled power broom equipped with a vacuum collection system before placing the ultrathin friction course .
Comply with the limitations of placing as specified in C except do not place concrete when the ambient temperature is above F. If within the hours preceding the scheduled concrete placement the National Weather Service refer to httpwww.nws.noaa.gov locally forecasts a percent chance or greater of precipitation during the scheduled concrete placement postpone the placement of bridge decks and pavement .
If paving adjacent to existing concrete pavement drill inchdeep holes into the side of the existing slab .
Immediately after consolidating the concrete strike off the surface to ensure that a uniform ridge of concrete of between and inches is maintained in front of the screed along the entire width of the pavement .
If using mineral admixtures in the concrete remove forms no sooner than hours after completing concrete pavement .
The Contractor may construct concrete pavement using the slipform paving method .
Consolidate the concrete for the full width and depth of the concrete pavement .
Finish the concrete in such a manner that a minimum of hand finishing is necessary to provide a dense and homogeneous concrete pavement .
Sawcut inch wide relief joints to a depth of of the thickness of the concrete pavement .
After sawcutting immediately remove sawing slurry from the sawcut cavity and surrounding pavement surface .
The ME will divide the concrete pavement into lots of approximately square yards .
Do not allow construction vehicles or equipment on the concrete pavement within days of placing or until the concrete has achieved a compressive strength of pounds per square inch as determined by test cylinders that are field cured according to AASHTO T . For concrete containing fly ash opening to traffic is governed solely by the poundsper squareinch compressive strength requirement and not by time elapsed .
Drill cores in the concrete pavement at locations as directed by the RE for thickness testing .
Drill inch diameter cores through the entire thickness of the concrete pavement .
Use a watercooled diamondtipped masonrytype drill bit capable of obtaining a valid test sample through the entire pavement thickness .
After removing the core from the pavement pump water from the hole and use a quicksetting patch to fill the hole flush with the adjacent pavement surface .
.. Diamond Grinding Perform wet grinding operations in a longitudinal direction that is parallel to the pavement centerline .
Continuously remove grinding slurry from the pavement surface .
Ensure that the surface of the ground pavement has a corduroy texture consisting of grooves between and of an inch in width .
Do not perform slab stabilization when the pavement surface temperatures are below F or if the subgrade or base course is frozen .
Drill holes between and inches in diameter vertically and round to a depth sufficient to penetrate the concrete pavement .
If the pavement has been lifted in excess of the specified amount the RE may require removal and replacement or grinding to the correct grade .
Ensure that the patch is flush with the surface of the pavement .
Ensure that holes do not exceed inch in diameter drilled vertically and round to a depth sufficient to penetrate below the concrete pavement and into the voids and subbase beneath the slabs .
During stabilization operations ensure the upward movement of the pavement does not exceed .
If the pavement has been lifted in excess of the allowable amount the RE may require removal and replacement or grinding to the correct grade .
When lifting concrete pavement to correct surface defects such as faulted and settled concrete slabs lift the concrete slab in increments of .
inch until the pavement is raised to the required elevation .
DESCRIPTION This Section describes the requirements for constructing partial depth concrete pavement repair. . MATERIALS .. Materials Provide materials as specified Quick Setting Patch Type A or B White Polyethylene Sheeting Use aggregate with maximum size no greater than inch in the quick setting patch .
The RE may then direct that a full depth concrete pavement repair be constructed .
DESCRIPTION This Section describes the requirements for constructing full depth concrete pavement repairs with concrete or HMA. . MATERIALS .. Materials Provide materials as specified Coarse Aggregate No .
Use an approved HMA M base course for full depth HMA pavement repairs .
Remove existing concrete or composite pavement using the lift out method .
Reuse removed pavement as specified in A .
Repair any damage to remaining pavements .
Drill holes into the face of the existing concrete pavement not more than inch in diameter greater than the maximum measured dimension of the joint tie .
For transverse joints abutting concrete pavement to remain drill holes into the face of the existing concrete pavement not more than inch in diameter greater than the dowels .
After sawcutting immediately remove all sawing slurry from the sawcut cavity and surrounding pavement surface .
DESCRIPTION This Section describes the requirements for installing retrofit dowel bars in existing concrete pavement. . MATERIALS .. Materials Provide materials as specified Quick Setting Patch Type A or B Dowel Bars Use aggregate with maximum size no greater than inch in the quick setting patch .
Sawcut slots in the pavement to a depth that allows placing the center of the dowel at middepth in the concrete slab .
Place the dowel bar at the middepth of the slab parallel to the longitudinal joint and parallel to the pavement surface .
Check the position of the dowel bar to ensure that it is parallel to the pavement surface and the longitudinal joint .
Finish the surface flush with the pavement surface .
DESCRIPTION This Section describes the requirements for diamond grinding of existing concrete pavements. . MATERIALS .. Materials Intentionally Blank .. Equipment Provide equipment as specified Grinding Machine Mechanical Sweeper .
CONSTRUCTION .. Diamond Grinding Existing Concrete Pavement Ensure that concrete pavement repairs are performed before diamond grinding .
Continuously remove grinding slurry from the pavement surface .
Ensure that the surface of the ground pavement has a corduroy texture consisting of grooves between and of an inch in width .
Do not grind to eliminate minor depressions if it lowers the overall profile of the pavement .
Regrind deficient areas in the pavement surface .
DESCRIPTION This Section describes the requirements for cleaning and sealing transverse and longitudinal joints in existing concrete pavement. . MATERIALS .. Materials Provide materials as specified Joint Sealer Backer Rod .. Equipment Provide equipment as specified Sealer Application System HotAir Lance .
Post warning tape around flatwork such as bridge decks pavement sidewalks driveways and islands during the curing period .
Comply with the limitations of placing specified in C except do not place concrete when the ambient temperature is above F. If within the hours before the concrete placement the National Weather Service httpwww.nws.noaa.gov locally forecasts a percent chance or greater of precipitation during the scheduled concrete placement postpone the placement of bridge decks and pavement .
Place the HDPE liner below the pavement and just above the first row of reinforcements .
For trenches in the traveled way shoulder and within feet of the outside edge of the shoulder backfill and restore the pavement structure to match the surrounding pavement before opening to traffic .
Do not use CLSM to replace pavement base courses or drainage layers that form the pavement structure .
For trenches in the traveled way shoulder and within feet of the outside edge of the shoulder backfill and restore the pavement structure to match the surrounding pavement before opening to traffic .
Construct concrete barrier curb in sections that correspond to the transverse joints in the existing or proposed pavement and at most feet in length .
Install inch preformed joint filler between the curb and concrete pavement and seal the joint with hotpoured joint sealer .
Locate transverse joints in dowelled curb directly over the transverse joints in the concrete pavement and over transverse pavement cracks wider than inch .
Place inch preformed joint filler between the curb and concrete pavement and seal the joint with hotpoured joint sealer .
Place inch preformed joint filler between the granite curb and concrete pavement .
Place inch preformed joint filler between the granite curb and adjacent concrete pavement .
Immediately before striping the pavement surface clean the surface of dirt oil grease and foreign material including curing compound on new concrete .
Before beginning longlife traffic striping operations construct or more striping test strips as specified in D. For each striping test strip apply striping to approximately linear feet of pavement with the same striping procedure that will be used for the Project .
Replace the entire length of striping that has failed to bond to the pavement or has chipped or cracked .
Immediately before marking the pavement surface clean the surface of dirt oil grease and foreign material including curing compound on new concrete .
Apply using equipment and procedures that produce markings of the specified color width and thickness with welldefined edges uniform retroreflectivity and proper bonding to the pavement .
When the ambient and surface temperatures are at least F apply the melted material at a temperature of between and F. Extrude the thermoplastic traffic markings on the HMA or concrete pavement ensuring a thickness of mils .
Remove defective markings as specified in Replace the entire area of traffic markings determined to be less than the required thickness to have incorrect color or width to have failed to bond to the pavement or to have chipped or cracked .
Ensure that roadway grooves are free of dirt dust oil grease moisture curing compounds loose or unsound pavement or other material that may interfere with bonding of the epoxy compound .
Do not apply epoxy compound when either the pavement surface or ambient air temperature is less than F at the time of application .
RPM leveling lugs shall rest on the pavement surface .
Do not allow lugs to drop below the pavement surface .
Removal of RPMs Remove RPMs that are not installed to full depth or that have a raised end exposed above the pavement surface .
Removal and Replacement of RPM Lenses Remove existing RPM lenses and install new monodirectional or bidirectional pavement reflector lenses using methods that do not damage the RPM castings .
Construct rumble strips by cutting indentations into the pavement perpendicular to the edge of the shoulder without disturbing the surrounding pavement .
Removal of Traffic Stripes and Markings Remove traffic stripes and traffic markings using methods that do not damage the underlying or adjacent pavement and do not cause gouging or create ridges or grooves in the pavement .
Before beginning removal operations demonstrate to the RE the proposed method to remove at least percent of stripes or markings without removing more than inch of pavement thickness .
Before excavating sawcut the full depth of the existing pavement and sidewalk .
For trenches in the traveled way shoulder and within feet of the outside edge of the shoulder backfill and restore the pavement structure and match the surrounding condition before opening to traffic .
If using CLSM install as specified in F. Restore the existing pavement structure to the original condition or as shown on the Plans .
The Department will make payment for restoring the existing pavement structure to the original condition or as shown on the Plans under the various Items the pavement structure is composed of .
Before excavating sawcut full depth existing pavement and sidewalk .
For trenches in the traveled way shoulder and within feet of the outside edge of the shoulder backfill and restore the pavement structure and match the surrounding condition before opening to traffic .
If using CLSM install as specified in F. Restore the existing pavement structure to the original condition or as shown on the Plans .. Sanitary Sewer Pipe Bridge Construct sanitary sewer pipe on bridges as specified in the Special Provisions .
The Department will make payment for restoring the existing pavement structure to the original condition or as shown on the Plans under the various Items the pavement structure is composed of .
The work restricted to prequalified contractors does not preclude the Contractor from performing sawcutting pavement removal removal of excess gas and temporary or final pavement restoration associated with the work of constructing gas mains .
Before excavating sawcut the full depth of the existing pavement and sidewalk .
For trenches in the traveled way shoulder and within feet of the outside edge of the shoulder backfill and restore the pavement structure and match the surrounding condition before opening to traffic .
Restore the existing pavement structure to the original condition or as shown on the Plans .
The Department will make payment for restoring the existing pavement structure to the original condition or as shown on the Plans under the various Items the pavement structure is composed of .
Ensure that jacking or drilling and receiving pits are not within feet from the edge of the pavement .
If the alternate method is unsuccessful the RE may allow the Contractor to use the opencut method to excavate as specified in A except sawcut the pavement full depth and no wider than inches greater than the proposed conduit diameter .
Excavate the trench place and maintain the conduit in the center of the trench and fill the trench with CLSM to the bottom of the pavement structure .
Replace the existing pavement structure in kind .
.. Loop Detector Sawcut the pavement as shown on the Plans .
After sawcutting immediately collect the slurry from the sawcut cavity and surrounding pavement surface and dispose of as specified Clean sawcuts with a poundspersquare inch water blast to remove remaining debris in the sawcut cavity and then blow sawcuts with a hotair lance to provide a dry surface .
When the roadway in the area of the loop detector is to be resurfaced or when constructing a new section of roadway install the loop detector immediately below the top layer of pavement .
Ensure that the joint sealant is hardened before the installation of the pavement .
A RWIS consists of the specified Items needed to provide a complete system that is capable of processing sensor and control data to and from the designated control center for wind speed and direction gusts precipitation visibility humidity pavement surface and subsurface temperature .
Install sensors embedded in the pavement according to the manufacturers recommendations .
Sawcut the pavement pressure wash and dry the sawcut before installing the sensors .
Install sensors embedded in the pavement and on bridges according to the manufacturers requirements for connections into existing weather stations .
Sawcut the pavement pressure wash and dry the sawcut before installing the sensors .
A WIMS consists of the specified Items needed to provide a complete system that is capable of processing pavement sensor and control data to and from the control center in Trenton .
The WIMS is composed of electronic and electrical equipment pavement sensors cables wiring control cabinet site processor remote communication modems operating software and software used to process and generate reports on the collected raw vehicle record files .
A TVS consists of the specified Items needed to provide a complete system that is capable of processing traffic control data to and from the control center in Trenton including pavement loop and vehicle detectors electronic devices to measure and record vehicle volume speed length gap and headway in each lane connected to the respective monitoring devices in a cabinet .
Sawcut the pavement .
Turf Repair Strip Remove soil and vegetation immediately adjacent to the edge of existing pavement .
If necessary form a windrow adjacent to the pavement .
Ensure that the soil aggregate is free from elements or chemicals which in the presence of water would produce detrimental effects to pavements structures or utility lines and is free of organic matter garbage metal debris lumps of clay or other deleterious matter .
SURFACE COURSE The last field in the Item description designates the intended use and location within the pavement structure options are surface intermediate or base course .
Composition Use Class V or E concrete for concrete pavement repair and replacement .
When used for concrete pavement use welded wire reinforcement mats at least feet in width .
Tie Bars and Joint Ties For tie bars and joint ties in longitudinal joints for concrete pavement use epoxy coated deformed reinforcement steel bar as specified in Provide certifications of compliance as specified in ..
Tie Bolts For tie bolts in longitudinal joints for concrete pavement use epoxy coated plain reinforcement steel bar that meets the requirements as specified in Perform all required bending of tie bolts in a fabrication shop .
For longlife pavement striping use an epoxy resin that is a component percent solids formulation conforming to the following requirements .
.. Raised Pavement Markers RPM Use raised pavement markers RPMs made of ductile iron castings with a way snowplowable replaceable prismatic reflector conforming to the following requirements .
Set castings in the pavement surfaces using an epoxy resin adhesive conforming to AASHTO M Type IV . .
Use removable pavement marking tape consisting of polymeric backing materials with a retroreflective surface .
for temporary pavement tape .
Temporary Pavement Markers Provide temporary pavement markers that have a maximum width of inches perpendicular to traffic and a maximum height of inch .
for temporary pavement markers .
PREFORMED JOINT FILLER Use preformed joint fillers conforming to AASHTO M or AASHTO M . For concrete pavement applications punch holes in preformed joint filler to admit the dowels .
for joint filler. . JOINT SEALER For sealing joints and cracks in HMA and concrete pavements use a hotpoured joint sealer that is listed on the QPL and conforms to ASTM D . Use the following types in the listed applications .
For sealing cracks in HMA use Type II sealer. . For sealing cracks and joints in concrete pavement and HMA saw and seal applications use Type IV sealer . .
For concrete pavements use coldpoured joint sealer that is listed on the QPL and conforms to ASTM D Type SL except that ultimate elongation is required to be a minimum of percent .
Use backer rod with a width that is at least percent greater than the width of the pavement joint or crack .
Provide a selfcontained selfpropelled resonant frequency breaker specifically designed for rubblizing concrete pavement .
Provide a selfcontained selfpropelled multihead breaker specifically designed for rubblizing concrete pavement .
Mount pavement breaking hammers so that there is continuous breakage from side to side .
Ensure that the roller has a gross weight of at least tons and is capable of seating the rubblized pavement .
Ensure that the roller has a gross weight of at least tons and is capable of seating the rubblized pavement and providing an even surface for the HMA overlay. . GROUT PUMPING UNIT A. PositiveDisplacement Injection or NonPulsating ProgressiveCavity Pump .
Provide a truckmounted pumping unit capable of injecting highdensity polyurethane at a controlled rate directly beneath the concrete pavement .
Ensure that the system is capable of immediate control of the material flow to avoid excessive lifting of the pavement slabs .
Ensure that the equipment is capable of detecting the movement of the pavement edge or any outside slab corners adjacent to a joint and the adjoining shoulder .
Ensure that the holding vessels for the epoxy pigments and hardener have thermometers for measuring the temperature of vessel contents. . A separate power unit for the pumps used to mix and distribute the components. . Mixing and conveying parts and the shaping dies or spray gun that is capable of maintaining the material at optimum plastic temperature. . A mechanical glass bead dispenser that automatically dispense beads uniformly on wet stripes or markings at the rates specified. . THERMOPLASTIC APPLICATOR Provide a thermoplastic applicator designed to apply thermoplastic in multiple widths between to inches and multiple thickness settings to achieve above the pavement thickness of to mils .
The Department may require special thickness equipment for in lane or shoulder transverse rumble strip pavement markings. . TRAFFIC STRIPE AND MARKING REMOVAL EQUIPMENT For removing traffic stripes and traffic markings provide equipment containing a vacuum system to remove all millings from the pavement surface and prevent residue from becoming airborne. . RUMBLE STRIP CUTTING MACHINE Provide a rumble strip cutting machine equipped with an acceptable guide that extends in front of the machine and is clearly visible to the operator to maintain alignment .
Ensure that the sweeper is equipped with an automatic audible warning signal when operating in reverse. . PAVEMENT SAW Provide a powerdriven pavement saw capable of sawing to the required dimensions in pass without causing uncontrolled cracking .
Equip the pavement saw with watercooled circular diamondedge blades or abrasive wheels and alignment guides .
Ensure that the pavement saw is capable of immediately collecting the slurry produced from the operations .
The Contractor may use a pavement saw that does not collect slurry if the RE approves an alternate slurry collection method .
Ensure that the caliper device is zeroed and set to the correct units of measure. . Place the specimen in the measuring apparatus with the smooth end of the core which is the top or upper surface of the pavement firmly against the zero reference point. . Take length measurements approximately degrees apart around the circumference of the specimen using the caliper device to measure the distance from the zero reference point top of the core to the bottom of the first lift .
The current version of ROADRUF ProVal or other Department approved pavement profile analysis software is used to compute the IRI .
i INDEX Bar open steel parapet A Abandoned vehicles towing Abbreviations Absorbent boom Acceptance Partial Acid producing soil Document control Excavation Remediation Sampling and analysis Temporarily storing Adhesive anchor bolt system Adhesive anchors bridge railing Admixtures Airentraining Chemical Corrosion inhibitor Affirmative action Aggregate Blast furnace slag Broken stone Coarse Concrete Densegraded Fine aggregate HMA Mineral filler Mortar and grout Reclaimed asphalt pavement RAP Recycled concrete aggregate Riprap stones Soil aggregate Source Stockpiles Virgin and RAP mixture Washed gravel Aggregate base course Compaction acceptance testing Correcting thickness Density control strips Compacting Density tests Placement Preparing subgrade or subbase Thickness requirements Air compressor Airentraining admixtures Aluminum alloy bolting Anchorages Annulment of award Approach slabs Approach bridge Approved working drawings Asbestos removal Asbuilt quantities Asphalt binder Asphalt price adjustment Asphaltstabilized drainage course Compacting Composition Delivering HMA Grading Mix design Paving plan Protecting Sampling and testing Spreading Thickness requirements Transporting HMA Weather limitations Assignment Audits Authority Change to make Department Inspection RE Automobile liability insurance Award Cancellation of Conditional Contract of B Backfilling Subsurface areas Bar chart schedule Requirements Updates Barrier curb Bridge Fixedform Slipform Concrete Dowelled Base course Aggregate Concrete Baseline schedule Beam guide rail Anchorages Blockouts Controlled release terminals Delineators Driving posts Element End treatments Post spacing Posts and spacers Rail element Removal of Reset beam guide rail Rub rail ii Bearing assemblies Reinforced elastomeric Structural HighLoad MultiRotational HLMR Seismic isolation Elastomeric Sliding Bearing pads Bearings Installing Anchor bolts Bridge seat bearing areas Setting Shipping Storing Working drawings Bicycle safe grates Bid Documents escrow Bidder Disqualification of Qualifications Registration Bids Balanced Consideration of Irregular Preparation of Public opening Qualifications to Rejection of all Submission of Withdrawal of Bituminous material distributor Bituminous materials Aphalt binder Cutback asphalts Limitations for use Emulsified asphalts Temperaturevolume correction factors Blasting plan Blockouts Bolts Anchor Highstrength steel Steel Bond Payment Performance Posted in lieu of retainages Proposal Bonding and grounding Cable and wire Materials Boom absorbent Breaker Multihead Resonant Bridge Approaches Barrier curb Fixedform Slipform Decks Drainage Fence ChainLink Grates Inlet frames Parapet Fixedform Slipform Railing Aluminum Anchors Steel Scuppers Bridge decks Acceptance testing Curing Date panel Dry run Forms Grooved surface Installing joint assemblies Installing reinforcement steel Joint assemblies Installation Modular expansion Preformed elastomeric Strip seal expansion Working drawings Limitations of placing concrete Loading Opening to traffic Permissible surface variations Placement plan Placing concrete Rehabilitation Repair of concrete deck Scarification Removable forms Repair of Saw cut grooved surface SIP forms Surface remedial measures Surface requirements Surface texture finish Underdeck inspection Bridges existing Painting Removal of Bulkheads Timber sheet piling C Cabinets Electrical Meter Cable Bonding and grounding Connecting to utilities Electrical Fiber optic Installing Racks iii Slack Testing Traffic signal Cable connectors Camera surveillance system Camera Camera Standard Controller Equipment training Final documentation Foundation Maintenance Testing Cancellation of Award of Contract Cast boxes Cast stone lettering panel Castings Extension frames Gray iron Resetting Rings Setting Castinplace retaining walls Caution fence Cell phones Cement Certification of compliance Certified working drawings Chainlink fenceSee Fence Change Order Protesting Changes to the Contract Authority to make Change Order Character Constructive acceleration Delays Differing site conditions Field Order Force Account Inefficiencies New Work Notice Protesting Quantity decreases Quantity increases Tracking costs Types Unacceptable cost calculation methods Unrecoverable costs Channel protection Channelizing guide posts Character of work changes to Chemical admixtures Claims by Contractor Claims committee Clay or shale brick Cleanup final Clearing and grubbing Clearing site Bridges Clearing and grubbing Mailbox and sign relocation Plugging pipe Preparation Removing electrical material and equipment Removing pipe inlets and manholes Sidewalks driveways curbs and gutters Structures Coarse aggregate Cofferdams Permanent Temporary Cold joint paving Cold weather conditions ColorCoated nonvegetative surface Commencement of Work Notice Submissions Communication equipment Communication hub Compacting Asphaltstabilized drainage course HMA Subbase Compactor Dynamic HMA Pneumatictired Vibratory drum Completion Interim Substantial Compost Composted sewerage sludge Comprehensive autombile liability insurance Comprehensive general liability insurance Computer system Concrete Acceptance testing requirements Slump and air entrainment Strength Nonpayadjustment items Payadjustment items Admixtures Aggregate Approaches Barrier curb Bridge Fixedform Slipform Base course Batching plant Automatic batching system Batch counter Bins Chemical admixtures Hoppers Laboratory Mineral admixtures Scales Water measuring equipment Brick Cement iv Composition Driveway HPC Composition Control and acceptance testing Mix design Mixing Island Mix design Mixer Mobile Smallbatch Mixing Centralplant and transit Batch tolerances Batching Delivery tickets Rejection criteria Requirements Mobile On the project Small mixers Parapet Fixed form Slipform Pavement Partial depth repair Placing seal for cofferdam Precast Nonstructural Acceptance requirements Components Curing Fabrication Finishing Quality control Removing forms Shipping and handling Retaining walls Acceptance requirements Components Curing Fabrication Finishing Form removal Quality control Shipping and handling Structural Acceptance requirements Component Curing Fabrication Finishing Quality control Removing forms Shipping and handling Precast plant Prestressed Acceptance requirements Components Curing Fabrication Finishing Quality assurance Quality control Removing forms Shipping and handling Prestressed plant Quality control Rubblizng SCC Composition Control and acceptance testing Mix design Mixing Verification of pumpability Sidewalk Bridge Slope gutters Slope protection Sloping curb Structures Placing concrete Seal method Tremie Trucks Central mixing Transit mixing Concrete barrier curb dowelled Concrete base course Placing concrete Relief joints Sawcutting Slipform paving Setting joint assemblies Thickness testing Concrete block Inlets and manholes Concrete pavement repair Diamond grinding existing Full depth using concrete Retrofit dowel bars Sealing joints in concrete pavement Concrete slab stabilization Deflection testing Highdensity polyurethane grout Drilling holes Experience Lifting Repairing cracks Weather limitations Pozzolan grout Drilling holes Repairing cracks Testing Void filling Weather limitations Concrete surface course Concreting plan Core samples Curing Diamond grinding v Fixed form method Consolidating Control testing Finishing Placing concrete Removing forms Setting forms Setting joint assemblies Setting tie bars Surface correction Forms Installing longitudinal joint ties Opening to traffic Partial depth repair Opening to traffic Placing concrete Preparation Placing limitations Placing methods Protectin surface Ride quality requirements Sawcutting Sealing joints Strength requirements Thickness requirements Average core thickness Individual core thickness Underlayer preparation Weather limitations Concrete vertical curb Concrete washout system Concurrent delays Conditional Award Conductor cable assignments Conduit Flexible metallic Flexible nonmetallic Rigid metallic Rigid nonmetallic Conflicts of interest Conformity with Contract Plans Specifications Conformity with the Contract Discrepencies Construction Barrier curb Driveway Layout Signs Constructive acceleration Contract Assignment Award of Conformity with Examination of Execution of Failure to execute Intent of Nonwaiver Plans Specifications Working drawings Contract Time Extensions Modifications to Reductions Time impact evaluation Types of Delay Excusable Noncompensable Nonexcusable Contractor Damaged caused by Independent Responsibilities Risks assumed by Contractual claim resolution process Satisfying notice requirements Steps I RE II Dispute review board DRB III Claims committee IV Nonbinding mediation Contractual Notice Initial REs response Control center system Control fill method Control strip Embankment Control of work Control points and stakes Controlled low strength material CLSM Controlled Release Terminals Controlled traffic signal system Controller Equipment training Final documentation Maintenance Testing Controller Controlled traffic signal system ITS Turn on Converting inlets to manholes Cooperation with Others Utilities Coordinator traffic control Core samples Concrete surface course Correspondence with RE format Crash Cushion Temporary Traffic control truck Crash cushions Crosshole Sonic Logging CSL Installing tubes Reporting Steel cage installation Testing vi Culverts Precast concrete Removal of Curb Concrete Protection and curing Concrete barrier Concrete barrier dowelled Concrete sloping Concrete sloping dowelled Concrete vertical Concrete vertical Construction barrier Dresed stone Granite Reset HMA Quarryspilt stone Removal of Stone Curb pieces Curing Bridge decks Structural concrete Curing compound Curing facility Equipment Furnishings Maintenance Utilities and lighting Curing materials Burlap cloth Liquid membraneforming compounds Polyethylene sheeting Cutback asphalts D Daily communications Damages Liquidated Date panel Debris Disposal of Default Deflection inspection of HDPE pipe Deflection testing Deflection testing equipment Delay Damages Payment for Labor escalation Material escalation NonProductive activity Storage Delineators Ground mounted Mounting to beam guide rail Delineators flexible Barrier curb mounted Ground mounted Guide rail mounted Demolition of buildings Rodents control and extermination Safety Plan Utility disconnections Densegraded aggregate Recycled concrete aggregate Virgin Virgin and RAP mixture Density control method Density control strips Aggregate base course Compacting Density tests Departmentfurnished materials Detectable warning surface Dewatering basin Diamond grinding Existing concrete pavement Differing site conditions Direct tension indicators Disabled vehicles towing Disadvantaged business enterprises Discrimination in employment Disposal of Debris Excess or unusable material Hazardous regulated material Materials Regulated material Dispute review board DRB Dolphins Dowel bars Drainage course Asphaltstabilized Drainage structures Cleaning Culverts Headwalls Inlets Manholes Drainage bridge Drilled shafts Aligning Approval of Constructing using casings Permanent Removable Temporary Constructing using slurries Mineral Polymer Construction sequence limitations Core drilling Crosshole Sonic Logging CSL Demonstration Excavating Cleaning Dry method Obstructions Verification Wet method vii Excavation log Installation plan Load tests Linear Variable Displacement Transducers LVDTs Ocell installation Posttest grouting procedures Reporting Testing Locating Placing concrete Limitations Methods Pumped method Tremie method Reinforcement steel cages Removing obstructions Rock socketing Drilling and blasting Blasting plan Blasting test sections Explosives Presplitting Production blasting Safety Driveway Concrete Construction HMA Ductile iron castings Ductile iron water Dynamic compactor Dynamic message system Controller Equipment training Final documentation Foundation Maintenance Sign Sign with controller Standard Testing Dynamic pile load test E Echelon paving Electrical Bonding and grounding Cable Cable racks Conduit bridge Controller Existing systems Foundations General items Highway lighting Lighting mast arm Lighting standard Luminaire Sign lighting Temporary Tower lighting Underdeck lighting Intelligent transporation systems ITS ITS Camera surveillance system Controlled traffic signal system Dynamic message system Fiber optic cable General system Equipment training Final documentation Maintenance General system testing Road weather information system Traffic volume system Travel time systems Weigh in motion system Junction box Meter cabinet Pedestrian signal head Rigid metallic conduit Testing circuits and system Traffic signal Circuits Controllers Image detector Interim Loop detector Loop detector cable Mast arm Push button Standards Temporary Traffic signal cable Traffic signal head Wire Electrical materials Bonding and grounding Bushings Cabinets Cable and wire Cable connectors Cable racks Cast boxes and fittings Circuit breakers Conduit and fittings Electrical tape Friction Insulating Jacket Ground rods Ground wire Lamps Highway lighting Sign lighting Traffic signal Loop wire Mast bracket arms Meter cabinets Multiple lighting wire Panel boards Pedestals Photoelectric controls Poles viii Resin splicing kits Service wire Single conductor signal wire Traffic signal cable Transformer bases Electrical tape Embankment Constructing Constructing with Concrete HMA Rock Soil aggregate and rock Density control method Placing and compacting methods Control fill method Density control method Directed method Enddumping method Slope stabilizing Emergency spill kit Emergency towing service Emerging small business enterprises Employers liability insurance Emulsified asphalts End treatments Enddumping method Enviornmental manager Enviornmental protection Archeological sites Forests Hazardous materials Historical sites Navigable waters Epoxy Bedding compound Bonding compound Injection material Resin injection equipment Striping applicator Striping unit Traffic stripes Waterproofing Equipment Air compressor Bituminous material distributor Concrete batching plant Concrete trucks Deflection testing equipment Dynamic compactor Epoxy resin injection equipment Epoxy striping applicator Epoxy striping unit Flashing arrow board Flexural beam testing Grinding machine Grout pumping unit Cavity pump Truck mounted HMA compactor Steelwheel Vibratory HMA curb machine HMA paver HMA plant HMA trucks Hotair lance Impact hammer Injection device Leads and followers Lift monitoring equipment Materials transfer vehicleMTV Mechanical sweeper Milling machine Mixer Mobile mixer Multihead breaker Nuclear density guage Padfoot roller Pavement forms Pavement saw Pneumatictired compactors Portable variable message sign Precast plant Prestressed plant Resonant breaker Rumble strip cutting machine Scarification Sealer application system Slipform extrusion machine Slipform paver Smallbatch mixer Spreading and finishing machine Spreading and finishing machine bridge decks Steelwheel roller Straightedge Thermoplastic applicator Traffic control truck with mounted crash cushions Traffic stripe and marking removal equipment Ultrathin paver Vibrator Vibratory drum compactor Vibratory hammer Vibratory roller ZGrid roller Escrow Bid Documents Estimates Subcontractor certification Ethics standards Evaluation of subsurface and surface conditions Excavation Acid producing soil Temporily storing Blasting plan Dewatering Disposal of Acid producing soil Hazardous regulated material Material Regulated material Document control Materials and handling reports PPC logs ix Sampling logs and analytical reports Soilsediment usage tracking log Transport manifests Drilling and blasting Foundation and bridge areas Measuring elevation Regulated material Document control Sampling and analysis Temporarily storing Reuse of material Rock areas Stripping Test pit Unclassified Temporarily storing Water pipe Wet areas Excess liability insurance Excusable Compensable delays Excusable Noncompensable delays By Others Catclysmic natural phenomena Extreme weather Labor disputes Shortage of materials Sovereign acts of the state Utilities War and unrest Execution of Contract Explosives Storage Use of Extension frames F Fence Bridge Caution Chainlink Gates Heavyduty silt Material Repairing Silt Snow Temporary Fender systems Fertilizer Application Fertilizing Fiber mulch Fiber optic cable Equipment training Final documentation Installation Maintenance Splicing Testing Level Level OTDR Power meter Tracer wire Fiberglass reinforced plastic lumber Fiberglass reinforced plastic piles Fiberglassconcrete composite piles Field office Cell phones Communication equipment Computer system Fax machine Lavatory Maintenance Office equipment Office furnishings Size requirements Telephone Telephone service Utilities Field Order Filters Inlet Final Certificate Final cleanup Finishing structural concrete Fire hydrant Relocating Resetting Flagger Flashing arrow board Flexible metallic conduit Flexible nonmetallic conduit Backfilling Excavation Installation Flexural beam testing equipment Floating turbidity barrier Fly ash Force Account Payment for Direct labor Equipment Equipment Contractorowned Equipment Rented Extraordinary expenses Indirect labor costs Insurance Labor fringe benefits Materials Overhead Profit Subcontractors Foreign material Federal aid projects Wholly Statefunded projects Forms Pavement Foundation Electrical Castinplace Precast Excavation ITS x Fuel price adjustment Fuel usage factor Full depth concrete pavement repair Curing concrete Dowels Joint ties Opening to traffic Placing concrete Placing limitations Preparation Sawcutting and sealing joints Setting forms G Gabion basket stone Gabion walls Gabion wire baskets Galvanizingzinc coating Gas mains Airpressure test Backfilling Bridges Excavating Handling Installation prequalification Installing Bell joint encapsulation Fusing plastic pipe Hot tap preparation Thrust restraints Welding steel pipe Scheduling Storing Tiein Tiein assistance Gas valve boxes reset Gates General liability insurance Geomembrane liner Geotextiles Grading HMA Granite curb Grass seed mixtures Grates Bicycle safe Gray iron castings Grinding machine Ground mounted delineators Grout Mixer Nonshrink type Grubbing Guide rail See Beam guide rail Guy wire H Hauling restrictions Hay Haybale Haybale check dams with temporary stone outlets Hazardous regulated material Disposal of Headwalls precast concrete Heating and housing Heavyduty silt fence Herbicides High voltage lines Highway lighting Lighting mast arm Lighting standard Luminaire Sign lighting Temporary system Tower lighting Underdeck lighting HMA Aggregates for Compactor Steelwheel roller Vibratory roller Composition Construction Air void requirements Compacting Conditioning existing surfaces Grading Longitudinal joints Opening to traffic Paving plan Prime coat application Spreading Tack coat application Test strip Transporation of HMA Transverse joints Weather limitations Curb Curb machine Driveway Drum mixing plants Aggregate bins Aggregate feeder Asphalt binder metering system Control console Drum mixer Emission control system Mineral filler bin Modifications Proportioning controls Fully automated batchtype plants Aggregate hot bins Asphalt binder control Automated batching and mixing control Control of mixing time Dryer Hopper Mixer Plant scales Screens Weigh box Fully automated batchtype plants Island xi Joints Cold joing paving Echelon paving Longitudinal Material Mix design Mix designation Mixing plants Aggregate bins Aggregate storage Automatic release agent system Dust collector Feeder for dryer Laboratory Preparation of asphalt binder Safety Thermometric equipment Truck scales NonVegetative surfaces Patch Paver Automatic profile control Automatic slope controls Manual override system Receiving hopper and distribution system Screed Screed heater Sloped plate Strikeoff assembly Plants and equipment Surge and storage bins Sampling and testing Sidewalk Test strip Nuclear density gauge readings Quality control core density test results Roller pattern Temperatures Trucks for transporting mixtures HMA courses Acceptance Core samples IRI Ride quality requirements Thickness requirements Surface course thickness Total thickness HMA friction courses HMA overlays Sawing and sealing joints Hot weather concreting Hotair lance Hydrostatic pressure testing I Image detector Impact hammer Hammer cushion Pile cushion Pile drive head Independent Contractor Inertial Barrier System Injection device Inlet frames Inlets Block and brick Converting to manholes Filters Precast Reconstructing Removal of Sediment traps temporary Setting castings Inlets filters Type Type Inlets sediment traps temporary Inquiries After Award of the Contract Before Award of the Contract Inspection Of plant materials Plant Safe access Insulated blankets Insulated forms Insurance Automobile Comprehensive automobile liability Comprehensive General Liability Employers liability Excess liability Liability Maintenance Marine liability Owners and Contractors protective liability Policies Pollution liability Protective liability Railroad protective liability Types Workers compensation Intent of Contract Interim completion Island Concrete HMA ITS Camera surveillance system Controlled traffic signal system Device testing Level A Level B Level C Dynamic message system Fiber optic cable General system Communication cable Communication hub Control center Controller Final documentation Foundation Junction box xii Maintenance General system testing Device testing Project testing Road weather information system Traffic volume system Travel time systems Weigh in motion system J Joint assemblies Modular Preformed elastomeric Strip seal expansion Joint materials Preformed elastomeric joint sealer Preformed expansion joint filler Sealer Strip seal expansion dam Joint ties Junction box Castinplace Cover Fabricated Foundation Castinplace Precast Frame Metal Precast L Laboratory Materials field Ladder rungs Lamps Landscaping Fertilizing Mowing Mulching Planting Selective clearing Selective thinning Sodding Soil preparation Topsoil stabilization Topsoiling Tree removal Tree trimming Turf repair strip Turf seeding Landscaping materials Binders Composted sewerage sludge Fertilizer limestone pulverized Miscellaneous materials Mulch Plant materials Seed mixtures Sod Topsoil Topsoil stabilization matting Lane occupancy charges Latex paint Laws ordinances and regulations Insurance requirements Lead health and safety plan LHSAP Leads and followers Legal jurisdiction Applicable law Approvals Licenses Permits Soverign immunity Liability Insurance Limitation of Personal for public officials Lift monitoring equipment Lighting Highway Luminaire Mast arm Signs Standard Temporary highway Tower Underdeck Limestone pulverized Limitation of liability Limitations of placing Structural concrete Liquidated damages Load restrictions Longlife traffic stripes Loop detector Connecting Installing Testing Loop detector cable Luminaire Lighting replacement assemblies M Mailbox and sign relocation Maintaining and protecting traffic Flagger Police Traffic control directors Maintenance Curing facility ITS Operational Regular Materials field laboratory SESC Manholes Block and brick Covers Precast Reconstructing Removal of Setting castings xiii Marine liability insurance Markers Temporary pavement Masonry units Clay or shale brick Concrete block Concrete brick Granite curbs stone facing for pier shafts Stone paving block Mass concrete Mast arm Mast bracket arms Material Bar open steel parapet Aggregate for concrete mortar and grout Coarse aggregate Fine aggregate Lightweight aggregate Aggregate for HMA Coarse Aggregate Crushed recycled container glass CRCG Fine Aggregate Ground Bituminous Shingle Material GBSM Mineral filler Reclaimed asphalt pavement RAP Remediated Petroleum Contaminated Soil Aggregate RPCSA Aggregates Aluminum alloy bolting Aluminum paint Asphalt binder Asphaltstabilized drainage course Beam guid rail End treatments Miscellaneous hardware Posts and blockouts Rail element Rub rail Bearing pads Bituminous Blast furnace slag Bridge railing Aluminum Steel Broken stone Castings Ductile iron Gray iron Cement Clay Brick Coal tar epoxy paint Coarse aggregate Coatings Asphalt waterproofing Detectable warning surface Epoxy waterproofing For nonvegetative surface Galvanizingzinc coating Components for drainage structures Carbon steel extension frames and rings Ladder rungs Scuppers Concrete Concrete admixtures Airentraining Chemical Corrosion inhibitor Mineral Fly ash Silica fume Slag Viscosity modifying Concrete block for inlets and manholes Concrete brick Concrete stain Controlled low strength material Curing Burlap cloth Liquid membraneforming compound White polyethylene sheeting Curing facility Cutback asphalts Densegraded aggregate Recycled concrete aggregate Virgin Virgin and RAP mixture Departmentfurnished Dimensional lumber For structures Sheet piling Direct tension indicators Emulsified asphalts Epoxy bonding compound Epoxy injection Epoxy traffic stripes Fence Caution Chainlink Snow Fertilizer Fiberglass reinforced plastic lumber Fiberglass reinforced plastic piles Fiberglassconcrete composite piles Flexible delineators Floating turbidity barrier Foreign Gabion basket stone Gabion wire baskets Geomembrane liner Geotextiles Grit Grout Epoxy Nonshrink Grout for undersealing concrete pavement Highdensity polyurethane Pozzolan Hay High tensile strength alloy bars Highstrength steel bolting Hightensilestrength wire prestressing strand HMA HPC xiv Inspection Joint assemblies Modular Preformed elastomeric compression type Strip seal expansion glandular type Joint sealer Lamps Mast bracket arms Modified opengraded friction course Mortar Mulch Gravel Shredded hardwood bark Shredded wood Stone Straw Wood cellulose fiber Wood chip Nonstructural precast concrete Opengraded friction course Pavement repair mixes Class V and E Pedestals Photoelectric controls Pipe Concrete Corrugated aluminum alloy culvert Corrugated aluminum alloy underdrain Corrugated steel Ductile iron water Highdensity polyethylene HDPE Plastic drainage Steel alloy for bridge storm drains Pipe arches Corrugated aluminum alloy Culvert Corrugated steel Pipe bedding Class A Class B Class C Class D Poles Polyethylene sheeting Polymer modified tack coat Polymerized joint adhesive Posttensioning reinforcement Bars Strands Precast concrete retaining walls Preformed joint filler Prestressed concrete Prestressing reinforcement Pulverized limestone Quality requirements Questionnaire Quicksetting patch Raised pavement markersRPM Rebar coupling devices Reinforced elastomeric bearing assemblies Reinforcement for concrete pavement Dowel bars Tie bars and joint ties Tie bolts Reinforcement steel Bars Dowels Spiral Structural shapes plates and bars Welded wire Riprap stones Samples SCC Sediment control bag Shale Brick Sign Sign structures Sign supports Breakaway for ground mounted signs Mounting materials NonBreakaway for ground mounted signs Steel Timber Sleeves Sodium chloride rock salt Soil additives Compost Composted sewerage sludge Soil Aggregate Source of supply Stainless steel bolting Steel bolting Adhesive anchor bolt system Anchor bolts Bolts Nuts and washers Steel casings for drilled shafts Steel piles Stone curb Dressed stone Quarrysplit stone Stone facing for pier shafts Stone matrix asphalt Stone paving block Straw Structural bearing assemblies Structural precast concrete Structural steel Fabrication Structural steel paint Tackifers Fiber mulch Synthetic plastic emulsion Vegetable based gels Temporary traffic stripes and markings Latex paint Removable black line masking tape Temporary pavement markers Temporary pavement tape Tests Thermoplastic traffic markings Timber Round piling Routed spacers Sawn posts xv Spacers Timber connectors and hardware Timber treatment Topsoil Tower poles Transformer bases Ultrathin HMA Unacceptable Unusable disposal of Washed Gravel Water Waterstops Materials field laboratory Cell phones Communication equipment Computer systems Fax machine Laboratory equipment Lavatory Maintence Office equipment Office furnishings Parking Telephones Utilities and lighting Materials handling plan Materials transfer vehicleMTV Measuring Elevation Quantities Mechanical sweeper Meter cabinet Meter cabinets Milling Concrete Equipment HMA Milling machine Mineral admixtures Fly ash Silica fume Slag Mineral filler Mineral slurry Mixer Mobile mixer Mobilization Modified opengraded friction course Compacting Composition Delivery Grading Mix design Opening to traffic Paving plan Ride quality requirements Sampling and testing Spreading Test strip Thickness requirements Transportation Weather limitations Monitoring wells Monthly payments Monument box Monuments Rock socket Survey Monuments and markers Preservation of Mortar Mowing Existing areas Seeded areas Mulch Gravel Shredded hardwood bark Shredded wood Stone Wood cellulose fiber Wood chip Mulching Fiber Plants Straw Multihead breaker N New Jersey contractual liability act New Work Night operations Illuminance levels Lighting requirements Visibility requirements Equipment Workers Nonbinding mediation Conditions Decision Mediator Meeting Nonexcusable delays Nonthird party beneficiary clause Nonvegetative surfaces Notice Contractual claim resolution process Nuclear density guage O Oil spill remediation Oilonly emergency spill kit Oilwater separator Opengraded friction course Compacting Composition Delivery Grading Mix design Opening to traffic Paving plan Ride quality requirements Sampling and testing Spreading Test strip xvi Thickness requirements Transportation Weather limitations Opening to traffic after applying traffic stripes or markings After applying traffic stripes or markings Concrete surface course HMA Others cooperation with Owners and Contractors protective liability insurance P Padfoot roller Paint Aluminum finish coat Coal tar epoxy Epoxy bonding compound Epoxy waterproofing Sampling and testing shipping requirements Structural steel Painting Bridges existing Painting existing bridges Applying paint Cleaning Blast Hand or power tool Cleanup Coating thickness Epoxy mastic Organic zinc Conditions Curing Mixing paint Pollution control system Containment plan Equipment storage plan Lead health and safety planLHASP Waste disposal plan Prime coat Protection of Environment Persons Property Structures Repair Spot coat Stenciling Striping Surface preparation Waste disposal Parapet Bar open steel Bridge Fixed form Slipform Partial acceptance Partial depth concrete pavement repair Patch HMA Patented Devices Materials Processes Pavement Removing Pavement markers temporary Pavement marking tape temporary Pavement repair mixes Class V and E Pavement saw Paver HMA Slipform Ultrathin Paving plan Asphaltstabilized drainage course HMA Modified opengraded friction course Opengraded friction course Stone matrix asphalt SMA Ultrathin friction course Payment Delay damages Final Force account Materials for Scope of Payment bond Pedestals Pedestrian bridge Performance bond Permanent sheeting Construction Dewatering Plan Photoelectric controls Pier shafts Stone facing Piles Capping Cutoff Damaged correcting Defective correcting Driving Accuracy Methods Penetration Rock bearing Vibratory Furnishing pile driving equipment Load bearing Prebored holes Steel Order lengths Pipe shells Production pile lengths Shoes Splices Steel painting xvii Test piles Dynamic load test Static load test Wave equation analysis program WEAP Pipe Backfilling Bedding Cleaning existing Concrete Reinforced Corrugated aluminum alloy Culvert Culvert arches Underdrain Corrugated steel Culvert Deflection inspection of Ductile iron water End sections Excavating For stream diversion HDPE Installing Alternate methods using Joining Joints Circular pipe Gasket Mortar Plastic drainage Removal of existing Steel alloy Storing and handling Underdrains Video inspection of Water Bridge Pipe bedding Class A Class B Class C Class D Pipe lining Plan Blasting Demolition Safety Materials handling Pollution prevention and control Preexcavation Sitespecific health and safety Plans Conformity with Plant establishment period Plant inspection Plant materials landscape Planting Acceptance Backfilling Balled and burlapped plants Beds Containerized plants Delivering Excavation Furnishing Location Maintaining Mulching Optimal seasons Protecting Pruning Restoration Setting plants Staking and guying Watering Plants Mulching Plugging pipe Pneumatically applied mortar Application Cleaning of surfaces Curing Repair limits Test panels Pneumatictired compactors Poles Police Policies Insurance Pollution insurance Pollution prevention and control plan Polyethylene sheeting Polyethylene sheeting white Polymer slurry Polymerized joint adhesive Portable variable message sign Controller Power source Diesel Solar Sign panel Structural support system Portable variable message sign Posts Channelizing guide Posttensioning reinforcement Bars Strands Pozzolan grout Drilling holes Repairing cracks Testing Void filling Weather limitations Precast Arch structures Culverts Headwalls Precast plant Prefabricated modular walls Working drawings Preparation of Bid xviii Preparing existing pavement Milling concrete Milling HMA Repairing HMA pavement Sealing cracks Presplitting Pressure injection sealing Crack repair survey Finishing surface Injecting epoxy resin adhesive Repair preparation Sealing surface cracks Prestressed concrete structures Prestressed plant Casting beds Certification Forms Grouting equipment Jacks Load cells MEs office Prestressed structural concrete Prestressing reinforcement Price adjustment Asphalt Fuel Prime coat Application temperatures Production blasting Progress schedule Project Limits Examination of Maintenance within Property damage Proposal Bond Return of Proposal documents Downloading Revisions to Proprietary items substitutes Proprietary retaining walls Backfilling Compacting backfill Drainage Foundation Handling Installing Shipping Storing Working drawings Protection of Enviornment Markers and monuments Push button Q Qualification to Bid Quantities Asbuilt Measurement Quantity increases and decreases Major Minor Quicksetting patch materials Type Type A Type B Type R Railing Bridge Anchors Railroad Insurance Raised pavement marker RPM RE authority Rebar coupling devices Reclaimed asphalt pavement RAP Drum mixing plant In HMA Recovery of monies by the State Regulated material Disposal of Excavating Reinforcement steel Bars Coatings Dowels Field bending Field cutting Handling High tensile strength alloy bars Hightensilestrength wire prestressing strand Placing Plates Posttensioning Prestressing Protecting Shapes Spiral Splicing Storing Welded wire Remediation Oil spill Schedule Removal of Asbestos Bridges Concrete base course and surface course Electrical material and equipment Pavement Pipe inlets and manholes Sidewalk driveways curbs and gutters Structures Traffic Stripes Underground storage tanks Repair of concrete deck Cleaning reinforcement steel Deck condition survey Patching Class A concrete Quick setting patch xix Sawcut and removal Splicing reinforcement steel Type B Type C Reset beam guide rail Reset granite curb Resin splicing kits Resonant breaker Responsibilities of Contractor Equipment Fabricators Labor Subcontracted work Suppliers Inspectors RE Retaining walls Prefabricated modular walls Retrofit dowel bars Caps Placing Preparation Retroreflective sheeting Rigid metallic conduit Earth Backfilling Excavation Installation Exposed Opencut Roadway Rigid nonmetallic conduit Backfilling Cutting Excavation Field bends Installation Riprap stones Risks Assumed by the Contractor Claims on account of injury loss or damage Damage to construction Loss of property Road weather information system Equipment training Final documentation Maintenance Roadway devices Testing Weather station Rock backfill Rock socketing Rodent control Roller Padfoot Steelwheel Rolling and vibrating method RowofWay restrictions RPMs Rub rail Rubblizing concrete pavement DGA area patching Existing subsurface facility investigation Final subsurface facility survey Installing drainage system Multihead method Protecting Removing existing HMA surfaces Removing reinforcement steel Removing transverse joint assemblies Repairing subsurface facilities Resonant method Restrictions Rubblization plan Sawcutting joints Seating Test strip Rumble strip cutting machine Rumble strips S Safety program Certification Description Elements Identification of personnel Responsibility Sanitary provisions Sanitary sewers Backfilling Bridge Excavating Gravity and force mains Handling pipe and accessories Installing Manhole Reconstruct Reset Pipe lining Scheduling Service connection Testing Force main Gravity main Exfiltration Infiltration Thrust blocks Video inspection Scarification Bridge deck rehabilitation Equipment Schedule Alternate staging Bar chart Requirements Updates Baseline submission Constraints CPM Liquidated damages Milestones Missed updates Preliminary submission xx Progress Submission requirements Updates Gantt Chart Progress narrative Remediation Sorts Tabular reports Value engineering Scheduling Scope of payment Scuppers Sealer application system Sealing Abandoned wells Cracks in HMA surface course Joints in concrete pavement Seating Multihead method Resonant method Sediment control bag Sediment control tank Sediment traps Temporary inlet Temporary stone outlet Seed Mixtures Seeding Wildflowers Selective clearing Selective thinning Service connection Gas Sanitary sewer Water SESC Absorbent boom Caution fence Concrete washout system Construction driveway Construction Requirements Dewatering basin Enviornmental manager Floating turbidity barrier Haybale Haybale check dams with temporary stone outlets Heavyduty silt fence Inlet filters Maintenance Measures Oilonly emergency spill kit OilWater separator Removal Sediment control bag Sediment control tank Silt fence Temporary inlet sediment traps Temporary slope drains Temporary stone check dams Temporary stone outlet sediment traps Sewers See Sanitary sewers Shear connectors Sheeting Permanent Temporary Timber Shielding temporary Sidewalk Bridge Concrete HMA Sign structures Acceptance Fabrication Quality control Shipping and handling Sign support structures Erecting posts Erecting trusses Erection plan Excavation for Installing electrical material Placing concrete Storage and handling Tower structures Working drawings Signs Construction Fabrication Applying retroreflective sheeting Legends and borders Panels Flashing arrow board Lighting Materials Aluminum components Retroreflective sheeting Packing storing and shipping Portable variable message sign Support structures Supports Breakaway Flexible delineators Nonbreakaway Steel Timber Types GA breakaway GO GOX NonBreakaway Regulatory Warning Silt fence Site clearing Sitespecific health and safety plan Slack cable and wire Slag Sleeves Slipform extrusion machine Slipform paver Slipform paving Slope Protection xxi Slope drains temporary Slope protection Concrete Concrete slope gutters Riprap stone Rock backfill Smallbatch mixer Snow fence Sod Sodding Delivery Installing Mowing Soil aggregate Combining and mixing Composition Gradation Soil erosion and sediment control Soil preparation Source Materials Specifications conformity with Spill kit Spreading HMA Subbase Spreading and finishing machine Spreading and finishing machine bridge decks Stainless steel bolting Standards Static pile load test Stayinplace forms Steel Alloy pipe Anchor bolts Bolts Castings Grid flooring Nuts Posts for beam guide rail Rail element for beam guide rail Railing bridge Reinforcement Sign supports Washers Steelwheel roller Stockpiles Stone Facing for pier shafts Mulch Paving block Stone check dams temporary Stone matrix asphalt SMA Air void requirements Compacting Composition Delivery Grading Mix design Opening to traffic Paving plan Ride quality requirements Sampling and testing Spreading Test strip Thickness requirements Transportation Weather limitations Straightedge Straw Striping Removable black line masking Temporary Stripping Structural concrete Bridge decks Consolidating concrete Curing Curing compound Wet burlap and sheeting White polyethylene sheeting Curing and protecting Cold weather conditions Heating and housing Decks Placing Surface texture finish Epoxy waterproofing Falsework Removal of Finishing concrete surface Class surface finish Class rubbed finish Forms Removal of Limitations of placing Cold weather concreting Hot weather concreting Loading Mass concrete Placing concrete Chutes and troughs Pumped Placing mass concrete Precast arches Backfilling Erecting Erection plan Joints Shipping Storing Working drawings Precast culverts Backfilling Erecting Erection plan Grouting PostTensioning Shipping Storing Working drawings Prestressed Erecting Erection plan xxii Grouting Posttensioning Shipping Storing Working drawings Protecting Waterstops Structural steel Acceptance Bearings Casings for drilled shafts Cleaning Coating Erecting Erection plan Fabrication Flooring grid Handling Highstrength steel bolts Installing Rotational capacity test Tightening Paint Painting Acceptance Application Coatings Conditions Film thickness Handling requirements Quality control Stenciling Surface preparation Pedestrian bridge Piles Quality control Repairing damaged coating Shear connectors Shipping Shipping and handling Welding Working drawings Structures Bulkheads Demolition Removal of Bridges Temporary Timber Stump removal Subbase Compacting Preparing subgrade Spreading and grading Subbase outlet drains Backfilling Excavating for Subcontracting Federal aid projects Limits and restrictions Quantities Requirements Values Wholly State funded projects Subgrade Preparing Substantial completion Superintendent Alternate Responsibilities Surface course Concrete HMA courses HMA friction courses Stone matrix asphalt Ultrathin friction course Suspension of Work Contractor fault Convenience of the Department Unsuitable weather Synthetic plastic emulsion T Tack coat Tack coat Tackifiers Fiber mulch Synthetic plastic emulsion Vegetable based gels Tape Removable black line masking Temporary pavement marking Taxes Temperaturevolume correction factors Temporarily storing Unclassified excavation Temporary Cofferdam Construction Dewatering Dewatering plan Removal Working drawings Crash cushion Inlet sediment traps Pavement markers Pavement marking tape Sheeting Construction Dewatering Removal Working drawings Shielding Slope drains Stone check dams Stone outlet sediment traps Structures Erection plan Working drawings Traffic Stripes Termination Cause Convenience Terms xxiii Acceptance acceptance testing actual cost addendum approval asbuilt quantity authorized funding amount bridge Change order Completion construction operations Contract Contract Time Contractor day Department Department Laboratory Estimate Extra Work Field Order highway holiday inspector Interim Completion Item land surveyor manufacturers recommendations ME New Work Others pavement structure plan Plans Professional Engineer Project Project Limits Proposal qualified products list QPL RE RightofWay ROW RightofWay Plans road Specifications State street subcontractor subgrade Substantial Completion Superintendent Surety Testing Agency Total Adjusted Contract Price Total Contract Price traveled way utility Utility work Work working day working drawings Test method A Determining percent of mica in fine aggregate A Mortar making properties of fine aggregate A Petrographic analysis to determine lithological composition of coarse aggregate A Determining percent of adherent fines present in coarse aggregate A Scratch hardness test for coarse aggregate particles .. A Determining gradation of densegraded aggregate containing rap B Falling head permeability test for asphaltstabilized drainage course B Sampling HMA mixtures B Selecting cores for maximum specific gravity testing in air voids determination B Measuring thickness of HMA cores B Determining composition of HMA mixture using hot bin sample analysis B Determining percent of air voids in opengraded HMA B Determining optimum asphalt content for opengraded friction course B Determining the job mix formula for modified open graded friction course B Determining asphalt content for MOGFC courses by aggregate surface area C Determining yield of concrete produced by continuous mixing type truck mixers C Operating inertial profiler systems for evaluation pavement profiles C Quicksetting patch materials C Calcium presence in plastic concrete C Slump flow test and visual stability index C Static segregation of hardened selfconsolidating concrete cylinders S Rotationalcapacity test on long bolts in tension calibrator S Rotationalcapacity test on bolts too short to fit tension calibrator S Verifying direct tension indicators DTI Test pits Testing if and where directed Thermoplastic applicator Thermoplastic traffic markings Thrust blocks Sanitary sewers Water pipe Tie bars Tie bolts Timber Bearing piles Connectors For structures Hardware for Sheet piling Sheeting Sign supports Structures Treatment Wales Time impact evaluation Topsoil Borrow Placing Stabilization matting xxiv Installing Type Type Type Type Storing Topsoil stabilization Tower poles Towing service emergency Tracking costs of changes Traffic Control Directors Flagger Police Markings Longlife thermoplastic Extruded Marking plan Preformed Replacing Surface preparation Removal of RPMs Lens removal Lens replacement Removal of Rumble strips Stripes Longlife Applying Replacing Striping plan Surface preparation Test strip Longlife thermoplastic Opening to traffic Removable black line masking Removable black line masking tape Removal Removal of Temporary Traffic control Changes to Traffic control plan Coordinator Duties Devices Flashing arrow board Interference Plan Portable variable message sign Truck with mounted crash cushions Traffic control devices Channelizing guide posts Construction barrier curb Construction signs Flashing arrow board Portable variable message sign Temporary Crash Cushion Traffic control truck wmounted crash cushions Traffic control truck with mounted crash cushions Traffic signal Cable Circuits Controllers Head Image detector Interim Loop detector Loop detector cable Mast arm Pedestrian Push button Standards Pedestrian signal Traffic signal Temporary Traffic stripe and marking removal equipment Traffic volume system Controller Equipment training Final documentation Maintenance Roadway devices Testing Transformer bases Travel time systems Controller Detector Detector standard Equipment training Final documentation Foundation Maintenance Testing Trees Protectors Removal Trimming Turbidity barrier Absorbent boom Floating Turf Mowing Repair strip Turf seeding Application Establishment Fertilizer application Dry method Hydraulic method Maintenance Mulching Optimum seeding seasons Seed application Dry method Hydraulic method Soil preparation U Ultrathin friction course Compacting Delivery of Grading xxv Joints Opening to traffic Paving plan Ride quality requirements Spreading Test strip Thickness requirements Transportation of Weather limitations Ultrathin HMA Composition Mix design Sampling and testing Ultrathin paver Unacceptable cost calculation methods Eichleay formula Modified total cost method Productivity factors Total cost method Unacceptable materials Unclassified excavation Underdeck inspection Underdrains Backfilling Excavating for Underground storage tanks Disposing of Contaminated Soil Permits and approvals Recycling Contaminated Soil Removal of Storing excavated soil Transporting Contaminated Soil Underlayer preparation Uniform hazardous waste manifest Unrecoverable costs Update Bar chart Schedule Utilities Cooperation with Gas Locating existing facilities One call system Protection of Providing access Providing notice Sanitary sewers Test pits Water Fire hydrant Service connection Water pipe Backfilling Bacteriological testing Bridge Disinfecting Excavating Installing Leakage testing Scheduling Service interruption Thrust blocks Work performed by V Value Engineering Conditions Final documents Final proposal Initial proposal Payment Purpose Savings Schedule Scope Submittals VegetableBased gels Vibrator Vibratory drum compactor Vibratory hammer Vibratory roller Video inspection Pipe Sanitary sewers W Wales timber Warranties Plants Washed gravel Waste manifest Water Water valve box reset Waterproofing Asphalt Epoxy Waterstops Wave equation analysis program WEAP Weigh in motion system Controller Equipment training Final documentation Maintenance Roadway devices Testing Wells Abandoned Monitoring Sealing Wildflower seeding Application Bed layout Establishment Maintenance Mulching Preparing seed mixtures Seasons Seed mixtures Soil preparation Wire Bonding and grounding Connecting to utilities Installing Slack xxvi Testing Wood guy stakes Work Commencement of Work site and storage Workers compensation Working drawings Approved Bearings Bridge decks Joint assemblies Bulkhead system Certified Composite piles FCCP FRPP Dolphin system Fender system Format FRPL Precast concrete arch structures Precast culverts Prefabricated modular walls Prestressed structural concrete Sheet piling Concrete Steel Sign support structures Structural steel Submission category Submission requirements Temporary structures Title block format Z ZGrid roller
