Many parts of the specifications including the general provisions asphalt pavements portland cement concrete structures and materials have been reorganized andor significantly rewritten .
The graded portion of a roadway prepared as a foundation for the pavement structure within the top of the side slopes including the shoulder .
The surface upon which the pavement structure including shoulders are constructed .
The top course of the pavement structure .
Proposed changes in basic configuration and design of a bridge hydraulic capacity of drainage facilities typical roadway section type or minimum thickness of pavements or changes in grade or alignment which do not meet the geometric standards of the project as conceived will not be considered as acceptable VE Proposals .
Proposed changes in typical roadway section type minimum thickness of pavements or changes in grade or alignment which do not meet the geometric standards of the project as designed will not be considered as acceptable Contractor Proposals .
.. Use of Materials Found on the Project Unless otherwise specified the contractor may incorporate into the work materials found or produced on the project such as reclaimed asphalt pavement recycled portland cement concrete stone gravel sand topsoil or other materials provided they meet the requirements of the use specified .
Payment for removal of such materials will be made under the designated contract items such as cold planing asphalt pavement removal of portland cement concrete pavement excavation etc .
Trim branches of trees extending over the roadbed to a height of foot above the pavement in accordance with accepted horticultural and tree surgery practices published by AAN . .
Structures may include buildings floor slabs foundations fuel tanks septic tanks fences pipes bridges drainage structures pavements walks curbs abandoned pipelines and other similar facilities or obstructions not designated or permitted to remain within the project rightofway .
.. Pavement Base Courses Walks and Curbs Dispose of pavements stabilized or treated base courses walks curbs and gutters designated for removal as shown on the plans and as directed .
When the existing shoulder underdrain at the pavement edge is to remain in place and in service but removal of the shoulder surfacing and base is required do not damage the existing shoulder underdrains .
Do not place or spread embankment materials on portland cement concrete or asphalt concrete pavements .
Do not damage pavement surfaces edges and joints during embankment operations .
Removal of existing asphalt pavement asphalt will be paid for under Section .
When not specified any of the following types may be used Soil Cement Crushed Stone Asphalt Concrete Base Course on Treated Layer Recycled Portland Cement Concrete Blended Calcium Sulfate Select a base course type meeting the structural requirements for a specific pavement structure .
Do not place or spread base course material on portland cement concrete or asphalt concrete pavements .
Do not damage pavement surfaces edges or joints during construction .
Do not place spread or mix base course material on portland cement concrete or asphalt concrete pavements .
Do not allow base course construction operations to damage adjacent pavement surfaces edges and joints .
Protect by an approved method from the time of placement until placement of the following pavement layer .
Equipment required to place the pavement will be allowed provided that it enters and exits as near as possible to the paving operation .
Cover the permeable bases with the pavement within working days after placement. . TOLERANCES .
When permitted low areas not exceeding inch shall be filled with subsequent roadway pavement at the time and in the same operation in which the pavement is placed at no direct pay . .
Do not place or spread aggregate surfacing materials on adjacent portland cement concrete or asphalt concrete pavements .
Conduct aggregate surfacing operations so that pavement surfaces edges and joints are not damaged .
Remove and discard raised pavement markers prior to placement. . HAULING PAVING AND FINISHING .
Opening to Traffic Do not open the new pavement to traffic or allow any roller to sit idle on the pavement until the rolling operation is complete and the material has cooled to a temperature where the mat will not be damaged by traffic .
Payment for removal of pavement markings shall be in accordance with applicable item .
Reclaimed Asphalt Pavement RAP Keep reclaimed asphalt pavement separate from other materials at the plant in such a manner that will allow for Department inspection and acceptance .
Remove excess joint filler from the surface by an approved method when mixtures are to be placed on portland cement concrete pavement or previously overlaid portland cement concrete .
Remove any existing raised pavement markers prior to asphalt concrete overlay operations .
Payment for removal of pavement markings will be in accordance with the applicable item .
Coordination of Production Coordinate and manage plant production transportation of mix and placement operations to achieve a high quality pavement .
On final wearing course construction under traffic with pavement layers of inches compacted thickness or less the contractor will be permitted to pave one travel lane for a full day and the adjacent travel lane the next work day .
When pavement layers are greater than inches compacted thickness place approximately of each days production in one lane and the remainder in the adjacent lane unless an approved notched wedge device is used .
Protect pavement from traffic until it has sufficiently hardened to the extent the surface is not damaged .
On multilane pavements the initial paving strip and the sequence of lane construction will be subject to approval .
Without Automatic Screed Control When permitted pavers without automatic screed control may be used for pavement patching pavement widening paved drives and turnouts .
Vibratory rollers may be used provided they do not impair the stability of the pavement structure or underlying layers .
Ripples are small bumps in the pavement surface which usually appear in groups in a frequent and regular manner .
After rolling ensure that newly finished pavements have a uniform tightly knit surface free of cracks tears roller marks or other deficiencies .
Acceptance testing for pavement density and dimensional tolerances will be conducted on that portion of the lot placed on each contract .
.. Density Obtain pavement samples from each sublot within hours after placement .
Sample at locations determined by the PE using random number tables shown in DOTD S. When the sampling location determined by random sampling falls within areas that are to be replaced or within inches of the unsupported pavement edge another random sampling location will be used .
Replace removed pavement with hot or cold mixture and refinished during the work day coring is performed at no additional pay .
Any evidence of tampering with the core will result in the cores being rejected and additional pavement samples being required .
Make corrections in accordance with Grade When the plans require the pavement to be constructed to a specified profile grade test for conformance at selected locations using a stringline or other comparable device .
Grade tolerances shall apply to only one longitudinal line such as the centerline or outside edge of pavement .
Payment for removal of pavement markings will be in accordance with the applicable item .
Single Lift Overlays Over Cold Planed Surfaces or improved base Category D SingleLift Overlays Over Unimproved Surfaces NA Improvement or less than or equal to for all other pavements Improvement when initial is greater than IRI Greater than Existing when initial is greater than Based on total theoretical quantity .
Provide equipment that ensures even distribution of the asphalt or asphalt emulsion across the entire pavement area at the specified rate as measured per ASTM D. .. Distributors The asphalt cement distributor shall be capable of maintaining the allowable variation from any specified rate within .
Equip the MTV with a windrow head attachment capable of removing percent of the mixture off the pavement .
The Thermal Profile System is a device capable of continuously recording the temperature of the full width of pavement as the mixture exits the paver with constant record of the GPS location and distance traveled .
Use auger assembly extensions when screed extensions in excess of feet on a side are to be continuously used in the pavement operation .
Ensure that the vibratory screed crowns the pavement with adjustable extensions to accommodate the desired pavement profile .
Prepare and treat existing asphalt or portland cement concrete pavement surfaces with asphalt material in accordance with with these specifications and in conformity with the lines and grades shown on the plans or established. . ASPHALT MATERIALS .
Clean the pavement surface by sweeping or other approved methods .
Satisfactorily clean edges of existing pavements that will form joints with new pavement before tack coat is applied . .
Consider the pavement to be excessively moist when it is visibly wet or when a one square foot piece of polyethylene film condenses moisture after being tightly placed on the pavement surface for minutes .
The air temperature or pavement surface temperature in the shade is less than F or .
Immediately prior to application of the asphalt material clean and de grass existing pavements over the full width to be treated .
Remove raised pavement markers at no direct pay .
Sweep the pavement with a power broom or blower to remove all loose material .
During application of asphalt material do not splatter adjacent pavements structures and trees with asphalt material .
.. Interlayers An interlayer shall be Type E as specified herein and may be placed on raw or stabilized base on a milled surface between lifts of asphalt or over existing portland cement concrete pavement which will be overlaid with asphalt .
Payment for removal of pavement markings will be included in this pay item .
Place temporary pavement markings prior to opening the roadway to traffic in accordance with Section .
Haul all reclaimed asphalt pavement RAP material to be retained by the Department for its recycling program or by other government entities to the storage facility indicated on the plans and stockpile as directed .
Complete pavement patching before milling unless additional areas requiring patching are exposed by the milling .
Perform pavement patching and joint repair in accordance with Section .
Payment for milling of asphalt pavement will be made at the contract unit price per square yard which includes the costs for removing hauling and stockpiling of RAP material .
Payment for temporary pavement markings will be included under appropriate pay items .
Use asphalt concrete to patch widen and repair joints of existing concrete pavements asphalt concrete pavements and composite pavements in accordance with these specifications and in conformity with the lines grades and typical sections shown on the plans or as directed. . MATERIALS .
Sawcuts shall be for the full depth of the pavement along the perimeter of the pavement to be removed as marked by the engineer .
When through traffic is maintained place the pavement widening material or fill and compact open areas or trenches at the end of each days operations .
For joint repair clean contact surfaces of existing pavement and apply a thin uniform layer of approved asphalt tack coat prior to placing asphalt mixture in the joint .
Clean contact surfaces of pavement and apply a uniform layer of approved asphalt tack coat before placement of asphalt concrete .
Spread finish and compact the asphalt concrete leaving the surface smooth and slightly above the edge of existing pavement .
.. Patching The Department will measure patching of pavement by the square yard or ton of existing pavement designated to be removed and replaced .
Required excavation removal of existing pavement and base course asphalt tack coat and disposal of removed material will not be measured for payment .
.. Patching Payment for pavement patching will be made at the contract unit prices per square yard or ton subject to the following provisions Payment adjustments for deficiencies in asphalt concrete and asphalt materials will be applied at the contract unit price for pavement patching .
.. Widening Payment for pavement widening will be made at the contract unit price per square yard or ton .
Payment adjustments for deficiencies in asphalt concrete and asphalt materials will be applied at the contract unit price for pavement widening .
.. Joint Repair Payment for pavement joint repair will be made at the contract unit price per ton .
and .. Nonagitator Trucks See .. Finishing Equipment Use slipform paving equipment or equipment with stationary side forms to construct pavement .
Forms Provide metal solid and stable forms having a depth of the specified pavement thickness with a minimum base width of .
There is no limitation on the use of builtup forms or amount of buildup where the total area of pavement is less than square yards .
The artificial turf carpet shall be full pavement width and of sufficient size that during the finishing operation it produces inch deep striations in the pavement surface .
For pavement feet or more in width mount the artificial turf on a bridge that travels on the forms that allows control of the time and rate of texturing .
If necessary weigh the carpet to maintain intimate contact with the pavement surface .
Burlap Drag The burlap drag shall consist of a seamless strip of damp burlap that shall produce uniform inch deep striations in the pavement surface after dragging it longitudinally along the full width of the pavement .
For pavement widths feet or more mount the drag on a bridge that travels on the forms that allows control of the time and rate of texturing .
Tine dimensions and spacing requirements shall be in accordance with The pavement shall have a continuously tine textured surface .
Restore disturbed areas prior to placing the pavement in accordance with ..
Alternatively apply a mixture to the asphalt concrete base course to prevent heat buildup in the base and bonding between the concrete pavement and base .
Maintain the finished grade in a smooth and compacted condition until placement of pavement .
Except for concrete sawing equipment restrict operation of mechanical equipment on the pavement until obtaining a minimum compressive strength of psi in accordance with DOTD TR .
Place concrete with an acceptable slipform paver designed to spread consolidate screed and float finish freshly placed concrete in one pass of the machine with only a minimum amount of hand finishing necessary to provide a dense homogeneous pavement in conformance with plans and specifications .
Equip the machine with vibrators conforming to Vibrate concrete for the full pavement width and depth for complete consolidation .
Prior to sealing the pavement may be opened to traffic .
Cured sealant is required before allowing traffic on pavement .
close the pavement to traffic for at least one day after sealing .
Prior to beginning installation cut and install a length of seal equal to the pavement width so that stretching may be measured .
Position dowel bars parallel to the pavement centerline and parallel to the surface without any skew of individual bars .
Types of Joints Longitudinal Joint Type LJ Construct a longitudinal joint between the slabs when placing shoulder and roadway pavement slabs separately .
Construct a longitudinal joint in roadway pavements placed monolithically and exceeding feet in total width as shown on plans .
Do not permit any equipment other than the sawing machine on the pavement during sawing operations .
Construct the sleeper slab from Class A Concrete or one of the pavement type mixes complying with Section .
Place one layer of tarpaper equivalent to a minimum of pounds per square feet between the sleeper slab and the pavement .
Construct the sleeper slab from Class A concrete or one of the pavement type mixes conforming to Section .
Place one layer of tarpaper weighing pounds per square feet between the sleeper slab and the pavement .
Transverse Contraction Joints Type TCJ Transverse contraction joints shall consist of planes of weakness created in the cross section of the pavement .
Construct joints for pavement with a design speed equal to or greater than mph by sawing as specified in method below .
Construct by any of the following methods for joints for pavement with a design speed of less than mph .
If forms prohibit sawing the transverse contraction joint for the full width of pavement place a fulljoint depth insert in the inches adjacent to the forms .
Do not permit any equipment other than the sawing machine on the pavement during sawing operations .
The top cap of the insert shall be flush with the top surface of the pavement at the completion of all finishing operations .
Longitudinal Butt Joint Type LBJ Construct longitudinal butt joints when adding lanes of pavement .
Install tie bars in clean moisturefree holes drilled into the existing pavement approximately inch larger than the diameter of the tie bar .
Place epoxy using manufacturers temperature limitations but do not apply epoxy when ambient temperature is below F. Transverse Butt Joint Type BJ Construct transverse butt joints when extending existing pavement .
Install dowel bars in clean moisturefree holes drilled into the existing pavement approximately inch larger than the diameter of the dowel bar .
Use a mechanically powered finishing machine capable of spreading consolidating screeding and finishing the concrete to the required pavement elevation and cross section .
Mechanical roller or trusstype screeds are allowed if approved by the engineer for projects with concrete pavement lane lengths of feet or less continuous paving lengths less than feet pavement gaps intersections or when side clearance is restricted .
Use work bridges or other devices to reach the pavement surface to finish straightedge and make corrections .
StrikeOff Strike off to achieve the specified cross section and pavement surface elevation .
Consolidate under and around load transfer devices and other features embedded within the pavement without causing damage or misalignment .
When necessary following machine floating use longhandled floats to smooth and fill opentextured pavement areas .
Remove excess water or laitance from the pavement surface .
Edging at Forms and Joints Before tine texturing work the edges on each side of the pavement and each side of the transverse expansion joints Type EJ modified joints and longitudinal construction joints which are not sawed .
Do not disturb the pavement surface by tilting the tool during use .
Final Surface Finish Perform surface finishing with an artificial turf or burlap drag such that the resultant pavement surface is uniform in appearance and reasonably free from grooves over inch deep .
Provide an adjacent concrete shoulder with the same finish as the pavement .
If approved the contractor may use manual methods for tine texturing of ramps crossovers turnouts split slab construction or other pavement sections .
Correct all pavements not meeting the above requirements by retining if concrete is still fresh or by mechanical grooving if the concrete has set .
.. Curing Immediately after completing the surface finishing uniformly spray all exposed pavement surfaces with white pigmented curing compound as soon as surface bleed water evaporates or within onehalf hour if evaporation occurs quickly .
After application of curing compound resulting pavement surfaces shall have a uniform appearance of a blank white sheet of paper .
Additionally bumps are not to exceed inch in feet for nonIRI pavements including but not limited to bike paths detour roads parking areas sidewalks turning lanes turn outs and shoulders .
Removing Forms Keep the forms in place for at least hours and until concrete has set sufficiently to avoid damage or prior to opening to traffic as allowed by Remove forms carefully to avoid damage to pavement .
Opening to Traffic Allow traffic on the pavement after days or when test specimens complying with .. attain a compressive strength of psi when tested in accordance with DOTD TR or a flexural strength of psi when tested in accordance with AASHTO T. Saw initial stress relief joints and clean the pavement prior to opening to traffic .
Acceptance Requirements General Conduct sampling for DOTD testing on each pavement lot for thickness concrete strength and surface tolerance .
Correct all pavement that is obviously defective or remove and replace to full depth to the satisfaction of the engineer .
A pavement lot is an identifiable area of approximately square yards paid under the same item .
The final area of pavement placed is a lot if it is at least square yards otherwise it will be included in the previous lot .
Concrete Strength and Thickness Compressive Strength Determine the day compressive strength and thickness of pavements from hardened cores .
The engineer will divide each pavement lot into five equal sections .
Provide additional cores required by the Department to isolate thickness strength or other pavement deficiencies or for recutting of deficient cores at no direct pay .
Patch all core holes using an approved pavement or structural concrete mixture meeting the requirements of Section .
Finish the surface of the patch to match the surrounding pavement .
Determine flexural strength of pavements from inch by inch by inch cast beams .
Thickness Construct pavement to plan thickness .
The engineer in calculating average pavement thickness will consider individual measurements in excess of specified thickness by more than .
Surface Tolerance Test in accordance with Tolerances along Longitudinal Edges Check the pavement edge with a minimum foot straight edge while the concrete is still in a fresh state .
is to be constructed adjacent to the placed pavement .
For edges where there will be no adjacent pavement the tolerance is inch in inches .
Edges at Longitudinal Joints Correct by full depth removal and replacement of the pavement edge with tied concrete .
Remove the pavement by full depth sawing for a width necessary to bring the pavement within the required tolerance .
If the pavement surface corrections require removing more than inches of the pavement edge remove the pavement full depth for onehalf of the lane width .
Replace in accordance with the Departments full depth concrete pavement patching details prior to placing the adjacent pavement .
Edges not along Longitudinal Joints Correct by full depth removal and replacement of the pavement edge with tied concrete for a minimum width of inches and to the original width at proper grade .
.. Quality Control The contractor is responsible for all operations including but not limited to the production transporting placement joint construction surface finishing maintenance and curing of all concrete pavement and shoulders constructed in accordance with these specifications .
Control the work to produce concrete pavement and shoulders that are uniform and conform to the plan dimensions and test requirements .
Perform whatever tests are necessary to ensure the concrete pavement and shoulders comply with these specifications .
Payment for concrete cores taken for thickness and strength acceptance is at the contract unit price per each as described in There will be no adjustment in the unit price for coring when there are different pavementthicknesses specified .
If the pavement does not comply with acceptance requirements adjust unit price payments in accordance with Table .
Repair and rehabilitate ex ist ing a g ed portland cement concrete pavements .
Th is wo rk includes pavement grinding and texturing retrofitting of dowel bars full and partial depth pavement patching cleaning and resealing or filling of longitudinal and transverse joints cleaning and sealing of cracks and undersealing in accordance with these specifications plan details and as directed by the engineer .
Section is not applicable to newly constructed portland cement concrete pavement .
Dispose of removed materials including concrete pavement outside the project rightsofway in accordance with .. Quality assurance requirements shall be as specified in the latest edition of the Departments publication entitled Application of Quality . . MATERIALS .
Materials for concrete pavement rehabilitation shall comply with the requirements of the appropriate subsections .
Equipment for concrete pavement rehabilitation shall comply with the requirements of the appropriate subsections .
Remove joint sealants in longitudinal joints two inches and wider in existing concrete pavement and fill the joints in accordance with the plans or as directed and as follows .
Clean joints and adjacent pavement surfaces of existing sealants incompressibles and debris to the satisfaction of the engineer in accordance with the plans by sandblasting .
Remove joint sealants in longitudinal and transverse joints of existing concrete pavement and reseal the joints in accordance with the plans or as directed and as follows .
Clean joints and adjacent pavement surfaces of existing sealants incompressibles and debris in accordance with the plans to the satisfaction of the engineer .
The minimum width of the crack to be sealed shall be inch at the pavement surface .
Remove and replace to fulldepth portland cement concrete pavement corner breaks at locations shown on the plans or as directed and as follows .
This approval is subject to demonstrating satisfactory performance without damage to the base course and adjacent pavement structure .
Extend the fiberboard for the full thickness of the pavement .
Use Type B D or E concrete for pavement patching complying with Section .
Texture the patch surface to match the texture of adjoining pavement .
If pavement is to be overlaid only drag finish the patched surface .
Remove and replace to fulldepth portland cement concrete pavement with proper joints at locations shown on the plans or as directed and as follows .
If pavement has been removed and can not be replaced during daylight hours temporarily backfill the areas with aggregate acceptable to the engineer and keep the lane closed to traffic .
Perform saw cutting with a concrete saw for the full depth of the pavement along the perimeter of the pavement as marked by the engineer .
Repair spalls in the existing pavement resulting from pavement removal in the patch area by extending the removal limits to include the spalled areas .
Make pavement removal for spall repair at the full patch width .
Reduce the pavement to appreciable sized pieces by making additional saw cuts or by using hand held jackhammers or an approved resonant pavement breaking device to reduce the pavement to pieces .
This approval will be subject to the contractor demonstrating satisfactory pavement removal without damage to the base course .
When the engineer orders additional thickness of patching in excess of plan thickness payment for the additional thickness will be made in accordance with Drill holes for dowel bars and tie bars into vertical faces of the adjoining pavement and install bars with an Approved Materials List adhesive anchor system as shown on the plans or as directed .
Use Type B D or E concrete for pavement patching complying with Section .
Texture the patch surface to match the texture of adjoining pavement .
If pavement is to be overlaid only drag finish the patched surface .
Base acceptance and payment for full depth patching of jointed concrete pavement on a lot basis at the contract unit price per square yard adjusted in accordance with the following provisions .
Do not allow traffic on the high early strength concrete pavement until it obtains a minimum compressive strength of psi .
Follow the manufacturer or suppliers recommendations on mixing and placing high early strength concrete pavement. . Do not use chloridetype accelerating admixtures .
Texture the patch surface to match the texture of adjoining pavement .
If pavement is to be overlaid only drag finish the patched surface .
Patch partial depth concrete pavement in accordance with plan details and as follows .
Perform pavement cutting with a concrete saw along the perimeter of the pavement as marked by the engineer .
Use either portland cement concrete or epoxy mortar for partial depth patching of concrete pavement .
Use Type E portland cement concrete for pavement patching complying with Section except use only a coarse aggregate Size M or aggregate gradation complying with Table .
The patch surface shall conform to the existing surface texture to match the texture of adjoining pavement .
Finish all patches to the cross section of the existing pavement .
Backer rod material shall comply with The patch surface shall conform to the existing surface texture to match the texture of adjoining pavement .
Remove and replace continuously reinforced portland cement concrete pavement at locations shown on the plans or as directed and as follows .
Prior to pavement removal outline the patch splice area by saw cutting the pavement to a minimum depth of inches .
Cut the pavement full depth a distance of inches inward from the edges of the patch splice area or as shown on the plans .
Remove pavement without bending or damaging reinforcing bars projecting into the patch splice area .
Do not use hammers exceeding lbs for pavement removal in the inch splice area .
Place an approved bond breaker between the concrete patched base course and the pavement at no direct pay .
Use Type B D or E concrete for pavement patching complying with Section .
Coat the vertical surfaces of existing pavement in the patch areas with a neat cement grout immediately prior to placement of new concrete .
Texture the patch surface to match the adjoining pavement .
Uniformly grind and texture existing portland cement concrete pavement roadway surfaces longitudinally using a diamond grinder in accordance with the plans and specifications or as directed and as follows .
Uniformly grind and texture areas of the pavement surface as designated on the plans to eliminate joint and crack faults and to provide a constant pavement cross slope within the designated grinding limits in each lane .
Provide the surface of the ground pavement with a corduroytype texture consisting of parallel grooves between inches and inches wide with a distance between grooves of inch to inches and a difference between the peaks of the ridges and the bottom of the grooves of approximately inches .
Inspect the pavement texture which is a function of blade width blade spacing and cutting head alignment after each new or rebuilt cutting head has ground lineal feet .
Conduct a final sweeping with power equipment before opening the pavement to traffic .
Grind after removing raised pavement markers patching and load transfer restoration .
Grind before joint sealing striping and replacing raised pavement markers .
Begin and end grinding from locations normal to the pavement centerline .
Assemble the saw blades in a cutting head mounted on a selfpropelled machine designed specifically for diamond grinding that will produce the required texture and smoothness level without damage to the concrete pavement or joint faces .
After completion of grinding and texturing the engineer will test the pavement surface for smoothness with a foot straightedge at areas specified for grinding .
The engineer will identify pavement areas that deviate more than inches from the straightedge as defective work .
Begin and end transverse or longitudinally grooved areas normal to the pavements centerline .
Begin longitudinal grooving inches from the outside edge of pavement or reflective marker and run in a continuous pattern across the lane surface to within inches of all longitudinal joints .
Conduct a final sweeping with power equipment before opening the pavement to traffic .
The grooving machine control device must align the grooves detect variations in the pavement surface and automatically adjust the cutting head height to maintain the specified depth .
In areas where the shoulder has separated more than inch from the pavement edge place backer rod material in the joint prior to sealing .
Remove the existing cap at the pavement edge and at the outfall locations along with the geotextile fabric pipe fittings aggregate and other incidentals associated with the shoulder underdrain system .
Place particular attention on removing the geotextile fabric adjacent to the pavement edges .
Drill holes in concrete pavement and pump fly ashcement slurry under the pavement to fill cavities undersealing or to raise the elevation of the pavement slabs slabjacking .
Drill holes of approximately inches in diameter through the pavement at locations shown on the plans or as directed .
Rotate drills to avoid cracking pavement and hold as nearly perpendicular as possible to pavement surfaces .
Do not allow the discharge end of the pipe to extend below the bottom of pavement .
When directed proof roll undersealed or slabjacked pavements with the specified roller at no direct pay however do not conduct proof rolling until at least hours after completion of undersealing .
Conduct a final sweeping with power equipment before opening the pavement to traffic .
Fill all voids beneath pavement with pumped slurry .
Fill all cavities within range of the pumped hole as evidenced by lifting of the slab or slurry flowing out of an adjacent hole through pavement joints or cracks or out of the shoulderpavement joint .
When pressures cause pavement lifting use a lower pumping pressure .
Terminate all pumping operations that cause voids to form under the pavement in the immediate area .
Raise pavement slabs to the required grade by continuous pumping with a tolerance of inch .
Install plastic coated inch diameter by inch long plain round dowel bars into slots cut across and through existing concrete pavement transverse joints .
Remove the existing portland cement concrete pavement from the slots and retro fit the dowel bars across the pavement joints .
Install the dowel bars as follows Saw cut slots in the pavement parallel to the centerline of the roadway to a depth sufficient to place the center of the dowel bar at middepth in the pavement .
If the pound jack hammer damages the pavement use a lighter weight hammer .
Place the top of the foam core board flush with the top surface of the concrete pavement .
Measurement of portland cement concrete pavement rehabilitation will be as follows .
Measure Cleaning and Filling Existing Longitudinal Pavement Joints by the linear foot. . Measure Cleaning and Resealing Existing Longitudinal and Transverse Pavement Joints by the linear foot. . Measure Cleaning and Sealing Cracks by the linear foot along the centerline of the crack at the pavement surface. . Measure Full Depth Corner Patching of Jointed Concrete Pavement by the square yard. . Measure Full Depth Patching of Jointed Concrete Pavement by the square yard. . Measure Partial Depth Patching of Jointed Concrete Pavement by the square yard. . Measure Patching of Continuously Reinforced Concrete Pavement by the square yard. . Measure Grinding by the square yard .
Determine the quantity of pavement grooving by multiplying the width and length of the grooved pavement .
.Measure Removal of Existing Shoulder Underdrain Systems by the linear foot along the pavement edge .
Payment for portland cement concrete pavement rehabilitation includes furnishing all labor materials tools equipment and all incidentals for performing the work specified .
Base acceptance and payment for full depth patching of jointed concrete pavement on a lot basis at the contract unit price per square yard adjusted in accordance with the following provisions .
Payment will be at the contract unit price per square yard as specified in .. Base payment for deteriorated base course removed and replaced with concrete as directed by the engineer and as follows The value per inch thickness of full depth pavement patching will be determined by dividing the contract unit price per square yard by the plan thickness .
Make payment for partial depth patching of jointed concrete pavement will be made at the contract unit price per square yard .
Make payment for continuously reinforced concrete pavement on a lot basis at the contract unit price per square yard adjusted in accordance with the following provisions .
Payment for patching continuous reinforced concrete pavement per square yard includes furnishing all labor materials tools and incidentals for performing the work as specified in .. Make payment for deteriorated base course removed as directed by the engineer and replaced with concrete as follows The value per inch thickness will be determined by dividing the contract unit price per square yard by the plan thickness .
.. Backfill Applications For projects using the ABC bidding method where considering rigid and flexible pavement alternates use the backfill application in for either rigid or flexible pavements .
Pipe Under Concrete Pavements Type B backfill may be used as initial and final backfill for all pipes culverts or drains under portland cement concrete pavements .
Place and compact as specified in Cross Drains Under Flexible Pavements All reaches of cross drains exclusive of those portions of the pipe which are under shoulders and all other culverts pipes or drains that cross the centerlines of new or existing flexible pavement roadways including intersections that are under flexible pavements shall receive an initial backfill of Type A material .
Other Drains Under Flexible Pavements All reaches of all culverts pipes or drains under flexible pavements that do not cross the centerlines of new or existing roadways and exclusive of those portions of the pipe which are totally under shoulders shall receive an initial and final backfill of Type B material .
Perform operations in such a manner that existing pavement shoulder surfacing and base course outside the limits of underdrain trenches are not damaged .
Plastic Pipe Installation Place plastic pipe under drain in the trench immediately adjacent to the pavement or shoulder edge as shown on the plans .
Perform operations in such a manner that the existing pavement shoulder surfacing and base course outside the limits of the trenches are not damaged .
Shoulder Underdrains Shoulder underdrains will be measured by the linear foot along the pavement or shoulder edge .
When possible shape the subgrade and compact at the same time and in the same manner as the subgrade for the pavement .
Form joints in integral curbing to correspond with transverse joints in the pavement slab .
.. Integral Types After concrete pavement has been struck off clamp the curb forms or otherwise securely fasten in place on the slab form .
Place concrete for curbing and thoroughly tamp within minutes after pavement has been finished .
Take care to ensure that the pavement and curb are constructed monolithically .
Integral type curb may be placed after completion of pavement provided steel reinforcement is placed in the pavement of the size type and spacing shown on the plans at no direct pay .
Applications for this material include but are not limited to general backfilling of drainage structures entrenchments across pavements encasements beddings void filling and other uses as shown on the plans or as approved by the engineer .
Furnish install maintain and remove temporary construction barricades precast concrete barriers lights signals pavement markings and signs provide flaggers and comply with all other requirements regarding the protection of the work workers and safety of the public .
Signs barricades barriers channelizing devices pavement markings or any other temporary traffic control measures shall comply with plan details Temporary Traffic Control Standards the MUTCD and these specifications .
Signs barricades barriers channelizing devices pavement markings and arrangements thereof as shown on the plans are minimum requirements .
Temporary Pavement Markings Temporary pavement markings shall be a minimum of inches wide .
On projects where constructing the surface course with asphalt concrete or portland cement concrete install permanent striping and raised pavement markers when required prior to removal of barricades .
Color width and type of temporary pavement markings shall be in accordance with Table and the MUTCD .
Temporary pavement markings shall be in place by the end of each days operation .
Apply thermoplastic pavement markings in accordance with ..
Do Not Pass and Pass With Care signs as required Lane lines ft tape on ft centers dbl yellow centerline and edgelines Lane lines ft tape on ft centers and edgelines L O N G T E R M All ADTs with time days Standard ft lane lines nopassing zone markings when pavement width is ft edge lines Standard ft lane lines centerlines edge lines Standard ft lane lines centerlines edge lines Nopassing zones shall be delineated as indicated whenever a project is open to traffic .
On all Asphalt Surface Treatments that are open to traffic and used as a final wearing course or as an interlayer temporary pavement markings tabs on foot centers shall be used in lieu of the foot tape on foot centers .
.. Shortterm Pavement Markings Provide shortterm pavement markings on all pavement surfaces under traffic .
When shortterm pavement markings require no passing zone markings or double yellow centerlines on undivided multilane highways use any of the temporary pavement markings listed in ..
Removal of shortterm pavement markings only required on the final surface .
.. Longterm Pavement Markings Provide longterm pavement markings on all surfaces not covered by an additional surface within two weeks .
Longterm pavement markings shall include but are not limited to standard lane and centerline markings edge lines no passing zone markings on twolane highways stop bars and legend and symbol markings as shown on the permanent pavement marking details .
These markings include all of the pavement markings listed in .. Longterm markings do not include the installation of raised pavement markers .
Final Surface On the final surface of portland cement concrete pavement or asphalt concrete pavement place temporary markings with sufficient accuracy to avoid conflict with permanent striping .
Temporary pavement markings on the final surface shall be any of the pavement markings listed in .. Place permanent markings over traffic paint on final surfaces provided the temporary markings have been placed in the final configuration and the painted lines are not flaking or showing signs of deterioration .
When required remove temporary pavement markings in accordance with the requirements for the type of permanent marking being used .
No objectionable staining of pavement surface as a result of the removal procedure will be allowed .
Temporary Reflectorized Raised Pavement Markers When required install temporary reflectorized raised pavement markers in accordance with Section .
Put shortterm temporary pavement markings in place at the end of each days operation .
Put longterm temporary pavement markings in place as soon as practical after expiration of the fourday maintenance period following the asphalt surface treatment operation .
On the final wearing course place permanent markings within two weeks following completion of the longterm temporary pavement markings .
Install temporary raised markers on centerlines of twolane highways and lane lines of multilane highways in accordance with No passing zone markings shall be any of the temporary pavement markings listed in ..
Install the temporary raised pavement markers in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations or as directed by the engineer .
If directed by the engineer remove the temporary raised pavement markers after permanent striping has been accomplished .
Repair damage to the pavement surface at no direct pay. . PORTABLE WORK ZONE TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES .
Such tasks include pavement or structural crack filling joint repair joint cleaning joint sealing pavement patching and repairs sawcutting installation of signal equipment or other electricalmechanical equipment and other tasks involving fine details or intricate parts and equipment .
Temporary pavement legends and symbols will be measured per each legend or symbol .
Temporary reflectorized raised pavement markers will be measured per each marker furnished placed and accepted .
Removal of temporary reflectorized raised pavement markers will not be measured for payment .
Table Payment Schedule Temporary Signs Barricades and Related Devices Percent of Total Contract Amount Earned Allowable Percent of Lump Sum Price for Temporary Signs and Barricades Initial Erection Payment for temporary pavement markings will be made at the respective contract unit prices .
Before the construction of any rumble strips demonstrate to the engineer that the equipment to be used can achieve a depression having well defined edges without snagging or tearing the finished pavement .
When rumble strips do not meet the requirements of the contract documents restore any pavement to the satisfaction of the engineer at no additional cost to the Department . .
Temporary pavement markings shall comply with .. . CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS .
Place construction signs warning devices and pavement markings for detours in accordance with Section prior to opening to traffic .
Place temporary pavement markings complying with Section on detours surfaced with asphalt concrete or portland cement concrete .
Include temporary pavement markings to make tie ins to existing striping in the cost of these markings .
Furnish and place raised pavement markers in accordance with the plans .
The contractor shall be responsible for field layout and alignment of raised pavement markers .
Existing pavement striping shall generally be used as a guide in determining raised marker locations .
The Department will replace obliterated striping prior to installation of raised pavement markers however if no striping exists or is obliterated at the time of raised marker installation the contractor shall determine raised pavement marker locations in accordance with plan details or as directed. . MATERIALS .
Removal of Markers Remove markers by methods that will not damage the pavement surface .
Repair damage to pavement surface at no cost to the Department .
Do not place pavement markers on joints .
Heat the adhesive as per manufacturers recommendations and apply directly to the pavement surface from the melterapplicator by either pumping or pouring .
Raised pavement marker installation will be measured per each marker furnished placed and accepted .
Raised pavement marker removal will be measured per linear mile. . PAYMENT .
Payment for field layout and alignment of raised pavement markers will be in accordance with Section .
Payment for installation of raised pavement markers will be made at the contract unit prices per each .
Payment for removal of raised pavement markers will be made at the contract unit price per linear mile .
Furnish and place reflective pavement markings of hot applied thermoplastic or preformed cold or hot applied plastic at the locations shown on the plans .
Plastic pavement markings include stripes gore markings lines legends and symbols. . MATERIALS .
Black thermoplastic pavement markings shall require skidresistant filler in lieu of glass beads .
Surface Primer Provide a single component surface primer or two component primer sealer for the appropriate application in accordance with The primer shall form a continuous film that dries rapidly and adheres to the pavement .
The primer material shall not discolor or cause any noticeable change in the appearance of the pavement outside of the finished pavement marking .
For new mil application equipment shall consist of an extrusion die or a ribbon gun that simultaneously deposits and shapes lines at a thickness of mils or greater on the pavement surface .
Cleaning of Surfaces Clean surfaces including ramps and gore areas on which markings are to be applied of materials that may reduce adhesion of the thermoplastic marking materials to the pavement .
Intersection Markings Legends and Symbols Remove existing markings from the pavement surface .
Preformed Plastic Markings Tape Remove existing markings to the pavement surface before applying the preformed plastic markings tape .
Remove markings by methods that will not damage the pavement or bridge deck .
Removal shall be to such extent that percent of the pavement surface or bridge deck under the markings is exposed .
At the end of each days operations the engineer may direct that temporary pavement markings complying with Section be used in areas where existing markings have been removed and new markings not placed .
Satisfactorily remove temporary pavement markings prior to resuming thermoplastic marking operations .
Black thermoplastic pavement markings require skidresistant filler in lieu of glass beads .
.. Field Testing of Roadway Markings The contractor and the Department will field test the pavement markings in accordance with . . and Table .
Aggregate Surface Course projects will not be tested for retroreflectivity but will be visually inspected at night for acceptance by the engineer. . No reflectance readings are required for black red or blue thermoplastic pavement markings. . Glass beads shall be uniformly distributed to ensure that the full width of the line is visible at night .
Removal of pavement markings will include removal of lane lines edge lines gore markings legends symbols raised pavement markers and disposal of debris. . PAYMENT .
Payment for the completed and accepted quantities of plastic pavement markings and removal of existing markings will be made at the contract unit prices which include all labor materials equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
Rubblize existing reinforced or nonreinforced portland cement concrete pavement using a pavementfracturing machine capable of delivering sufficient energy to rubblize the pavement fulldepth in a manner that fractures the concrete slab into smaller pieces that eliminates slab action without damaging the subgrade .
Thoroughly compact and seat the rubblized pavement with appropriate equipment as outlined in this specification .
Either the resonant frequency breaker Method or the multihead breaker Method process may be utilized to rubblize and seat the pavement .
When using Method on concrete pavements with thickness greater than inches the contractor may use a guillotinebreaking device with the engineers approval if prefracturing of the pavement is necessary to achieve rubblization size requirements without damage to the subgrade .
Method Resonant Frequency Breaker Process Resonant Frequency Breaker Machine Use a selfcontained selfpropelled resonant frequency breaker for rubblizing existing pavement that is capable of producing pound force blows at a rate of not less than cycles per second with an amplitude of less than inch .
Resonant Frequency Breaker Seating Equipment SteelWheel Vibratory Roller Use a steel wheel vibratory roller having a gross weight of not less than tons operated in the vibrating mode to compact the rubblized pavement .
PneumaticTired Roller Use a pneumatictired roller as specified in .. to compact the rubblized pavement .
It shall be capable of rubblizing up to feet in width of pavement in one pass .
The roller shall have a gross weight of at least tons and operate in the vibratory mode to settle and seat the rubblized pavement .
SteelWheel Vibratory Roller Use a steel wheel vibratory roller having a gross weight of not less than tons operated in the vibrating mode to compact the rubblized pavement .
PneumaticTired Roller Use a pneumatictired roller as specified in .. to compact the rubblized pavement. . CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS .
Removal of Existing Asphalt Surfaces Remove existing asphalt concrete overlays and patches from the PCC pavement surfaces prior to rubblization .
SawCut Joints Make new fulldepth sawcuts along existing joints on all pavement edges where rubblized PCC is adjacent to pavement that will remain in place .
Sever all load transfer devices between the planned rubblization and PCC pavement remaining in place .
Shouldering Complete shoulder adjustments andor any pavement widening up to the elevation of the existing pavement grade prior to beginning the rubblization operations .
These areas can be used to support the rubblization machines while the existing PCC pavement is being rubblized .
Rubblize the test section using varying degrees of energy andor various striking heights until a procedure is established that will rubblize the pavement as outlined herein .
Check the rubblized particle sizes throughout the entire depth of the pavement .
Use the established procedure to rubblize the remainder of the pavement .
Inform the engineer of any major adjustments that may be required in the process to provide rubblized pavement that conforms to the specification requirements .
Additional test pits may be required by the engineer to confirm that the PCC pavement is adequately rubblized .
.. Rubblization Criteria Method Resonant Frequency Breaker Compact the complete width of the rubblized pavement surface with the vibratory steelwheel roller and pneumatictired roller in the following sequence as a minimum .
Break the existing concrete pavement into pieces ranging from sand size to inches with no more than approximately percent of the material larger than inches and no individual pieces larger than inches in any dimension .
Method Multihead Breaker Compact the complete width of the rubblized pavement surface with the vibratory Zgrid roller vibratory steelwheel roller and pneumatictired roller in the following sequence as a minimum .
Break the existing concrete pavement into particles with at least percent as determined by visual observation of the particles being less than inches and no pieces larger than inches in any dimension within the upper half of the slab thickness .
The bottom half of the slab shall have rubblized pavement with no pieces larger than inches in any dimension .
When the rubblization process is adjacent to inservice pavement take measures to prevent debris from entering the inservice pavement .
In areas where the pavement is to be overlayed prior to completion of the rubblization extend the initial rubblization a minimum of inches beyond the width of the pavement to be overlayed .
For the resonant frequency breaker process begin rubblizing at a free edge or previously broken edge and progress toward the opposite shoulder or longitudinal centerline of the pavement .
Continuous coverage of the entire pavement surface overlapped if necessary to achieve adequate rubblization with the breaking shoe will be required .
.. Unstable Area Patching If unstable areas occur because of expansion of the existing concrete pavement remove the unstable areas to a maximum length of feet by feet in width and replace with fulldepth asphalt concrete patching in accordance with Section as directed .
Remove the rubblized pavement base course and subgrade material from unstable areas .
.. Progress of the Work Unless otherwise specified no more than hours shall elapse between rubblizing the pavement and the placement of the asphalt concrete overlay .
A minimum of inches of asphalt concrete is required before traffic is allowed on the on the rubblized pavement .
If rain occurs between these operations this time limitation may be waived to allow sufficient time for the rubblized pavement to dry to the satisfaction of the engineer .
Except at restricted crossover and ramp crossings do not allow traffic on the rubblized pavement before the initial asphalt concrete base and leveling courses if required are in place .
Rubblizing portland cement concrete pavement will be measured by the square yard .
The width will be the nominal width of the existing pavement and the length will be measured along the centerline of each roadway or ramp. . PAYMENT .
Payment for rubblizing portland cement concrete pavement will be made at the contract unit price per square yard which includes furnishing all materials labor equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
Saw slots in the pavement for installation of vehicle detector loop wire in the configuration dimensions and combinations shown on the plans .
Cut an extension from the loop to the pavement edge to permit wire routing to an adjacent pullbox through a inch conduit .
Install wires from the pavement to the controller box inside a conduit as shown on the plans .
Uniformly twist wire installed from the pavement edge to the splice at to turns per foot .
Completely fill the slots to within inch of the pavement surface with an approved sealant in accordance with Table . . VIDEO DETECTORS .
Jack or bore conduit under existing pavements and within the drip line of trees in accordance with Section . . CONTROL EQUIPMENT .
Repair trenching through asphalt pavement in accordance with Section and through portland cement concrete pavement as directed at no cost to the Department .
Measurement will be made from the edge of the pavement and once around each loop perimeter .
Furnish and apply reflective white or yellow paint for pavement striping in accordance with plan details the MUTCD and these specifications. . MATERIALS .
Apply all striping on pavement prior to opening to traffic except when rain or other unavoidable occurrences prevent marking the pavement in which case mark the pavement as soon as conditions permit .
Surface Preparation Clean surfaces including ramps and gore areas to be striped of materials that may reduce adhesion of paint to pavement .
Weather Limitations Do not paint striping when pavement surface is wet or damp when air is foggy or misty when air or surface temperature is below F or when wind or other conditions create a dust film on the clean pavement surface before striping can be applied or causes displacement of striping material .
The Project Engineer may waive the tolerance when deviations are caused by undulation in the pavement surface .
Repair stripes that have been marred or picked up by traffic before they have dried clean the pavement outside the stripe at no cost to the Department .
.. Field Testing of Painted Traffic Striping Fieldtest the pavement markings in accordance with .
Construction layout also includes but is not limited to the layout of pavement striping and raised pavement markers setting of line and grade for construction of superelevated curves or other applicable work items and assisting in the coordination of utility relocation activities to ensure that the placement of relocated facilities will not conflict with required construction. . CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS .
For pavement preservation type projects the contractor will be responsible for recording the location of all existing pavement markings and laying out the required final markings subject to the approval of the Project Engineer .
Perform the layout of striping raised pavement markers and signs by methods approved by the engineer prior to placement . .
Locations and Elevations Collect line location and grade elevation data at structure slab corners and driveway pavement within the site in accordance with the accepted Construction Site Survey Plan .
Isolate concrete barriers and foundations from the travel pavement and provide a formed vertical inch to .inch open joint full depth through the barrier and foundation placed at foot to foot intervals .
are not released or spilled onto the pavement soil water sediment or into the air or storm sewers .
Structural concrete is designated by Class and pavement concrete by Type .
This does not apply to mixes for concrete pipe Types B and D pavement and minor structure class concrete .
For less workable concrete such as required for concrete pavement construction these volumes may be increased up to percent .
Proportion aggregates for pavement Types B and D mixes in accordance with .
Develop a curve for compressive strength flexural strength for pavements if required at and days .
Conform to gradation control limits of aggregates as shown in .. Use the Materials Sampling Manual to determine the minimum number of quality control tests for structural and pavement concrete .
When producing concrete for Types B and D pavements determine gradations daily on each stockpile of aggregates .
Acceptance and Verification for PCCP Types B and D Concrete Use the Materials Sampling Manual to determine sampling and testing requirements for acceptance and verification for concrete for Types B and D pavements except as follows .
For pavement types of concrete Types B and D the maximum substitution rate for ternary mixtures is limited to percent of cement and for binary mixtures is percent fly ash or percent GGBFS .
The use of Type III portland cement outside of the specified allowances for precast prestress and specified HES pavements requires the approval of the Chief Construction Engineer .
Nonagitator trucks are only allowed for pavement concrete .
Acceptance and payment schedules for portland cement concrete pavement are shown in Table of Section .
Recycled portland cement concrete RPCC reclaimed asphalt pavement RAP blended calcium sulfate BCS and fine natural sand are required to be from an approved ProducerSupplier .
Table Aggregate Friction Rating Friction Rating Polish Value I II to III to IV The Materials Engineer Administrator may adjust friction rating based upon pavement friction test results .
If the Project Engineer certifies that the stockpile contains RPCC exclusively from DOTD pavements or structures the Magnesium Sulfate soundness testing may be waived by the Materials Engineer Administrator .
Stone shall comply with Recycled portland cement concrete RPCC shall comply with Reclaimed asphalt pavement RAP shall comply with For source approval comply with ..
Description This joint formersealer is intended for use in simultaneously forming and sealing a weakened plane in portland cement concrete pavements .
The cross section shape shall allow easy installation in the pavement joint with parallel sides and shall be sufficiently selflocking to prevent the material from floating out of the joint .
Grade may be used in portland cement concrete pavement PCCP structures .
Signs and pavement markings materials shall comply with these specifications the plans and the MUTCD .
Temporary Raised Pavement Markings for Asphalt Surface Treatment Temporary raised pavement markers for asphalt surface treatment shall be flexible reflective tabs having a nominal width of inches .
Description This specification covers hotsprayed hot extruded and preformed thermoplastic compound for pavement markings on asphalt or portland cement concrete pavement .
Non preformed material shall be manufactured so as to be applied by spray mils thick or extrusion mils thick or greater to pavement in molten form with internal and surface application of glass spheres and upon cooling to normal pavement temperature shall produce an adherent reflectorized pavement marking of specified thickness and width capable of resisting deformation .
Black thermoplastic pavement markings shall require skidresistant filler in lieu of glass beads .
.. Suitability for Application Thermoplastic material shall be a product especially compounded for pavement markings .
Material shall not lift from pavement in freezing weather .
Cold ductility of material shall be such as to permit normal movement with the pavement surfaced without chipping or cracking .
degrees entrance angle as detailed in ASTM E. In lieu of measurements the engineer shall determine by visual nighttime inspection that preformed thermoplastic pavement markings have sufficient reflectance. . PREFORMED PLASTIC PAVEMENT MARKING TAPE .
.. General Preformed plastic pavement marking tape shall be from the Approved Materials List and shall comply with ASTM D Retroreflectivity Level I or Level II except as modified herein .
.. Thickness All preformed plastic pavement marking tape shall have a minimum overall thickness of .
Friction Resistance The surface of the Retroreflectivity Level II preformed plastic pavement marking tape shall provide a minimum friction resistance value of British Polish Number BPN when tested according to ASTM E. The surface of the Retroreflectivity Level I preformed plastic pavement marking tape shall provide a minimum friction resistance value of BPN when tested according to ASTM E. Friction values will be calculated for the Retroreflectivity Level I material with a raised surface pattern as defined in ASTM D by averaging values taken at downweb and at a degrees angle from downweb .
.. Retroreflective Requirements The preformed plastic pavement marking tape shall have the minimum initial specific luminance values shown in Table when measured in accordance with ASTM D. Table Specific Luminance of Preformed Plastic Tape Type Observation Angle degrees Entrance Angle degrees Specific Luminance mcdsq mlx White Yellow Retroreflectivity Level I . . Retroreflectivity Level II . . .. Durability Requirements The Retroreflectivity Level I preformed plastic pavement marking tape shall show no appreciable fading lifting or shrinkage for at least years after placement for longitudinal lines and at least years after placement for symbols and legends .
The Retroreflectivity Level I preformed plastic pavement marking tape shall also retain the following reflectance values for the time period detailed in Table .
Plastic Pavement Marking Tape Guaranty Retroreflectivity Level I If the plastic pavement marking tape fails to comply with these performance and durability requirements within years for Retroreflectivity Level I the manufacturer shall replace the plastic pavement marking material at no cost to the Department. . TRAFFIC PAINT .
This type of adhesive provides rapid adherence of traffic markers to the surface of the pavement .
This type of adhesive is recommended for adherence of traffic markers to pavement surfaces when rapid set is not required .
ASTM D . . . . . . . Flex C inch Bend ASTM D pass pass pass pass pass pass pass Not applicable when used to seal portland cement concrete pavement .. Video Detection System A Video Detection System VDS monitors vehicles on a roadway via processing of video images and provides detector outputs to a traffic controller or similar device .
