The graded portion of a highway within top and side slopes prepared as a foundation for the pavement structure and shoulder .
One or more layers of a pavement structure designed to accom modate the trafﬁ c load the top layer of which resists skidding and trafﬁ c abrasion .
If the contract requires the placement of material on or the use of an existing feature such as subgrade base course pavement or structure maintain the existing feature .
Use rollers on plant mix base and hot bituminous pavement as speciﬁ ed in Table .
Offset the string line parallel to the pavement edge on one or both sides and parallel to the established grade of the pavement surface. . G SECTION BITUMINOUS EQUIPMENT .
Equip the spreader box with Paddles that agitate and uniformly spread the materials throughout the box A hinge near the center to compensate for a quarter crown A front seal to prevent material loss at the road contact point An adjustable rear seal for strike off and The capability to side shift to compensate for variations in pavement ge ometry. . D. For micro surfacing attach an additional strike off to the spreader box after the adjustable rear seal that provides a smooth ﬁ nished surface .
The Department may approve mixers of smaller capacity if the volume of concrete required is less than cubic yards and is not used for concrete pavement or concrete structures .
Use a mechanical batch counter on stationary mixers used to mix concrete for pavement .
The Engineer will allow manually operated screeds on concrete pavement repair of less than feet in length driveways concrete tapers and sidewalks .
Use an approved handoperated sprayer where necessary. . SAWING Use a power saw furnished with suitable blades to cut pavement joints .
Remove all reinforcing steel dowel bars and tie bars from the existing concrete pavement .
The Engineer will include the reinforcing steel in the total weight when the Depart ment pays for removal of concrete pavement by the ton . .
Construct the ramp to a depth that will protect the existing pavement structure from damage and in a manner that will allow the roadway to be used by trafﬁ c at all times .
Before removing pavement place a stockpile of trafﬁ c service aggregate within the project limits .
Remove the entire depth of asphalt pavement and aggregate and blend with the virgin aggregate. . B. . Compaction .
The Engineer will measure the blended base between the outside edges of the existing asphalt pavement slough .
The Engineer will measure the removing and relaying of blended base between the outside edges of the existing asphalt pavement slough . .
DESCRIPTION This work consists of milling pavement surface. . EQUIPMENT Equipment Section Milling Machine . . MATERIALS Reserved. . CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS Remove deleterious material from the pavement before milling .
Mill the surface parallel to the centerline beginning at the centerline and progress ing outward to the edge of pavement .
Provide a smooth transition to the original pavement surface when stopping .
Remove loose material from the milled surface before opening to trafﬁ c. Place the pavement overlay within calendar days of milling the pavement surface . .
Schedule the work so that the last bitumen application of the day cures sufﬁ ciently to allow installation of the shortterm pavement marking before sunset .
After installa tion of permanent pavement markings remove spotting tabs by cutting the tabs ﬂ ush with the roadway surface. . F C. Application of Bitumen .
Apply bitumen to a dry surface with a minimum pavement surface temperature of F. Protect the surface of structures and other roadway appurtenances against track ing and splattering .
Do not place the material if the pavement or ambient temperatures is below F and falling .
Adjust the rate of application of the fog spray to suit the pavement surface and atmospheric conditions .
Do not place the material if the pavement or ambient temperatures is below F and falling .
Adjust the rate of application of the fog spray to suit the pavement surface and atmospheric conditions .
DESCRIPTION This work consists of constructing bituminous pavement .
RAP may be incorporated into mix used for mainline pavement at a rate be tween and percent of the mix by weight .
RAP may be incorporated into mix used for shoulder pavement at a rate between and percent of the mix by weight .
Do not be gin production of hot bituminous pavement before the Department approves the mix design .
If the project will contain both recycled and nonrecycled pavements submit one mix design containing recycled material and one without recycyled ma terial .
Compact and roll the mix. . H. The mix required for correcting local irregularities will be deducted from the total mix used for the project meaning that the subsequent lift of pavement will be thinner than originally planned .
Apply a tack coat to the surface and to the exposed edges of longitudinal and transverse joints before placing bituminous pavement .
If required place and compact approved aggregate from the bottom of existing bituminous pavement to a minimum depth of inches below the existing sur face .
Do not place bituminous mixture on a damp pavement surface on a frozen roadbed or when weather conditions prevent the proper handling and ﬁ nish ing of the bituminous mixtures .
Place pavement to use the estimated tonnage uniformly throughout the road way .
The Engineer will reject loads of mix or sections of pavement containing uncoated batches of aggregate or segregated materials .
Do not place bituminous pavement on bridge decks .
Correct pavement edges that deviate from the uniform line and correct areas of the longitudinal joint that vary from the intended loca tion of the joint by more than inches .
Sequence rolling operations and select the type and the number of rollers to match production and to attain the required density before the mat tempera tures fall below F. In areas not accessible to rollers compact the pavement mat with hand or mechanical tampers . .
Use calculated density on mainline pavement interstate crossroads ramps turn lanes rest area approaches and parking lots .
The recorded average density of each sublot will be determined us ing the density of pavement cores .
The Engineer will designate locations for obtaining pavement cores .
Fill core holes before placing the subsequent lift of pavement .
If there is no subsequent lift of pavement ﬁ ll the core hole within hours of obtaining the core .
After the placement of the ﬁ nal lift of pavement at locations des ignated by the Engineer and under the observation of the Engineer obtain one full depth core per mile .
Place pavement against the surface of curbing gutters manholes and simi lar structures uniformly near the contact surfaces so the pavement is slightly higher than the edge of the structure after compaction .
Compact pavement sloughs with rollers capable of providing a smooth ﬁ nished compacted slough that is free of tire marks and unevenness and dropoffs .
This section will apply when the pavement is constructed as speciﬁ ed in Section .
The Engineer will base acceptance of the density of hot mix asphalt on the average density of the pavement compared to the daily average maximum .
The Engineer will determine the density of pavement based on lots .
The recorded average densities of the sublots will be totaled and divided by the number of sublots within the lot to obtain the average density of the pavement .
If the average density of the pavement compared to the daily average maxi mum theoretical density is above the values in Table the Engineer will apply a contract price adjustment as speciﬁ ed in Section .
If the average density of the pavement compared to the daily average maxi mum theoretical density is at or below the values speciﬁ ed in Table remove and replace the pavement .
When the lift of pavement is placed on aggregate base reclaimed material or cold in place recycle material this number is reduced to . .
The Engineer will pay for the tonnage of bituminous mix used in the accepted pavement and will make no deduction for the weight of asphalt cement used in the mixture .
The Engineer will apply the adjustment factors from Table for lifts of pavement placed on aggregate base reclaimed material or cold in place recycle material .
DESCRIPTION This work consists of constructing concrete pavement. . EQUIPMENT Item Section Concrete Equipment Air Compressor .
Do not stockpile or mix material on the pavement .
On smaller placements place rein forcement in advance of the pavement as far as practical .
Under the observation of the Engineer verify the placement of reinforce ment in the plastic concrete pavement at the start of paving each day and every feet during paving .
Repair or remove and replace concrete pavement where uncontrolled cracks have occurred .
Per form patching when the ambient and pavement temperatures are greater than F. Clean the spall area .
On small areas or tapers create the joints by sawing inserting preformed inserts or forming inch deep grooves in the pavement surface .
Support the preformed ﬁ ller perpendicular to the pavement surface by one of the following An expansion joint assembly that is staked into the subgrade A load transfer assembly or a device designed to remain in the pavement and A suitable installing bar or header .
After the pavement has been ﬁ nished edge the surface adjacent to the header. . Longitudinal Joints .
Use a foot straightedge parallel to the pavement centerline to reveal any irregularities .
Start the ﬂ oat at the edge of the pavement and slowly move it to the crown and back again to the edge .
Dispose of surplus water and laitance on the pavement surface outside the forms .
Uniformly texture the surface by dragging a seamless strip of stiff ﬁ ber artiﬁ cial grass carpet longitudinally along the full width of the pavement in a single pass .
Create impressions after texturing the pavement .
Imprint the reference point RP number into the pavement at each RP .
If weather conditions cause rapid drying of the pavement surface use a fog ger to apply a ﬁ ne mist to the concrete surface for interim curing .
Cure concrete pavement for a period of at least hours .
Suspend curing when the pavement has attained the minimum strength speciﬁ ed in Section .
M Opening to Trafﬁ c for opening pavement to public trafﬁ c. During the curing period only equipment necessary for curing and for saw ing joints will be allowed on the concrete .
Cover the concrete pavement with wet mats of cotton burlap or geotextile fabric .
Place fabric mats to cover the entire concrete pavement surface .
Cover the exposed sides of the concrete pavement after removing forms .
Immediately cover the exposed sides of the concrete pavement with curing compound if removing forms exposes curing concrete before the expiration of the curing period .
Use mortar having the same proportions of cement and sand as the concrete pavement .
Extend the preformed joint seal inch beyond each edge of the concrete pavement .
The Engineer may use a foot straightedge to test pavement surfaces that have been proﬁ led .
If the deviation exceeds inch high or low submit a corrective ac tion plan that includes either grinding or removal and replacement of the pavement .
If the corrective action plans contains grinding the pavement must be ground to within the inch tolerance .
N. Contractor Coring and will make a deter mination of the pavement thickness as speciﬁ ed in Section .
Ensure the deviation after grinding is less than inch. . M .. b If the deviation exceeds inch high or low submit a corrective ac tion plan that includes either grinding or removal and replacement of the pavement .
If the corrective action plans contains grinding the pavement must be ground to within the inch tolerance .
N. Contractor Coring and will make a deter mination of the pavement thickness as speciﬁ ed in Section .
The Engineer will determine the pavement smoothness by proﬁ ling the ﬁ nished surface of the mainline pavement as speciﬁ ed in the Field Sam pling and Testing Manual .
The Engineer will test when the pavement is dry and at an agreed upon time between the Engineer and the Contractor .
The Engineer will test the roadway when the pavement is dry .
To perform a partial proﬁ le the En gineer will require a minimum of percent continuous pavement from either the beginning or end of project .
Use equipment that does not cause strain or damage to the underlying sur face of the pavement .
Perform grinding in the longitudinal direction so grinding begins and ends at lines normal to the pavement centerline .
Ensure the surface of the ground pavement has a texture consisting of grooves between .
Contractor Coring. . N .. c The Engineer will designate locations for obtaining pavement cores a mini mum of days after concrete placement .
A lot is deﬁ ned as square yards of concrete pavement of constant thickness and place ment width Fractional areas between and square yards and Individual ramps crossovers intersections shoulders or other irregular areas of pavement not included in the main line .
The Engineer will determine the concrete pavement thickness as speci ﬁ ed in AASHTO T . When determining the average pavement thickness the Engineer will re cord the length of cores that exceed the designed thickness using Table .
inch from the speciﬁ ed pavement thickness the Engineer will not request additional cores for determining thickness in that lot .
When the pavement thickness is deﬁ cient by more than .
The Engineer will determine the strength of the inplace concrete by testing the initial core used to determine pavement thickness from each lot .
The Engineer will measure vertical location of the reinforcement from the cores taken for determining pavement thickness and strength .
inches from the top or bottom of the pavement slab the Engineer will make a determination of serviceability as speciﬁ ed in Section .
The contract price adjustment for each lot will be determined by multiplying the lot size of by the contract unit price for concrete pavement and the appropriate Contract Price Adjustment Factor in Table .
No price adjustments will be made for lots with a pavement thickness deﬁ cient by .
The Department will not pay more than the contract unit price for any pavement that has an average thickness in excess of that speciﬁ ed .
For continuously reinforced pavements the Engineer will process a contract price adjustment for each lot of pavement with reinforcing steel that is outside the speciﬁ ed location based by multiplying the lot size by the contract unit price for concrete pavement and the appropriate Contract Price Adjustment Factor in Table .
DESCRIPTION This work consists of repairing concrete pavement. . EQUIPMENT Item Section Concrete Equipment Air Compressor . . MATERIALS A .
If when removing the pavement the Engineer determines the extent of damage requires a fulldepth repair change the repair to fulldepth .
L Opening to Trafﬁ c. Provide ﬁ nished concrete that is ﬂ ush with all adjacent pavement surfac es .
Establish tie bar placement in the new pavement by before the sec ond placement installing inch tie bars in the longitudinal joint in the original tie bar pattern .
Use the following work sequence after removing the concrete Perform subgrade repair full depth concrete pavement repair and partial depth spall repair .
Trafﬁ c is allowed on the new pavement from the end of the curing period to the beginning of the joint sealing .
Leave the edges free from frays or spalls on the pavement surface .
Ensure the epoxy is level with the top of the pavement after bar insertion . .
Wait hours before grinding of pavements and dowel bar retroﬁ t slots. . Grinding Depth .
Provide a uniform texture over the pavement surface .
Remove a minimum of inch of pavement at all locations except at culverts dips or other conditions .
Begin and end grinding at lines perpendicular to the pavement centerline within any one ground area. . C. . Texture .
Excluding longitudinal joints provide a uniform transverse slope on the pavement surface with no more than inch deviation in feet when mea sured using a foot long straightedge. . Slurry Removal .
The Engineer will determine the pavement smoothness by proﬁ ling the ﬁ n ished surface of the mainline pavement as speciﬁ ed in the Field Sampling and Testing Manual .
The Engineer will test when the pavement is dry and at a time agreed upon by the Engineer and the Contractor .
For full depth repairs on continuously reinforce concrete pavement the En gineer will measure each end of the repair sections as Full Depth RepairEnd Preparation .
DESCRIPTION This work consists of performing a dowel bar retroﬁ t in concrete pavement. . EQUIPMENT Item Section Concrete Equipment Air Compressor .
Use a gang saw capable of sawing all required slots on a transverse joint or crack in the wheel paths of a single lane of the pavement simultaneously .
Place the dowel bar parallel to the centerline and parallel to pavement surface of the lower panel at the transverse joint to a tolerance of inch .
A hour minimum trafﬁ c control course shall be one of the following ATSSA Trafﬁ c Control Supervisor Course AGC Trafﬁ c Control Supervisor Course NHIs Design and Operation of Work Zone Trafﬁ c Control course number A or Approved subject courses with a minimum of hour per subject of the following combined total must be at least hours Manual and standard signs used in work areas Channelizing devices and temporary barriers pavement markings lighting devices arrow displays and special devices and devices location and placement Layout for trafﬁ c control devices motorist characteristics and op tions and alternatives Installation and removal of the trafﬁ c control zone and operation and maintenance of the trafﬁ c control zone and Flagging operations legal liability and record keeping and emer gency situations .
c. Vertical channelizing devices and independent supports between and feet above the pavement. . Sequencing Arrow Panels .
Remove existing markings and place the new delineation before opening the affected lane or lanes to trafﬁ c. Do not permanently damage the surface or texture of the pavement when removing pavement markings .
Where blast cleaning is used for removal of markings immediately remove the blast material from the pavement. . Masking .
Masking of existing pavement markings will be allowed when indicated in the plans and will allow the option of masking or require the use of masking .
Mix paint so as to closely approximate the color of the inplace pavement .
Use removable nonreﬂ ective preformed tape that minimizes contrast with the pavement .
If adjacent lanes of pavement are not even at the completion of a days work install trafﬁ c control devices as speciﬁ ed in this section .
Leave these devices in place until the pavement surface in the adjacent lanes is even. . TwoLane Roadways .
Install an Uneven Lanes sign Sign W and a supplementary plaque identifying the length of the uneven pavement Sign W. Place this assembly on the right shoulder in both directions in advance of the uneven pavement .
Install Uneven Lanes signs and a supplementary plaque identifying the length of the uneven pavement at the following intersections County Major Collectors State Highways US Highways and Interstate Ramps .
Install tubular markers spaced at times the posted speed limit through the uneven pavement area. . Multilane Roadways .
O .. a plaque identifying the length of the uneven pavement Sign W. Place this assembly on the right shoulder in advance of the uneven pave ment .
Install Uneven Lanes signs and a supplementary plaque identifying the length of the uneven pavement at the following intersections County Major Collectors State Highways US Highways and Interstate Ramps .
Install an Uneven Lanes sign Sign W and a supplementary plaque identifying the length of the uneven pavement Sign W. Place this assembly on the right shoulder in advance of the uneven pave ment .
Install Uneven Lanes signs and a supplementary plaque identifying the length of the uneven pavement at the following intersections County Major Collectors State Highways US Highways and Interstate Ramps .
Install tubular markers spaced at two times the posted speed limit through the uneven pavement area . .
Use laser grade control on the trenching machine whenever the pipe grades do not follow the pavement grades at a constant depth .
Cover the entire concrete surface with an impervious membrane cure. . D Immediately cover the exposed sides of the concrete pavement with curing compound if removing forms exposes curing concrete before the expiration of the curing period .
Place inch isolation joints at foot maximum spacing and between the sidewalk and any abutting curb pavement driveway or other structure .
Immediately cover the exposed sides of the concrete pavement with curing compound if removing forms exposes curing concrete before the expiration of the curing period .
Erect signs and delineators located less than feet from the pavement edge with the sign face truly vertical and turned degrees away from the center and direction of travel of the lane which the facility serves .
Erect signs located feet or more from the edge of the pavement edge with the sign face truly vertical and aligned degrees from the center and direction of travel of the lane which the offset sign serves .
Immediately after installing the rumble strips sweep and remove the millings from the pavement surface .
DESCRIPTION This work consists of furnishing and installing pavement markings. . EQUIPMENT A .
To apply pavement marking paint and glass beads use a selfpropelled pneu matic spraying machine with atomizing nozzles capable of applying two inch to inch wide lines at one time .
Use handoperated equipment to place the pavement markings and reﬂ ectorized spheres on areas not accessible to the pavement marking applicator .
Use grooving equipment that has the following characteristics Equipped with diamond blades mounted on a self propelled machine de signed for grinding a recess into the pavement surface Equipped with a dust collection system capable of removing and containing airborne emissions incurred during grooving operations Uses mounted diamond blades on a ﬂ oating head with controls capable of providing uniform depth and alignment and Capable of grooving a total width sufﬁ cient to install inch wide pavement marking in a single pass .
Do not use equipment that causes strain or damage to the underlying surface of the pavement .
Install pavement markings on clean and dry surface .
Air blast the pavement immediately before the paint application using an air compressor that sup plies air free of oil and water .
Primer may be used to precondition the pavement surface. . Epoxy .
Prepare pavement surfaces as speciﬁ ed by the epoxy paint manufacturer .
Shotblast or grind existing epoxy pavement markings to remove a sufﬁ cient amount of the existing epoxy marking to provide a clean rough surface for the application of new epoxy markings. . Grooved Pavement Markings .
After grinding blow the grooved slot clean to remove any residue and loose material before the installation of the pavement marking .
If pavement marking installation does not occur within hours of grind ing sandblast the groove and install the pavement markings the same day the sandblasting occurs .
If speciﬁ ed in the plans groove a recess into the pavement surface for each stripe that meets the tolerances speciﬁ ed in Table . . A .. b Table Preformed Patterned Pavement Marking Film Grooves Parameter Tolerance Depth to mils Smoothness Ridges within the groove shall be no more than mils higher than either adjacent valley Width line width plus inch Length line length plus inches per end of line Line End Tapers inches c. Grooves for Epoxy Paint .
If speciﬁ ed in the plans groove a recess into the pavement surface for each stripe that meets the tolerances speciﬁ ed in Table .
Keep trafﬁ c control devices in place until the pavement marking has dried and the Engineer approves their removal .
Include the cost to fur nish erect and maintain cones signs and barricades including the cost for ﬂ agging and shadow vehicles in the cost of pavement marking. . Protection Vehicles .
Apply pavement marking paint during daylight .
Allow new asphalt pavement to cool to a temperature below F and cure for a period of hours before applying permanent pavement mark ing .
The use of a computerized DLS is required for monitoring the applica tion of water based paint and epoxy pavement markings when the plan quantity of either water based paint or epoxy pavement marking is linear feet or greater .
Upon initial inspection pavement markings must demonstrate satisfac tory retroreﬂ ectivity and proper daytime and nighttime colors. . C .. c Where material yield computations show a deﬁ ciency in material usage of less than percent the Engineer may accept the work and process a contract price adjustment in direct proportion to the percent of the de ﬁ ciency .
If the Engineer requires removal and replacement remove at least percent of the deﬁ cient line with no excessive scarring of the existing pavement .
Perform removal actions to a width of inch wider all around the nominal width of the pavement marking to be removed. . Water Based Paint .
Apply pavement marking paint and glass beads separately by machine .
Apply water based paint when the air and pavement surface temperatures are F or warmer .
Do not apply paint when the air or pavement surface temperatures are forecasted to be colder than the minimum application temperature during the curing period of the paint .
Apply pavement mark ing paint and beads only during daylight hours .
Install permanent pavement marking over rumble strips only after the fog coat on the rumble strips has cured for a minimum of hours .
Apply pavement marking paint and glass beads separately by machine .
Apply the epoxy pavement marking material at a thickness of mils .
Do not apply markings if the wind or other conditions cause a ﬁ lm of dust to be deposited on the pavement surface before the material can be applied .
If short term paint was applied epoxy pavement markings may be placed directly over the shortterm paint .
Place epoxy materials only when air and pavement temperatures are at least F. The Engineer will allow lower temperature if the manufactur er in writing approves a lower temperature and warranties the adhesion of the epoxy to the pavement for a minimum of one year .
Place epoxy pavement markings so that the initial retroreﬂ ectivity values of the markings are at or above those shown in Table .
Prepare the pavement surface for installation as required by the manufacturer .
Cut the ﬁ lm at open joints or cracks in the pavement .
The Engineer will rate shortterm pavement markings as acceptable marginal or unacceptable in accordance with Quality Guidelines for Temporary Trafﬁ c Control Devices and Features published by ATSSA .
Install shortterm pavement markings that are classiﬁ ed as acceptable .
As necessary remove material from raised pavement markers that re duces the brightness of reﬂ ectorized sheeting .
Apply shortterm pavement marking to the center line to the full length of the surface treatment and milled surface before sunset on the same day the work is performed .
Do not resume paving or milling operations if the shortterm pavement marking has not been replaced as required .
On the ﬁ nal lift allow new asphalt pavements to cool to F before applying shortterm pavement marking paint .
Place shortterm pavement marking on the ﬁ nal lift of new pavement with alignment and spacing so that the permanent striping matches when ap plied .
Allow the ﬁ nal lift of asphalt pavements to cool to F before Type NR markings .
Place the shortterm pavement markings at the rate speciﬁ ed in Section .
Rate of Application with the following exception Exception When the permanent pavement marking is speciﬁ ed as epoxy paint apply the short term pavement marking at a thickness of mils. . C. . ShortTerm Pavement Marking Type R Removable .
Use pavement marking paint and beads for shortterm pavement marking for seal coat projects .
If the inplace shortterm pavement marking has become obscured and has lost its required visibility due to being covered or partially covered by cover coat or blotter material remove the material from the striped areas by light brooming or compressed air before sunset .
Place raised pavement markers used in double solid lines side by side .
Remove raised pavement markers once they are no longer necessary for traf ﬁ c control operations . .
If substituting raised pavement markers for paint the Engineer will measure the lengths of a pavement line that would exist if paint had been installed .
The Engineer will measure pavement markingpainted messages by the square footage shown on the Plans in place and accepted by the Engineer . .
Place hot bituminous pavement before guardrail post installation .
Drill post holes for the new or reset guardrail through the hot bituminous pavement .
Saw the pavement slot with a selfpropelled power saw equipped with a depth gauge and alignment guide .
Ensure the pavement slot is cut cleanly .
Provide acrylic waterborne pavement marking paint capable of receiving and holding glass beads for producing retroreﬂ ective pavement marking .
Use only preapproved pavement marking paint .
A list of preapproved pavement marking paint lots is available at the Departments website www.dot.nd.gov .
Use glass beads for pavement marking that meet AASHTO M Type I ex cept use beads that have a minimum of percent true spheres .
Provide a slow cure material suitable for all applications of pavement markings under controlled trafﬁ c conditions .
Provide material that does not give off solvents to the environment upon application to a pavement surface. . Color .
Use only preapproved pavement marking paint .
A list of preapproved pavement marking paint lots is available at the Departments website www.dot.nd.gov .
Provide retroreﬂ ective pliant polymer pavement markings that consist of a mix ture of polymeric materials pigments and glass beads distributed throughout its base crosssectional area with a reﬂ ective layer of ceramic beads bonded to a polyurethane topcoat surface .
Provide preformed markings that conform to pavement contours by the action of trafﬁ c. Provide pavements markings applied using a pressure sensitive adhesive in ac cordance with the manufacturers instructions .
Place shortterm pavement marking that meets Section .
Provide preformed tape that is immediately ready for trafﬁ c after applica tion and is precoated with a pressuresensitive adhesive that adheres to pavement without the use of heat solvents or other additional adhesive means .
RAISED PAVEMENT MARKERS Provide raised pavement markers that consist of a plastic shell with one or more prismatic reﬂ ective faces with a minimum of square inch of reﬂ ective surface for each direction required to reﬂ ect incident light .
