The portion of the roadbed immediately below the base course or pavement including below the curb and gutter valley gutter shoulder and driveway pavement .
Where no limits are shown in the Plans the subgrade section extends to a depth of inches below the bottom of the base or pavement and outward to inches beyond the base pavement or curb and gutter .
Conditions Requiring a Supplemental Agreement or Unilateral Payment A Supplemental Agreement or Unilateral Payment will be used to clarify the Plans and Specifications of the Contract to provide for unforeseen work grade changes or alterations in the Plans which could not reasonably have been contemplated or foreseen in the original Plans and Specifications to change the limits of construction to meet field conditions to provide a safe and functional connection to an existing pavement to settle documented Contract claims to make the project functionally operational in accordance with the intent of the original Contract and subsequent amendments thereto .
However if the Engineer determines that it is necessary to extend the construction in order to make suitable connections to existing pavement the Engineer will authorize such a change in writing .
The Department reserves the right to reject at its discretion any Proposal submitted that proposes a change in the design of the pavement system or that would require additional rightofway .
For nonprequalified items determine the submittal path to be followed based upon the identity of the Engineer of Record as shown adjacent to the title block on the structural plan sheets and on the key sheets of roadway plans signing and pavement marking plans andor lighting plans .
Set grade stakes at locations that the Engineer directs to facilitate checking of subgrade base and pavement elevations in crossovers intersections and irregular shaped areas .
For resurfacing and resurfacingwidening type projects establish horizontal controls adequate to ensure that the asphalt mix added matches with the existing pavement .
In curve sections set horizontal control points at foot intervals by locating and referencing the centerline of the existing pavement .
Establish by an instrument survey and mark on the surface of the finished pavement at foot intervals the points necessary for striping of the finished roadway .
Mark the pavement with white paint .
The Engineer may require the Contractor to protect the pavement or Roadway at the crossing by using lumber planks or fill .
Within the Limits of a Construction Project The Department will not allow the operation of equipment or hauling units of such weight as to cause damage to previously constructed elements of the project including but not necessarily limited to bridges drainage structures base course and pavement .
on existing pavements that are to remain in place including pavement being resurfaced cementtreated subgrades and bases concrete pavement any course of asphalt pavement and bridges .
Return to Table of Contents Where existing pavement is to be widened and stabilizing is not required prevent any open trench from remaining after working hours by scheduling operations to place the full thickness of widened base by the end of each day .
Provide workmen engaged on special work or skilled work such as bituminous courses or mixtures concrete bases pavements or structures or in any trade with sufficient experience in such work to perform it properly and satisfactorily and to operate the equipment involved .
Furnish and install work zone pavement markings for maintenance of traffic MOT in construction areas .
Do not obstruct or create a hazard to any traffic during the performance of the work and repair any damage to existing pavement open to traffic .
Temporary Traffic Control Devices Use only the materials meeting the requirements of Section Section Standard Plans and the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices MUTCD. . Detour Provide all materials for the construction and maintenance of all detours. . Commercial Materials for Driveway Maintenance Provide materials of the type typically used for base including reclaimed asphalt pavement RAP material and having stability and drainage properties that will provide a firm surface under wet conditions .
Conflicting Pavement Markings Where the lane use or where normal vehicle or pedestrian paths are altered during construction remove all pavement markings paint tape thermoplastic raised pavement markers etc .
Use of paint to cover conflicting pavement markings is prohibited .
Remove Return to Table of Contents conflicting pavement markings using a method that will not damage the surface texture of the pavement and which will eliminate the previous marking pattern regardless of weather and light conditions .
Remove all pavement markings that will be in conflict with next phase of operation vehicle pedestrian paths as described above before opening to vehicle traffic or use by pedestrians .
Cost for removing conflicting pavement markings paint tape thermoplastic raised pavement markers etc .
In the event that use or operations result in damage to a bridge requiring repairs give such repairs top priority to any equipment material or labor available. . Special Detour A special detour is defined as a diversion or lane shift for vehicular traffic that requires temporary pavement .
An anchored unit is defined as having at least one stake or bolt into the underlying pavement or bridge deck .
Return to Table of Contents Remove temporary asphalt pads and repair all attachment scars to permanent structures and pavements after barrier removal .
Remove temporary asphalt or concrete pads and repair all attachment scars to permanent structures and pavements after crash cushion removal .
Description Furnish and install work zone pavement markings for MOT in construction areas and in close conformity with the lines and details shown in the Plans and Standard Plans .
Painted Pavement Markings Return to Table of Contents .. General Use painted pavement markings meeting the requirements of Section .
Application Apply removable tape with a mechanical applicator to provide pavement lines that are neat accurate and uniform .
.. Retroreflectivity Apply white and yellow pavement markings that will attain an initial retroreflectivity of not less than mcdlxm for white and contrast markings and not less than mcdlxm for yellow markings .
.. Removability Provide removable tape capable of being removed from bituminous concrete and portland cement concrete pavement intact or in substantially large strips either manually or by a mechanical rollup device at temperatures above ºF without the use of heat solvents grinding or blasting . .
However traffic control devices warning devices barriers signing pavement markings and restoration to final configuration will be paid for under their respective pay items .
For temporary and new intersections the Return to Table of Contents certified quantity to be paid for will be the number of signalized intersections per day beginning the day the temporary detection is functional and ending the day the permanent detection is operational and the final lane configuration is in place for a new intersection or when the detection is removed for a temporary intersection. . Work Zone Pavement Markings The quantities of work zone pavement markings authorized and acceptably applied under this Section and certified as installedused on the project will be paid for as follows .
The number of pavement messages symbols and arrows .
Payment for temporary RPMs used to supplement line markings will be paid for under temporary raised pavement markers .
Remove and dispose of all trees stumps roots and other such protruding objects buildings structures appurtenances existing flexible asphalt pavement and other facilities necessary to prepare the area for the proposed construction .
Standard Clearing and Grubbing. . Work Included Completely remove and dispose of all buildings timber brush trees stumps roots rubbish debris existing flexible pavement and base drainage structures culverts and pipes .
Removal of Buildings. . Parts to be Removed Completely remove all parts of the buildings including utilities plumbing foundations floors basements steps connecting concrete sidewalks or other pavement septic tanks and any other appurtenances by any practical manner which is not detrimental to other property and improvements .
Partial Removal of Bridges On concrete bridges to be partially removed and widened remove concrete by manually or mechanically operated pavement breakers by concrete saws by chipping hammers or by hydrodemolition methods .
Remove and dispose of existing rigid portland cement concrete pavement sidewalk slope pavement ditch pavement curb and curb and gutter etc .
Measurements for appurtenances which have irregular surface configurations such as curb and gutter steps and ditch pavement will be the area as projected to an approximate horizontal plane .
Where the removal of pavement areas is necessary only for the construction of box culverts pipe culverts storm sewers inlets manholes etc .
For all other bases and rigid pavement consider the finished grading template as the finished shoulder and slope lines and bottom of completed base or rigid pavement .
excavated in the removal of existing pavements and dispose of them outside the rightof way .
Consider the sequence of work and maintenance of traffic phasing in the determination of the availability of this material. . General Requirements for Embankment Materials Construct embankments of acceptable material including reclaimed asphalt pavement RAP recycled concrete aggregate Return to Table of Contents RCA and portland cement concrete rubble but containing no muck stumps roots brush vegetable matter rubbish reinforcement bar or other material that does not compact into a suitable and enduring roadbed .
For construction of mainline pavement lanes turn lanes ramps parking lots concrete box culverts and retaining wall systems a LOT is defined as a single lift of finished embankment not to exceed feet .
Maintain the required density until the base or pavement is placed on the subgrade .
Maintain a shoulder at least feet wide adjacent to all pavement or base construction in order to provide support for the edges .
Shape the earthwork to match adjacent pavement curb sidewalk structures etc . .
When the work does not include construction of base or pavement shape the entire roadbed shoulder point to shoulder point to within .
foot from the true lines shown in the Plans. . Operations Adjacent to Pavement Carefully dress areas adjacent to pavement areas to avoid damage to such pavement .
Do not manipulate any embankment material on a pavement surface .
When shoulder dressing is underway adjacent to a pavement lane being used to maintain traffic exercise extreme care to avoid interference with the safe movement of traffic .
This Section does not include excavation for bases or pavements curbs curb and gutter valley gutter ditch pavement or rubble gutter. . Trench Excavation Safety System and Shoring Special Trench Excavation When performing trench excavation in excess of feet in depth comply with the Occupational Safety and Health Administrations OSHA trench safety standards CFR Subpart P and all subsequent revisions or updates adopted by the Department of Labor and Employment Security .
Box Culverts For box culverts over which pavement is to be constructed compact around the structure to an elevation not less than inches above the top of the structure using rapidstriking mechanical tampers .
When the cover height below the bottom of base under asphalt pavement below concrete pavement or below unpaved ground exceeds inches compact the pipe backfill in the cover zone to a density of at least of the Standard Proctor maximum density as determined by FMT .
Removal and Replacement of Existing Pavement For pavement curb etc .
Construct mainline pavement lanes turn lanes ramps parking lots concrete box culverts retaining wall systems shoulderonly areas sidewalk and shared use path areas meeting the requirements of .
The Contractor is responsible for maintaining the required density until the subsequent base or pavement is in place including any repairs replacement etc .
Perform controlled cracking of concrete pavement and reseating of the cracked slabs by rolling tamping etc .
Do not punch the pieces into the subgrade but firmly seat them thereon to as uniform a contour as is practicable. . Special Requirements for AsphaltSurfaced Pavement Where the existing concrete pavement is covered with an asphalt surface remove the asphalt surfacing after the cracking operation on test areas approximately by feet at locations selected by the Engineer in order to determine if the required results are being obtained in the cracking operations .
The quantity to be paid for will be the plan quantity in square yards of existing concrete pavement acceptably cracked and reseated on the subgrade .
The Engineer may terminate the use of thick lift construction and instruct the Contractor to revert to the inches maximum lift thickness if the Contractor fails to achieve satisfactory results or meet applicable specifications. . Rock Base for Shoulder Pavement Unless otherwise permitted complete all rock base shoulder construction at any particular location before placing the final course of pavement on the traveled roadway .
When dumping material for the construction of a rock base on the shoulders do not allow material capable of scarring or contaminating the pavement surface on the adjacent pavement .
Compacting and Finishing Base. . General Construct mainline pavement lanes turn lanes ramps parking lots concrete box culverts and retaining wall systems meeting the requirements of .
Authorized Variable Thickness Base Where the base is constructed to a compacted thickness other than the normal thickness as shown on the typical section in the Plans as specified in the Plans or ordered by the Engineer for providing additional depths at culverts or bridges or for providing transitions to connecting pavements the volume of such authorized variable thickness compacted base will be calculated from authorized lines and grades or by other methods selected by the Engineer converted to equivalent square yards of normal thickness base for payment .
Where widening the existing base excavate trenches along the edges of the existing pavement to the width and depth indicated in the Plans .
Aggregate Consensus Properties Meet the aggregate consensus properties at design as specified in Meet the criteria specified for a depth of top of pavement layer from surface of greater than inches .
For pavement of a specified thickness of inches or more pounds per square yard. . For pavement of a specified thickness of less than inches pounds per square yard. . Pavement Exceeding Allowable Deficiency in Spread Rate Where the deficiency in spread rate for the total thickness is in excess of pounds per square yard for Return to Table of Contents pavements with a specified thickness of inches or more or in excess of pounds per square yard for pavements with a specified thickness of less than inches the Engineer may require removal and replacement at no cost or may require a correction as specified in ..
The Engineer may require the Contractor to core the pavement for thickness in order to determine the area of pavement with deficient thickness .
As an exception to the above the Contractor may leave pavement outside the main roadway in place without compensation when the Engineer allows even though the deficiency exceeds the tolerance as specified above .
The Department will not compensate the Contractor for any pavement removed or for the work of removing such pavement. . Correcting Deficiency by Adding New Surface Material In the event the total thickness as determined by the spread rate is excessively deficient as defined above and if approved by the Engineer for each particular location correct the deficient thickness by adding new surface material and compacting it using a rolling pattern as approved by the Engineer .
Construct a base course composed of reclaimed asphalt pavement RAP material .
Obtain the RAP material by either milling or crushing an existing asphalt pavement .
When the RAP material is from a Department project and the composition of existing pavement is known the Engineer may approve material on the basis of the composition .
Except as might be permitted by the Engineer for special cases conduct all RAP base construction operations for shoulders before placing the final pavement on the adjacent traveled roadway .
Construct asphalt treated permeable base ATPB and outlet pipe for use under concrete pavement in accordance with the details shown in the Plans and Standard Plans Index .
Connect the open end of the outlet pipe into either an existing drainage structure existing ditch pavement or terminate with a concrete apron .
Outlet Pipe Price and payment will be full compensation for work specified in this Section including removal of existing shoulder pavement trench excavation pipe and fittings standard aprons galvanized hardware cloth rodent screens grouting around and stubbing into existing or proposed drainage structures or ditch pavement restoration of ditch pavement sod and other areas disturbed by the Contractor backfill in place disposal of excess materials and incidentals necessary to complete the work. . Payment Items Payment will be made under Item No .
Concrete Plant and Cement Concrete pavement Meet the requirements of Section for plant and equipment and Section for general construction requirements .
Connect the open end of the outlet pipe into either an existing drainage structure existing ditch pavement or terminate with a concrete apron .
Outlet Pipe Price and payment will be full compensation for work specified in this Section including removal of existing shoulder pavement trench excavation pipe and fittings standard aprons galvanized hardware cloth rodent screens grouting around and stubbing into existing or proposed inlets and drainage structures or paved ditches restoration of ditch pavement and other areas disturbed by the Contractor backfill in place and disposal of excess materials and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
Apply bituminous prime coats on previously prepared bases and apply bituminous tack coats on previously prepared bases and on existing pavement surfaces .
This Section specifies the basic equipment and operational requirements for hot mix asphalt including warm mix asphalt production facilities used in the construction of asphalt pavements and bases .
Remove existing asphalt concrete pavement by milling to improve the rideability and cross slope of the finished pavement to lower the finished grade adjacent to existing curb before resurfacing or to completely remove existing pavement .
For complete pavement removal the Engineer may approve the use of alternate removal and crushing equipment instead of the equipment specified above .
Construction. . General Remove the existing raised pavement markers RPMs before milling .
When milling to improve rideability or cross slope remove the existing pavement to the average depth specified in the Plans in a manner that will restore the pavement surface to a uniform crosssection and longitudinal profile .
The Engineer may require prewetting of the pavement .
Return to Table of Contents Provide positive drainage of the milled surface and the adjacent pavement .
Before opening an area which has been milled to traffic sweep the pavement and gutters with a power broom or other approved equipment to remove to the greatest extent practicable fine material which will create dust under traffic .
Multiple cuts may be made to achieve the required pavement configuration or depth of cut .
For pavement with multiple cuts the deficient areas not caused by the final cut may be left in place upon approval of the Engineer .
Provide a milled surface with a reasonably uniform texture within inch of a true profile grade and with no deviation in excess of inch from a straightedge applied to the pavement perpendicular to the centerline .
This Section specifies the basic equipment and construction requirements for hot mix asphalt including warm mix asphalt pavements and bases .
Pavement Density Monitor the pavement temperature with an infrared temperature device so compaction is completed before the surface temperature of the pavement drops to the extent that effective compaction may not be achieved or the rollers begin to damage the pavement .
Monitor the roadway density with either inch diameter roadway cores a nuclear density gauge or other density measuring device at a minimum frequency of once per feet of pavement . .
When determining the spread rate use at a minimum an average of five truckloads of mix. . Pavement Texture Monitor the pavement texture to minimize pavement segregation .
Cleaning Before placing the mixture clean the surface of the base or underlying pavement of all loose and deleterious material by the use of power brooms or blowers supplemented by hand brooming where necessary .
Application over Asphalt Membrane Interlayer AMI Where an asphalt mix is to be placed over a newly constructed AMI do not sweep or otherwise disturb the cover material before placing the asphalt mix unless directed by the Engineer. . Tacking Apply a tack coat on all existing pavement surfaces that are to be overlaid with an asphalt mix as specified in Section and between successive layers of all asphalt mixes .
Requirements Applicable to All Pavement Types .. Alignment of Edges Place all asphalt mixtures by the stringline method to obtain an accurate uniform alignment of the pavement edge .
As an exception pavement edges adjacent to curb and gutter or other true edges do not require a stringline .
Control the unsupported pavement edge to ensure it will not deviate from the stringline more than plus or minus .
Speed of Paver Establish the forward speed of the asphalt paver based on the rate of delivery of the mix to the roadway but not faster than the optimum speed needed to adequately compact the pavement .
When the average spread rate is beyond plus or minus of the target spread rate monitor the thickness of the pavement layer closely and adjust the construction operations .
Address the unacceptable pavement in accordance with ..
The following areas are exempt from a work stoppage based solely on the calculated spread rate median crossovers turnouts variable thickness overbuild courses leveling courses miscellaneous asphalt pavement as well as turn lanes and ramps less than feet .
As an exception the Engineer may allow the Contractor to leave areas in place if it is determined by the Engineer that the deficiency is not a significant detriment to the pavement quality .
Compacting Mixture. . General Requirements When density testing for acceptance is required select equipment sequence and coverage number of times the roller passes over a given area of pavement of rolling to meet the specified density requirement .
Regardless of the rolling procedure used complete the final rolling before the surface temperature of the pavement drops to the extent effective compaction may not be achieved or the rollers begin to damage the pavement .
Finish rolling Provide one static coverage with a tandem steelwheeled roller after completing the breakdown rolling and intermediate rolling but before the surface pavement temperature drops to the extent effective compaction may not be achieved or the rollers begin to damage the pavement. . Rolling Procedures Use procedures that will uniformly compact the pavement layer to the desired density level while meeting the appropriate smoothness requirements without damaging the pavement surface crushing aggregate or leaving excessive roller marks roller heads or ripples .
Compaction of Areas Inaccessible to Rollers Use hand tamps or other satisfactory means to compact areas which are inaccessible to a roller such as areas adjacent to curbs gutters bridges manholes etc. . Correcting Defects Do not allow the compaction equipment to deposit contaminants onto the pavement surface .
When resuming the paving operation construct a transverse joint by cutting back on the previously placed pavement at a location where the straightedge requirements are met .
At the project limits tie into the adjoining pavement layers as shown in the Plans. . Longitudinal Joints Place each layer of pavement so all longitudinal construction joints are offset to inches laterally between successive layers .
Placing Asphalt Next to Concrete Pavement When placing asphalt next to concrete pavement construct the joint as shown in the Plans .
Surface Requirements. . General Construct a smooth pavement with good surface texture and the proper crossslope. . Texture of the Finished Surface of Paving Layers Produce a finished surface of uniform texture and compaction with no pulled torn raveled crushed or loosened portions and free of segregation bleeding flushing sand streaks sand spots or ripples .
Some examples of pavement deficiencies are displayed at the following URL httpwww.fdot.govprogrammanagementImplementedURLinSpecsPavement.shtm .
Address any pavement not meeting the requirements of this specification in accordance with .. For densegraded structural and densegraded friction course mixtures in areas not defined as density testing exceptions per .. obtain for the Engineer three inch diameter roadway cores at locations visually identified by the Engineer to be segregated .
address the segregated area in accordance with .. Do not use asphalt concrete mixtures containing aggregates that cause a different color appearance in the final wearing surface unless the section is greater than or equal to one mile in length and across the full width of the pavement including shoulders and turn lanes .
Exceptions to these requirements will be permitted if approved by the Engineer. . Cross Slope Construct a pavement surface with cross slopes in compliance with the requirements of the Contract Documents .
The Contractor assumes all risk associated with placing the pavement at the correct cross slope .
.. Cross Slope Measurement Measure the cross slope of the compacted pavement surface by placing the level at the center of the lane and perpendicular to the roadway centerline .
Complete all corrections before placement of the final pavement surface layer .
For pavement with multiple layers the deficient areas for the structural course may be left in place if approved by the Engineer .
The Engineer may waive the corrections at no reduction in payment if the deficiencies are sufficiently separated so as not to affect the pavements overall traffic safety surface drainage ride quality or surface texture .
The Engineer will measure the cross slope of the compacted pavement surface by placing the level at the center of the lane and perpendicular to the roadway centerline .
The Engineer reserves the right to check the pavement cross slope at any time by taking cross slope measurements at any location .
Pavement Smoothness Construct a smooth pavement meeting the requirements of this Specification .
Obtain a smooth surface on all pavement courses placed and then straightedge all layers as required by this Specification .
Test all pavement lanes and ramps where the width is constant and document all deficiencies in excess of inch on a form approved by the Engineer .
In addition the Engineer may also waive the straightedging requirements on ramps and superelevated sections where the geometrical orientation of the pavement results in an inaccurate measurement with the rolling straightedge .
Intermediate Layers and Temporary Pavement When the design speed is mph or greater and the intermediate Type SP layer or temporary pavement is to be opened to traffic if the Engineer identifies an objectionable surface irregularity straightedge and address all deficiencies in excess of inch within hours of placement in accordance with ..
Acceptance Straightedge Acceptance For areas of roadways where the design speed is less than miles per hour and for areas of roadways where the design speed is greater than or equal to miles per hour which are noted in as not suitable for testing with the Laser Profiler acceptance for pavement smoothness of the friction course will be based on verified QC measurements using the straightedge as required by The Engineer will verify the straightedge testing by observing the QC straightedging operations .
Laser Acceptance For areas of high speed roadways where the design speed is equal to or greater than miles per hour acceptance testing for pavement smoothness of the friction course for mainline traffic lanes only will be based on the Laser Profiler .
Ramps acceleration and deceleration lanes and other areas not suitable for testing with the Laser Profiler will be tested and accepted with the straightedge in accordance with and The pavement smoothness of each lane will be determined by a Laser Profiler furnished and operated by the Department in accordance with FM and a report issued with the Ride Number RN reported to one decimal place .
If corrections are made as required following Laser Acceptance the pavement will not be retested for smoothness using the Laser Profiler .
For this testing the pavement will be divided into .
The pavement will be accepted as follows .
the pavement will be accepted at full pay. . For segments with a RN less than .
Unacceptable Pavement .. Corrections Address all areas of unacceptable pavement at no cost to the Department .
As an option for high straightedge deficiencies only mill the pavement surface the full lane width to a depth and length adequate to remove the deficiency .
As an exception the Engineer may allow the Contractor to leave these areas in place if it is determined by the Engineer that the deficiency is not a significant detriment to the pavement quality .
Do not dump embankment or base material directly on the pavement .
Dress shoulders before placing the friction course on adjacent pavement .
Equip blade graders operating adjacent to the pavement during shoulder construction with a inch by inch or larger board or other attachment providing essentially the same results attached to their blades so it extends below the blade edge and protects the pavement surface from damage by the grader blade .
The Contractor may use artificial methods to cool the pavement to expedite paving operations .
The Department may direct the Contractor to use artificial cooling methods when maintenance of traffic requires opening the pavement to traffic at the earliest possible time .
Return to Table of Contents SECTION SUPERPAVE ASPHALT CONCRETE Description. . General Construct a Superpave Asphalt Concrete pavement with the type of mixture specified in the Contract Documents or when offered as alternates as selected .
When construction includes the paving of adjacent shoulders less than or equal to feet wide the layer thickness for the upper pavement layer and shoulder must be the same and paved in a single pass unless called for differently in the Contract Documents. . All overbuild layers must be Type SP Asphalt Concrete designed at the traffic level as stated in the Contract Documents .
Return to Table of Contents .. Pavement Coring Report When the Contract includes milling of the existing asphalt pavement the Pavement Coring Report may be available on the Departments website .
Density testing for acceptance will not be performed on widening strips or shoulders with a width of feet or less opengraded friction courses variable thickness overbuild courses leveling courses any asphalt layer placed on subgrade regardless of type miscellaneous asphalt pavement shared use paths crossovers gore areas or any course with a specified thickness less than inch or a specified spread rate that converts to less than inch as Return to Table of Contents described in .. Density testing for acceptance will not be performed on asphalt courses placed on bridge decks or approach slabs compact these courses in static mode only per the requirements of ..
The pay adjustment will be assessed by calculating a Pay Factor for the following individual quality characteristics pavement density air voids asphalt binder content and the percentage passing the No .
Construct an asphalt concrete friction course pavement with the type of mixture specified in the Contract Documents or when offered as alternates as selected .
Establish an appropriate rolling pattern for the pavement in order to effectively seat the mixture without crushing the aggregate .
At intersections and in other areas where the pavement may be subjected to cross traffic before it has cooled spray the approaches with water to wet the tires of the approaching vehicles before they cross the pavement. . Transportation Requirements of Friction Course Mixtures Cover all loads of friction course mixtures with a tarpaulin or waterproof cover meeting requirements of .
For purposes of this Specification the Responsible Party as designated herein is responsible for performance of the Value Added Asphalt Pavement including continued responsibility for performing all remedial work associated with pavement distresses exceeding threshold values determined in accordance with this Section and as to which notice was provided to the Responsible Party .
When the scope of the asphalt work is only milling and resurfacing and there is no construction of the embankment subgrade or base below the pavement included in the Contract the Responsible Party may be either the Contractor or the Department approved subcontractor performing the Value Added Asphalt Pavement work .
When the construction of the embankment subgrade or base below the pavement is included in the Contract in addition to the construction of the Asphalt Concrete Structural Course and Asphalt Concrete Friction Course the Contractor shall be considered as the Responsible Party .
Pavement Evaluation and Remedial Work. . General The Departments Pavement Condition Survey Program along with observations by the Engineer will be used as the basis for determining the extent and the magnitude of the pavement distresses occurring on the project .
The Department will monitor the pavement for distresses and may require remedial action at any time .
The Department may conduct a Pavement Condition Survey of the value added pavement following the final acceptance of the project and at intermediate times throughout the warranty period with findings provided when considered by the Department to be the obligation of the Responsible Party .
inch remedial work will be required .. a If pavement has an open graded friction course remove and replace .
If the pavement distresses exceed threshold values and it is determined that the cause of the distress is due to the embankment subgrade base or other activities performed by the Contractor the Responsible Party will be responsible for performing all remedial work associated with the pavement distress .
Determination that the pavement thickness design as provided by the Department is deficient .
The Department will make available a copy of the original pavement thickness design package and design traffic report to the Responsible Party upon request .
The Responsible Party is responsible for performing all remedial work associated with the pavement distress if the pavement design is provided by the Contractor .
Determination that the Accumulated ESALs Number of Kip Equivalent Single Axle Loads in the design lane has increased by or more than the Accumulated ESALs used by the Department for design purposes for the warranty period for the pavement design life .
In the event remedial action is necessary and forensic information is required to determine the source of the distress the Department may core andor trench the pavement .
The Responsible Party will not be responsible for damages to the pavement as a result of any forensic activities conducted by the Department .
As applicable to distress criteria for rutting ride and cracking for Category and Category pavements when two LOTs requiring remedial action are not separated by three or Return to Table of Contents more LOTs not requiring remedial action the remedial work shall be required for the total length of all such contiguous LOTs including the intermediate LOTs not requiring remedial action .
Additionally for Category and Category pavements where such areas of remedial action are required due to raveling slippage or bleeding are separated by less than feet the remedial work will be required for the entire area contiguous to the distressed areas including intermediate areas otherwise requiring no remedial action .
If in the opinion of the Engineer the problem poses an immediate danger to the traveling public and the Responsible Party can not provide temporary mitigation for the defect within hours of written notification and restore the pavement to its original design condition within hours of written notification the Engineer has the authority to have the remedial work performed by other forces .
If remedial work necessitates a corrective action to overlying asphalt layers pavement markings signal loops adjacent lanes roadway shoulders or other affected Contract work perform these corrective actions using similar products at no additional cost to the Department .
Construct asphalt pavement in areas where vehicular traffic does not travel such as pavement under guardrail bicycle paths median pavement sidewalks etc .
For the pavement use any plantmixed hot bituminous mixture meeting the requirements of a mix design verified by the Engineer except do not use opengraded friction course FC .
For bicycle paths use a mixture that produces a finished pavement which will not distort or mar under bicycle or mower wheel loads .
Shape the soil in areas where pavement is to be constructed to a surface true to the lines grades and typical crosssections shown in the Plans .
Immediately before placing the pavement uniformly apply a preemergent herbicide in accordance with the requirements of .
If posts are to be constructed within the pavement area the Contractor may cut holes for installation through the completed pavement .
If directed by the Engineer place miscellaneous asphalt pavement prior to placement of the final surface course .
Return to Table of Contents Upon completion of the pavement shape the surface of the adjacent earth to match the pavement edges .
Equipment. . Power Broom Provide a power broom for cleaning the existing pavement capable of removing all loose material from the surface . .
Preparation of Surface Prior to application of the asphalt binder clean the existing pavement as specified in .
The pavement is absolutely dry . .
Maintain an application rate such that the pavement is covered uniformly with aggregate and is one aggregate layer thick .
Any spalling or flaking off of the surface layer that exposes the rough pitted aggregate surface in excess of square inches is to be removed and replaced in accordance with .. Sidewalk ditch pavement slope pavement Traffic Separator or curb and gutter having any intersecting cracks visible in the dry concrete regardless of size will be removed and replaced in accordance with ..
Construct Portland cement concrete pavement in one course on a prepared subgrade .
When reinforced cement concrete pavement is specified or required use concrete reinforced with steel bars or welded wire reinforcement in accordance with details shown in the Plans .
Meet the following requirements Concrete Class I or Class I Pavement Section Grinding Concrete Pavement Section Curing Materials Section Embedded ItemsSection Joint Seal Section For concrete pavement placed using the slipform method of construction utilize Concrete Class I Pavement .
For concrete pavement placed by hand in constructed forms utilize Concrete Class I or Concrete Class I Pavement .
Ensure that the alignment and grade of all forms are in accordance with the contract documents prior to the placing of concrete. . SlipForm Paver Provide a slipform paver that is selfpropelled and equipped to spread strikeoff consolidate screed and floatfinish the freshly placed concrete in one complete pass of the equipment in such a manner that a minimum amount of handfinishing will be necessary to provide a dense and homogeneous pavement .
Ensure that the equipment is of such dimensions and arrangement as to cover the full width of the pavement strip being placed .
If necessary in order to produce a pavement of the required crosssection and meeting the surface requirements equip the slipform paver with traveling side forms of sufficient dimension and strength and of proper shape to support the concrete laterally for a sufficient length of time during placing and finishing .
Automatic grade controls are not required on the paver when the tracks of the slipform paver are operating on previously placed concrete pavement .
Cover the entire surface of the pavement and with slipform type paving the vertical faces by a single pass of the machine .
Fill low areas with suitable material compacted to the specified density or with concrete placed integrally with the pavement .
Fill any subgrade that is below the established grade at the form line to grade with granular material in lifts of inch or less for a distance of inches on each side of the pavement edge and thoroughly compact the material .
Placement of Reinforcement. . General Where the Plans call for reinforced concrete pavement place the steel reinforcement in the pavement slab in accordance with the details shown in the Plans .
Place the reinforcement as provided below. . Welded Wire Reinforcement Place welded wire reinforcement at right angles to the centerline of the pavement and accurately to the position and location shown in the Plans .
Perform the necessary hand spreading with shovels not with rakes or hoes. . Placement Widths The Contractor may construct the pavement either in lanes as determined by the longitudinal joints shown in the Plans or for the full width in one operation .
Construct the pavement to the full width of the lane or slab in a single construction operation .
When constructing pavement in separate lanes do not deviate the junction line from the true line shown in the Plans by more than inch at any point .
When constructing pavement in separate lanes place the lanes adjacent to the low edge of the pavement as shown on the typical section first . .
Strikingoff Consolidating and Finishing Concrete. . General Requirements Immediately after placing the concrete strikeoff consolidate and finish it to produce a finished pavement in accordance with the crosssection width and surface finish required by the Contract Documents .
Use equipment that is fully and accurately adjustable to produce a pavement meeting project requirements .
If the Engineer permits adding water to assist the finishing operations apply water as a fog spray by means of approved spray equipment. . Machine Method Operate the machine over each area of pavement as few times and at such intervals as is necessary to give proper consolidation and to leave a surface of uniform texture .
Take the necessary care to avoid creating depressions or ridges during this operation. . Work Bridges Provide work bridges or other devices necessary for access to the pavement surface for the purpose of inspection finishing straightedging and performing corrective work .
Final Finish. . Finishing As the water sheen disappears from the surface of the pavement and just before the concrete achieves its initial set drag a seamless length of damp burlap that extends the full width of the strip of the constructed pavement longitudinally along the surface to produce a uniform gritty texture .
Support the burlap drag in a manner so that a length of at least feet of burlap is in contact with the pavement .
Except in areas where using hand methods to construct the pavement support the lead end of the burlap drag by a traveling bridge .
Edging After applying the final finish but before the concrete has become nonplastic carefully round the edges to a inch radius on each side of transverse expansion joints and construction joints and along any structure extending into the pavement .
If the Contractor fails to provide sufficient curing materials to adequately cure the concrete in place in a timely manner that portion of the concrete pavement section addressed in the Quality Control Plan QCP will be suspended .
Remove forms carefully so as to avoid damage to the pavement .
After removing the forms immediately cure the sides of the slab in the same manner as the surface of the pavement .
Joints. . General Construct joints at the locations and in accordance with the details shown in Standard Plans Indexes and and the Contract Documents. . Longitudinal Joints .. Longitudinal Construction Joints Where the pavement is poured in strips less than the full width of the pavement construct longitudinal construction joints in accordance with the details shown in the Plans .
.. Longitudinal Lanetie Joints Construct longitudinal lanetie joints within the limits of a strip of pavement in accordance with the details shown in the Plans .
Do not place construction joints however within feet of any other transverse joint or within feet of either end of a section of pavement .
Form the joints by placing a wood or metal bulkhead accurately and securely in place in a plane perpendicular to the profile and centerline of the pavement .
Place the groove perpendicular to the surface of the pavement .
Ensure that the sawing equipment does not damage the pavement and saw the transverse contraction joints as soon as the pavement has hardened to the degree that tearing and raveling are not excessive and before uncontrolled shrinkage cracking begins .
Make the initial cut inch wide by a depth at least of the pavement thickness and as soon as possible but in no case longer than hours after placing the concrete .
In cases where a strip of pavement is being placed immediately adjacent to a previously constructed strip of pavement construct transverse contraction joints using extreme care to time sawing so as to prevent uncontrolled cracks .
Repair any uncontrolled cracks at no expense to the Department by removing and replacing the pavement across the full width of all affected lanes or shoulders and to the nearest transverse joint in each direction .
Place the filler normal to the pavement surface .
When laying the pavement in partial width slabs place transverse joints in the succeeding slab in line with the like joints in the first slab .
In the case of widening existing pavement place transverse joints in line with like joints in the existing pavement or as otherwise shown in the Plans. . LoadTransfer Devices Provide dowel loadtransfer devices in all transverse joints .
Position each dowel such that its final deviation from parallel to the surface of the pavement and parallel to the longitudinal centerline of the pavement does not exceed inch .
Position each dowel such that at no point in its length does it deviate from the surface of the pavement as shown in the Plans in excess of inch .
Expansion Joints at Manholes Meter Boxes and other Projections Form expansion joints by placing premolded expansion joint material about all structures and features projecting through into or against the pavement .
Cleaning Random Cracks in Existing Pavement Do not begin cleaning random cracks in existing pavement until all other concrete pavement repairs have progressed to the point where those operations will not adversely affect the installation of the new seal .
Sealing Joints and Cracks Seal joints in new pavement before allowing any traffic or construction equipment on the pavement .
If traffic is going to be on the pavement prior to any grinding then seal the joints with a temporary material acceptable to the Engineer .
Ensure that the apparatus develops sufficient pressure to extrude the joint sealer from the nozzles satisfactorily and to control the rate of application so as to completely fill the joint to within inch of the surface of the pavement without spillage .
.. HotPoured Type Sealant When the Plans require hot poured sealant for specific joints fill the joint thoroughly without trapping air ensuring the sealant is recessed below the pavement surface as required and control the pouring rate to avoid spilling of sealant onto the adjacent pavement surface .
If any spilling of sealant occurs immediately remove and clean the entire surplus amount from the pavement surface .
Exercise care to provide the required depth of recess above the sealant surface and below the pavement surface .
Produce by grinding in accordance with Section a pavement surface that is true to grade and uniform in appearance with a longitudinal line type texture .
Return to Table of Contents Thickness Determinations. . General After completing the concrete pavement including any corrective work to meet ride requirement determine the thickness by one of following methods .
Core Borings To determine the actual thickness drill cores from the pavement and measure thickness in accordance with ASTM C. Replace the portions of the pavement removed by the borings at no expense to the Department .
.. Nondestructive Testing For a determination using the impactecho method measure the thickness of the pavement in accordance with ASTM C. The initial thickness measurement will be validated by having a core boring taken at that location in compliance with If the results from the impactecho test vary by plus or minus .
inches from the core boring then the nondestructive test method can not be used on the pavement .
Method of Calculating Average Thickness The Department will determine the average thickness of the pavement by using the following method of calculation .
The Department will not take into account in the calculation any areas of pavement which are left in place but for which no payment will be made . .
When the thickness of the pavement is more than inch greater than the specified thickness the Department will consider it in the calculation as the specified thickness plus inch . .
Deficient Thickness. . General The Department will not pay for any pavement which is more than inch less than the specified thickness .
When the pavement contains no longitudinal construction joint the Department will not pay for the area of such pavement that is the product of the full width of the strip placed as a unit times the sum of the distances each way from the short core or cores to the cores on each side which show measurements within the tolerance limits .
When the pavement contains longitudinal construction joints for the width the Department will use the width between longitudinal construction joint and the edge of pavement. . Deficient Pavement Requiring Removal The Engineer will evaluate areas of pavement found deficient in thickness by more than inch and if in his judgment the deficiency is enough to seriously impair the anticipated service life of the pavement remove such areas and replace them with concrete of the thickness shown in the Plans .
The Department will not pay for the area of pavement removed or for the materials or labor involved in its removal .
When removing a section of pavement remove the full length between transverse joints. . Deficient Pavement Left in Place If the Engineer determines that the deficiency will not seriously impair the anticipated service life of the pavement the pavement may be left in place at no compensation. . Additional Borings If the number of cores taken is not sufficient to indicate the thickness of the pavement additional boring locations may be requested with prior approval from the Engineer at no additional cost to the Department .
Construct an earth berm along each edge of the pavement within hours of finishing any newly placed concrete pavement .
Build the berm to the full height of the pavement and at least inches wide and sufficiently compacted to prevent underwash of the pavement .
Except as provided below keep the pavement closed to traffic for a minimum period of calendar days after placement of the concrete .
The Engineer may permit opening of a section of pavement to traffic at an earlier time provided that representative test cylinders made in accordance with ASTM C and tested in accordance with ASTM C indicate a compressive strength of at least psi .
Cure these test cylinders in a manner identical to the corresponding section of pavement .
Protect the pavement from all traffic including construction operations until the specified period of time has elapsed .
Protect the pavement from ambient temperatures below F for the calendar days or until the required compressive strength has been attained .
Concrete Pavement The quantities to be paid for will be the plan quantity in square yards of plain cement concrete pavement and of reinforced cement concrete pavement omitting any areas not allowed for payment under the provisions of .
For purposes of payment the average thickness of pavement will determine the final pay quantities for this pavement as follows The area of pavement represented by the difference between the calculated average thickness and the specified thickness will be converted into equivalent square yards of specified thickness pavement and the quantity thereby obtained will be added to or deducted from the quantity of pavement to be paid for subject to the limitation that the maximum average of overthickness permitted in the adjustment of the quantity of pavement to be paid for will be inch .
Where the Plans call for cement concrete pavement that is to be covered with asphalt concrete surface course payment will be made for the total thickness of the combination as plain cement concrete pavement .
Joints and Cracks For cleaning and sealing joints in new or existing concrete pavement the quantity to be paid will be the length in feet as determined by field measurement along the joints .
For cleaning and sealing random cracks in existing concrete pavement the quantity to be paid will be the length in feet as determined by field measurement along the cracks. . Bridge Approach Expansion Joint The quantity to be paid for will be plan quantity in feet of bridge approach expansion joint installed in accordance with Standard Plans Index calculated across the pavement at right angles to the centerline of the roadway pavement completed and accepted .
Grind existing concrete pavement in the areas designated on the Plans .
Grind new concrete pavement the full width of the travel lanes .
Provide a power driven selfpropelled machine that is specifically designed to grind portland cement concrete pavement with diamondimpregnated grinding blades .
Grind parallel to the centerline until the pavement surfaces of adjacent sides of transverse joints and cracks are in the same plane .
Grind the concrete pavement to eliminate the faulting at joints and cracks maintain the overall smoothness within the limits specified and texture over the majority of the pavement surface .
Maintain the cross slope of the pavement as shown in the Plans .
Remove solid residue from pavement surfaces before traffic action or wind blows such residue .
After the curing period use a grinding process that produces a pavement surface that is true to grade and uniform in appearance with a longitudinal line type texture .
Return to Table of Contents Grind to produce areas of uniform and neat surface appearance beginning and ending at lines perpendicular to the pavement centerline .
Test the pavement surface for smoothness with a foot long straightedge a foot long rolling straightedge or a California Type Profilograph while the Engineer observes the operations as described below .
For pavement surfaces not meeting the smoothness requirements provide corrective work and retesting to ensure conformity approved by the Engineer . .
Testing with a foot straightedge Use this straightedge for longitudinal profiling parallel to centerline within feet of a bridge approach or existing pavement which is being joined .
When portland cement concrete pavement abuts bridge approaches or pavement not under this Contract ensure that the longitudinal slope deviations of the finished pavement do not exceed inch in foot length .
Produce transverse slope deviations of the finished pavement that do not exceed inch with the straightedge laid in a direction perpendicular to the centerline . .
Testing with a foot rolling straightedge Use this straightedge for longitudinal profiling of short pavement sections up to feet long including mainline and nonmainline sections on tangent sections and on horizontal curves with a centerline radius of curve less than feet and the pavement within the superelevation transition of such curves turn lanes ramps tapers and other nonmainline pavements as directed .
When tested with a straightedge ensure that the finished pavement profile provides a uniform surface with no deviation greater than inch in a foot length .
General Use the profilograph on all longitudinal profiling of mainline full width pavement lanes longer than feet and as otherwise directed .
Profilograph A longitudinal profile testing apparatus used to measure a pavements surface profile deviations . .
Such a record is analyzed to determine the rate of roughness or smoothness and to identify changes in the longitudinal pavement surface elevation that exceed a specified threshold along the pavement length traversed by the profilograph . .
A Profile Index PI is a summary value calculated from these numbers above and below a blanking band over a specified length of pavement .
inch uniform height with its longitudinal center positioned optimally between the highs and the lows of the profilogram depicting at least ft of pavement .
Start and terminate the profile feet from each bridge approach or existing pavement which is being joined .
Take at least two pavement profile traces with bump option turned on .
Upon completion of each days testing submit the profilograms to the Engineer for review to determine the pavement section in compliance with these requirements .
Ensure that pavement tested meets the Profile Index requirements and is applicable to the profilogram for each profile trace .
Ensure that pavement on tangent alignment and horizontal curves having a centerline radius of curve feet or more has a Profile Index of inches per mile or less . .
Ensure that pavement on horizontal curves having a centerline radius of curve feet or more but less than feet and pavement within the superelevation transition of such curves has a Profile Index of inches per mile or less . .
Ensure that the pavement riding surfaces have all deviations in excess of .
The Engineer will evaluate the pavement in .
inch in feet or less pavement length until such points do not exceed .
Ensure that the pavement within feet of a bridge approach or existing pavement which is being joined complies with the testing requirements of a foot straightedge .
Where misalignment of the planes of the surfaces on adjacent sides of the joints or cracks is in excess of inch grind the pavement until the surfaces are flush .
After the curing period test the surface for pavement surface smoothness in accordance with .
Where pavement surfaces do not meet the smoothness requirements the Engineer will require corrective work and retesting to ensure conformity .
Operate all milling cutting or grinding equipment to produce a reasonably uniform finished surface without spalling the pavement joints within corrected areas .
The Engineer will not require extra grinding to eliminate minor depressions in order to provide texturing of the pavement surface .
Maintain the cross slope of the pavement as shown in the Plans .
Remove and replace any area of pavement which after grinding still shows a deviation in excess of the allowable tolerance .
Replace any area of concrete pavement with concrete that meets the requirements of Sections .
If the grinding operation removes more than a total length of consecutive feet of the grooves then regroove the entire width of the pavement for the deficient area .
Price and payment will be full compensation for all work and materials specified in this Section including furnishing all labor materials tools equipment testing and incidentals and for doing all work involved in grinding existing or new concrete pavement removing residue and cleaning the pavement including necessary disposal of residue and furnishing any water or air used in cleaning the pavement .
The Unit Bid Adjusted Price will be computed using the plan surface area of grinding concrete pavement .
Replace the existing defective area of concrete pavement with portland cement concrete free of any uncontrolled cracks .
Meet the following requirements Portland Cement Concrete Section Curing Materials Section Epoxy Compounds Section PostInstalled Anchor Systems for Structural Applications in Concrete Elements Section Dowel Bar Assembly Section Calcium Chloride AASHTO M Type For concrete pavement slab replacement the use of pozzolans and slag is optional .
Concrete pavement containing only dowel bars will be considered nonreinforced concrete .
Use and demonstrate proficiency to the Engineer of the maturity method to determine when the concrete has achieved a compressive strength of psi in order to open the pavement to traffic .
Controlled cracks are cracks designed to occur at specific locations based on the pavement design .
All other cracks in the pavement are uncontrolled cracks .
Repair uncontrolled cracked slabs which occur during the life of the contract by removing and replacing the pavement across the full width of all affected lanes or shoulders and to the nearest transverse joint in each direction .
Ensure that transverse slope deviations of the finished pavement do not exceed inch Return to Table of Contents with the straightedge laid in a direction perpendicular to the centerline .
When portland cement concrete pavement abuts bridge approaches or pavement not under this Contract ensure that the longitudinal slope deviations of the finished pavement do not exceed inch in foot length .
Produce a uniform gritty textured final finish longitudinally along the pavement by dragging a broom or seamless strip of damp burlap having at least feet in contact with the pavement .
When required in the Contract Documents produce a pavement surface that is true to grade and uniform in appearance with a longitudinal line type texture by grinding in accordance with Section .
Position each dowel such that its final deviation from parallel to the surface of the pavement and parallel to the longitudinal centerline of the pavement does not exceed inch .
Position each dowel such that at no point in its length does it deviate from the surface of the pavement as shown in the Plans in excess of inch .
Protect the pavement from all traffic including construction vehicles until the maturity value indicates that the required strength has been obtained .
The pay quantity for concrete pavement slab replacement calculated using field measured horizontal dimensions and thickness of the removed slab will be the volume in cubic yards of calculated concrete volume placed and accepted .
Price and payment for concrete pavement slab replacement will be full compensation for all work specified in this Section and shall include demonstration slab construction all joint Return to Table of Contents construction including tie bars and dowels furnishing of test specimens and all necessary incidentals .
This Section applies only to new pavements including added lanes .
Perform all the associated work specified in this Section including continued responsibility for performing all remedial work associated with pavement distresses exceeding threshold values determined in accordance with this Section and as to which notice was provided to the Contractor .
Pavement Evaluation and Remedial Work. . General The Departments Pavement Condition Survey Program along with observations by the Engineer will be used as the basis for determining the extent and the magnitude of the pavement distresses occurring on the project .
The Department will monitor the pavement for distresses and may require remedial action at any time .
The Department may conduct a Pavement Condition Survey of the value added pavement following the final acceptance of the project and at intermediate times throughout the warranty period with findings provided when considered by the Department to be the obligation of the Contractor .
During the warranty period the Contractor may monitor the pavement using nondestructive methods and may participate with the Department in the Pavement Condition Surveys upon request .
Determination that the pavement thickness design as provided by the Department is deficient .
The Department will make available a copy of the original pavement thickness design package and design traffic report to the Contractor upon request .
The Contractor will be responsible for performing all remedial work associated with the pavement distress if the pavement design is provided by the Contractor . .
Determination that the Accumulated ESALs Number of Kip Equivalent Single Axle Loads in the design lane have increased by or more than the Accumulated ESALs used by the Department for design purposes for the warranty period for the pavement design life .
The Contractor will not be responsible for damages to the pavement as a result of any forensic activities conducted at the discretion of the Engineer .
If in the opinion of the Engineer the problem poses an immediate danger to the traveling public and the Contractor can not provide temporary mitigation for the defect within hours of written notification and restore the pavement to its original design condition within hours of written notification the Engineer has the authority to have the remedial work performed by other forces .
If remedial work necessitates a corrective action to the pavement markings adjacent lanes or roadway shoulders perform these corrective actions using similar products at no cost to the Department .
Construct special expansion joints for concrete pavement near the bridge approach slabs that consist of a section of reinforced concrete subslab supporting the roadway concrete pavement with a portion of the roadway pavement over the subslab interrupted by a galvanized sheet metal strip in accordance with the details shown in Standard Plans Index and the Contract Documents .
The quantity to be paid for will be plan quantity in feet calculated across the pavement at right angles to the centerline of the roadway pavement completed and accepted .
Construct concrete structures and other concrete members with the exception of pavement and incidental concrete construction which are specified in other Sections .
.. AdhesiveBonded Anchors Field test installed anchors and dowels for applications connecting traffic railings to bridge decks approach slabs and concrete pavement using Type HSHV adhesives .
Make adjustments using the inner frame in accordance with the manufacturers installation recommendations so the inner frame and cover meet the grade and slope of the pavement surface opened to traffic . .
within the limits of the proposed work to meet the finished grade of the proposed pavement or if outside of the proposed pavement area to the finished grade designated in the Plans for such structures .
Adjust structures prior to placement of final asphalt pavement surface layer .
Adjust structures to match final pavement surface crossslope .
When adjusting structures in flexible pavement restore final road surface in accordance with Standard Plans Index .
Further limit bursting to locations where no part of the host pipe passes within feet of any buried utility or pavement base material .
Such prices and payments will be full compensation for all the work specified in this Section and will include all materials and all excavation and will also include sheeting or shoring if required the disposal of surplus material pavement restoration backfilling and tamping but will not include payment for items paid for elsewhere in the specifications .
Perform straightedging along the edge of the gutter adjacent to the pavement or along other lines on the gutter crosssection as directed by the Engineer .
Install patterned pavement on asphalt or concrete pavement areas at locations and with the color and pattern as specified in the Plans .
For the purpose of this Specification patterned pavements are defined as a post applied surface marking overlay to either the pavement surface or to an imprinted pavement surface .
Do not use products requiring removal of pavement or requiring blockouts or trenches below the top of pavement .
Materials. . General Use only patterned pavement products approved for use in vehicular and nonvehicular areas as appropriate and listed on the APL .
APL approval will be contingent on a field service test demonstrating that the patterned pavement product meets the following performance measures at the end of three years from opening to traffic .
Friction performance of patternedtextured pavement materials shall meet or exceed one of the following test method values a. FNR value of in accordance with ASTM E or b. DFT value of in accordance with ASTM E Manufacturers shall provide a field service test installation of each product within a marked crosswalk on a roadway with an ADT of to vehicles per day per lane on a site approved by the Department .
The test installation shall be a minimum six feet wide and extend from pavement edge to pavement edge across all traffic lanes and shoulder pavement at the crosswalk location .
Installation Acceptance For installation on new asphalt roadways apply patterned pavement a minimum of days after placement of the adjacent pavement .
Submit certification that the patterned pavement was installed in accordance with the manufacturers requirements .
The quantity to be paid will be the plan quantity in square yards of patterned pavement completed and accepted .
Construct concrete pavement in the flow channel of drainage ditches and on slopes in accordance with the notes and details shown in the Plans .
Shape and compact the foundation materials upon which the pavement is to be constructed to a firm even surface true to grade and crosssection .
Upon finishing the pavement over the joint open and edge the slot with a tool having a inch radius . .
Method of Placing Slope Pavement Place slope pavement in vertical strips feet plus or minus inch wide except taper radii strips from the foot width at the bottom to a minimum width of foot at the top .
Construct weep holes at the toe of slope for all slope pavements. . Filter Fabric Locate and construct filter fabric as shown in the Plans and Standard Plans .
Roughen the surface of ditch pavement after screeding concrete unless otherwise specified to the approximate shape and grade by a rake or other suitable tool drawn perpendicular to the direction of flow .
Strike off slope pavement or smooth surfaced ditch pavement when specified true to line and crosssection and remove all surplus water and laitance from the surface .
Where the Plans show headers or cutoff walls at the end or edge of the pavement the volume of the additional thickness of pavement that constitutes the headers calculated in accordance with plan dimensions will be converted into equivalent square yards of standard thickness pavement and included in the quantity to be paid for .
No deduction will be made for any areas occupied by manholes inlets or other drainage structures or by public utility appurtenances within the pavement area .
The square yard quantity includes any ditch blocks with ditch or slope pavement on top .
The cubic yard pay item includes any ditch block within a grass or earth ditch without other pavement on top .
Construct an asphalt concrete curb on a previously laid pavement at the locations shown in the Plans .
Sufficiently roughen the surface of the roadway pavement at the locations where the curb will be constructed to provide suitable bonding of the pavement and the curb .
Meet the following gradation limits Standard Sieve Sizes Inches Individual Percentage by Weight Passing inches inches to inches to inches to inch to The Engineer will conduct source approval and project control of bedding stone as specified in In lieu of limestone or other quarry run stone the Contractor may Return to Table of Contents substitute nonreinforced concrete from existing pavement that is to be removed and which meets the above requirements for commercial bedding stone. . Articulating Concrete Block ACB Revetment Systems Obtain all precast block cabling anchors and necessary incidental materials from the same manufacturer .
If driving timber posts either block out holes in the asphalt pavement during the asphalt paving operation or cut holes through the asphalt mat prior to the post installation .
Blocked out or cut holes in the asphalt pavement must be at least larger than the cross sectional area of the timber post .
Over a distance of one post spacing linearly widen the miscellaneous asphalt pavement where required to maintain a minimum of inches of material behind the post. . Special Steel Posts Where post placement atop a concrete structure can not be avoided use special steel posts as defined in the Standard Plans and .. .
The mixture will be accepted on the basis of visual inspection by the Engineer with no further testing required. . GroundIn Rumble Strip .. General Grind rumble strips that have welldefined edges and smooth interiors without tearing the finished pavement .
Restore any pavement to the satisfaction of the Engineer at no additional cost to the Department when groundin rumble strips do not meet the requirements of the Contract Documents .
Measure depth as Return to Table of Contents distance from pavement grade to top of groundin grooves at the transverse and longitudinal centerline of the grinding prior to the placement of longitudinal thermoplastic pavement markings .
Setting Posts If rock occurs within the required depth of the post hole or pavement which is to remain in place exists at the location of a post drill a hole of a diameter slightly larger than the greatest dimension of the post or footing and grout in the post or footing .
Exposure of product shall be limited to feet and consecutive days unless approved by the Engineer. . Damage Restoration Take responsibility for restoration for any damage caused by heaving settlement separation of pavement escaping drilling fluid fracout or the directional drilling operation at no cost to the Department .
If the owner does not require pressure testing the Engineer may require at least one test. . A water tight pipe and joint configuration where the product is installed beneath any pavement including sidewalk and front shoulders is required .
Show the ground or pavement surface and crown elevation of each facility installed or installed and placed out of service to an accuracy of within inch at the ends and other exposed locations .
When ground water level must be controlled use a system and equipment that is compatible with the properties characteristics and behavior of the soils as indicated by the soil investigation report. . Damage Restoration Take responsibility for restoring any damage caused by heaving settlement separation of pavement escaping boring fluid fracout of the JB or MT operation at no cost to the Department .
.. Drainage Application Testing Under Pavement When under pavement including sidewalk and front shoulders all JB pipe installations must meet or exceed the Departments water tight pipe and joint configuration in accordance with Section .
When under the pavement conduct an air pressure test for leaks in the presence of the Engineer at a minimum test pressure of PSI by either of the following methods. . hour pressure test with a recording chart or .
.. Drainage Application Testing Not Under Pavement When JB pipe installations are not located under the pavement the pipe and joint configuration must meet or exceed soil tight joint requirements .
Also show the ground or pavement surface and the crown elevation of each facility installed or installed and placed out of service accurately to within inch at the ends and other points physically observed .
Complete all grassing on shoulder areas prior to the placement of the friction course on adjacent pavement. . Seeding At the Contractors option wildflower seed may be included in the turf seeding operation or performed separately from the turf seeding .
Do not spray polyacrylamide containing mixtures onto pavement .
Do not spray polyacrylamide containing mixtures onto pavement .
Signing and pavement marking plan sheets may be used instead of signalization plan sheets if a substantial number of changes from the original Plans must be recorded .
Identify the device location and the approximate detection area for detection systems that are not embedded in or under pavement .
When backfilling trenches in existing pavement use a flowable fill meeting the requirements of Section .
Such work includes repair or replacement of all pavement areas sidewalks driveways curbs structures landscaping grass areas including removal of excavated materials and spoils removal and disposal of drilling fluids and backfilling areas disturbed by the conduit installation. . AboveGround Installation Use conduit designed and manufactured for use in longterm aboveground applications with UV stabilization to prevent material deterioration .
Payment for conduit placed under existing pavement roadway driveways or sidewalk will be made as directional bore .
If conduit is being placed under both existing turf and existing pavement between two pull boxes payment for the total pull boxtopull box length will be made as directional bore .
Ensure insulated tubing used to cover splice is heatshrinkable crosslinked polyethylene with a silicon sealant inside the tubing and an insulation rating of at least V. Return to Table of Contents Loop Sealant Ensure loop sealant is intended for traffic loop embedding in both asphalt and concrete pavement .
Saw Cuts Use a chalk line or equivalent method to outline the perimeter of the loop on the pavement and routes for leadin cables .
Do not allow the saw cut in the pavement to deviate by more than inch from the chalked line .
Ensure that the distance between a twisted loop wire pair lead within the roadway is a minimum of inches from any other twisted loop wire pair lead or loop until they are within foot of the edge of pavement or curb at which point they may be placed closer together .
Perform saw cuts across concrete pavement expansion joints as detailed in Standard Plans Index .
For pavement less than inches deep make saw cuts deep enough to allow to inch of sealant cover over the installed loop wire .
Profiled thermoplastic pavement markings consist of thermoplastic material with raised thermoplastic bumps creating a raised profile marking .
Apply profiled thermoplastic pavement markings in accordance with the Contract Documents .
Use equipment capable of providing continuous uniform heating of the pavement marking material to temperatures exceeding ºF mixing and agitating the material in the reservoir to provide a homogenous mixture without segregation .
Use equipment that will maintain the pavement marking material in a plastic state in all mixing and conveying parts including the line dispensing device until applied .
Capable of traveling at a uniform predetermined rate of speed both uphill and downhill to produce a uniform application of pavement marking material and capable of following straight lines and making normal curves in a true arc . .
Capable of applying retroreflective elements or glass spheres to the surface of the completed pavement marking by automatic dispensers attached to the pavement marking machine such that the retroreflective elements or glass spheres are dispensed closely behind the installed line .
Use retroreflective element or glass sphere dispensers equipped with an automatic cutoff control that is synchronized with the cutoff of the thermoplastic material and applies the retroreflective elements or glass spheres uniformly on the entire pavement marking surface with to embedment . .
Equipped with a special kettle for uniformly heating and melting the pavement marking material .
Application. . General Remove existing pavement markings such that scars or traces of removed markings will not conflict with new pavement markings by a method approved by the Return to Table of Contents Engineer .
Cost for removing conflicting pavement markings during maintenance of traffic operations to be included in Maintenance of Traffic Lump Sum .
Before applying pavement markings remove any material that would adversely affect the bond of the pavement markings by a method approved by the Engineer .
Before applying pavement markings to any portland cement concrete surface apply a primer sealer or surface preparation adhesive of the type recommended by the manufacturer .
Offset longitudinal lines at least inches from construction joints of portland cement concrete pavement .
Apply pavement markings to dry surfaces only and when the ambient air and surface temperature is at least F and rising .
Apply pavement markings to the same tolerances in dimensions and in alignment specified in .
When applying pavement marking over existing markings ensure that no more than inches on either end and not more than inch on either side of the existing line is visible .
Take test readings representative of the pavement marking performance .
Remove and replace pavement markings not meeting the requirements of this Section at no additional cost to the Department. . Thickness Apply flat base lines having a thickness of .
inches or mils exclusive of the bumps when measured above the pavement surface .
Measure record and certify on a Department approved form and submit to the Engineer the thickness of white and yellow pavement markings in accordance with FM .
The Engineer will verify the thickness of the pavement markings in accordance with FM within days of receipt of the Contractors certification. . Dimensions of Raised Bumps Apply the raised bumps with a profile such that the leading and trailing edges are sloped at a sufficient angle to create an audible and vibratory warning .
inches at the highest point of the bump above the pavement surface including the base line .
Measure record and certify on a Department approved form and submit to the Engineer the retroreflectivity of white and yellow pavement markings in accordance with FM . . Color Use pavement marking materials that meet the requirements of . . Retroreflective Elements or Glass Spheres Apply retroreflective elements or glass spheres to all markings at the rates determined by the manufacturers recommendations as identified for the APL System. . Loss If more than of the bumps or more than three consecutive bumps are missing or broken less than half a bump remaining within the first days under traffic replace all failed bumps at no expense to the Department .
Do not allow traffic onto or permit vehicles to cross newly applied pavement markings until they are sufficiently dry .
Remove and replace any portion of the pavement markings damaged by passing traffic or from any other cause at no additional cost to the Department .
Longitudinal pavement markings with the exception of bumps are subject to a day observation period under normal traffic .
The longitudinal pavement markings shall show no signs of failure due to blistering excessive cracking chipping discoloration poor adhesion to the pavement loss of retroreflectivity or vehicular damage .
Replace at no expense to the Department any longitudinal pavement markings that do not perform satisfactorily under traffic during the day observation period .
Place raised pavement markers RPMs and adhesive which upon installation produces a positive guidance system to supplement other reflective pavement markings .
If any adhesive pavement marking materials or other foreign matter adheres to the reflective face of the RPM replace the RPM at no cost to the Department .
Lump Sum Payment Price and payment for RPMs will not be measured or paid for separately when the item for painted pavement markings Final Surface is included in the proposal .
Apply two reactive components pavement markings in accordance with the Contract Documents .
Use equipment that will produce continuous uniform dimensions of pavement markings of varying widths and meets the following requirements .
Capable of applying retroreflective elements or glass spheres to the surface of the completed line by an automatic retroreflective element dispenser attached to the pavement marking machine such that the retroreflective elements or glass spheres are dispensed closely behind the installed line .
Use a retroreflective element or glass sphere dispenser equipped with an automatic cutoff control that is synchronized with the cutoff of the material and applies the retroreflective elements or glass spheres in a manner such that the retroreflective elements or glass spheres appear uniform on the entire pavement markings surface . .
Application. . General Remove existing pavement markings such that scars or traces of removed markings will not conflict with new pavement markings by a method approved by the Engineer .
Before applying pavement markings remove any material by a method approved by the Engineer that would adversely affect the bond of the pavement markings .
Offset longitudinal lines at least inches from construction joints of portland cement concrete pavement .
Apply pavement markings to dry surfaces only and when the ambient air and surface temperature is at least ºF and rising .
Do not apply two reactive components pavement markings when winds are sufficient to cause spray dust .
Return to Table of Contents Apply two reactive components pavement markings to the same tolerances in dimensions and in alignment specified in .
When applying two reactive components pavement marking over existing markings ensure that not more than inches on either end and not more than inch on either side of the existing line is visible .
Apply the two reactive components pavement markings to the pavement in accordance with the manufacturers instructions or as directed by the Engineer .
Take test readings representative of the pavement marking performance .
Remove and replace two reactive components pavement markings not meeting the requirements of this Section at no additional cost to the Department .
Apply all final pavement markings prior to opening the road to traffic. . Thickness Apply two reactive components pavement markings to attain a minimum wet film thickness in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations as identified on the APL .
Measure record and certify on a Department approved form and submit to the Engineer the thickness of white and yellow pavement markings in accordance with FM . . Retroreflectivity Apply white and yellow two reactive components pavement markings that will attain an initial retroreflectivity of not less than mcdlxm and not less than mcdlxm respectively for all longitudinal lines .
Measure record and certify on the Department approved form and submit to the Engineer the retroreflectivity of white and yellow two reactive components pavement markings in accordance with FM . . Color Use materials that meet the requirements of . . Retroreflective Elements or Glass Spheres Apply retroreflective elements or glass spheres to all white and yellow two reactive components pavement markings at the rates determined by the manufacturers recommendations as identified on the APL .
Do not allow traffic onto or permit vehicles to cross newly applied pavement markings until they are sufficiently dry .
Remove and replace any portion of the pavement markings damaged by passing traffic or from any other cause at no additional cost to the Department .
Longitudinal pavement markings are subject to a day observation period under normal traffic .
The longitudinal pavement markings shall show no signs of failure due to blistering excessive cracking chipping discoloration poor adhesion to the pavement loss of retroreflectivity or vehicular damage .
Return to Table of Contents Replace at no additional expense to the Department any longitudinal pavement markings that do not perform satisfactorily under traffic during the day observation period .
Apply painted pavement markings in accordance with the Contract Documents .
Use equipment that will produce continuous uniform dimensions of pavement markings of varying widths and meet the following requirements .
Capable of applying glass spheres to the surface of the completed line by an automatic sphere dispenser attached to the pavement marking machine such that the glass spheres are dispensed closely behind the installed line .
Use a glass spheres dispenser equipped with an automatic cutoff control that is synchronized with the cutoff of the paint and applies the glass spheres in a manner such that the spheres appear uniform on the entire pavement markings surface . .
Application. . General Remove existing pavement markings such that scars or traces of removed markings will not conflict with new pavement markings by a method approved by the Engineer .
Before applying pavement markings remove any material that would adversely affect the bond of the pavement markings by a method approved by the Engineer .
Do not apply painted pavement markings when winds are sufficient to cause spray dust .
Return to Table of Contents Apply painted pavement markings having well defined edges over existing pavement markings such that not more than inches on either end and not more than inch on either side is visible .
Apply paint to the pavement by spray or other means approved by the Engineer .
Remove and replace painted pavement markings not meeting the requirements of this Section at no additional cost to the Department .
Apply all pavement markings prior to opening the road to traffic .
Painted Pavement Markings Final Surface On concrete surfaces or newly constructed asphalt the painted pavement markings final surface will include one application of standard paint and one application of Class B RPMs applied to the final surface .
For center line and edge line rumble strip installations where the pavement marking is placed within the grinding apply a second application of standard paint within hours of each days grinding operation .
Measure record and certify on a Department approved form and submit to the Engineer the thickness of white and yellow durable paint pavement markings in accordance with FM . . Retroreflectivity Apply white and yellow standard paint that will attain an initial retroreflectance of not less than mcdlxm and not less than mcdlxm respectively .
Measure record and certify on a Department approved form and submit to the Engineer the retroreflectivity of white and yellow pavement markings in accordance with FM .
The test readings should be representative of the Contractors pavement marking performance .
If the retroreflectivity values measure below values shown above reapply the pavement marking at no additional cost to the Department .
For standard paint ensure that the minimum retroreflectance of white and yellow pavement markings are not less than mcdlx m. If the retroreflectivity values for standard paint fall below the mcdlx m value within days of initial application the pavement Return to Table of Contents marking will be reapplied at the Contractors expense .
If the retroreflectivity values for durable paint fall below the initial values of mcdlx m value for white and mcdlx m for yellow within days of initial application the pavement marking will be reapplied at the Contractors expense. . Color Use paint material that meets the requirements of . . Glass Spheres Apply glass spheres on all pavement markings immediately and uniformly following the paint application .
Establish tack points at appropriate intervals for use in aligning pavement markings and set a stringline from such points to achieve accuracy. . Dimensions .. Longitudinal Lines Apply painted skip line segments with no more than plus or minus inches variance so that overtolerance and undertolerance lengths between skip line and the gap will approximately balance .
Apply longitudinal lines at least inches from construction joints of portland cement concrete pavement .
Contrast Lines Use black paint to provide contrast on concrete or light asphalt pavement when specified by the Engineer .
Apply black paint in foot segments following each longitudinal skip line. . Alignment Apply painted pavement markings that will not deviate more than inch from the stringline on tangents and curves one degree or less .
Apply painted pavement markings that will not deviate more than inches from the stringline on curves greater than one degree .
Apply painted edge markings uniformly not less than inches or more than inches from the edge of pavement without noticeable breaks or deviations in alignment or width .
Remove and replace at no additional cost to the Department pavement markings that deviate more than the above stated requirements . .
Do not allow traffic onto or permit vehicles to cross newly applied pavement markings until they are sufficiently dry .
Remove and replace any portion of the pavement markings damaged by passing traffic or from any other cause at no additional cost to the Department .
The number of pavement messages symbols and arrows .
Painted Pavement Markings Final Surface Price and payment for painted pavement markings final surface will be full compensation for all applications of painted pavement markings and all applications and removal of RPMs in accordance with .. and .. . Payment Items Payment will be made under Item No .
Apply new thermoplastic pavement markings or refurbish existing thermoplastic pavement markings in accordance with the Contract Documents .
Use equipment capable of providing continuous uniform heating of the pavement marking material to temperatures exceeding ºF mixing and agitation of the material in the reservoir to provide a homogeneous mixture without segregation .
Use equipment that will maintain the pavement marking material in a plastic state in all mixing and conveying parts including the line dispensing device until applied .
Capable of traveling at a uniform predetermined rate of speed both uphill and downhill to produce a uniform application of pavement marking material and capable of following straight lines and making normal curves in a true arc . .
Capable of applying glass spheres to the surface of the completed pavement marking by a double drop application for standard thermoplastic pavement markings and a single drop application for recapping and refurbishment thermoplastic pavement markings .
The bead dispenser for the first bead drop shall be attached to the pavement marking machine in such a manner that the beads are dispensed closely behind the installed line .
The second bead dispenser bead shall be attached to the pavement marking machine in such a manner that the beads are dispensed immediately after the first bead drop application .
Use glass spheres dispensers equipped with an automatic cutoff control that is synchronized with the cutoff of the thermoplastic material and applies the glass spheres uniformly on the entire pavement markings surface with to embedment . .
Equipped with a special kettle for uniformly heating and melting the pavement marking material .
Return to Table of Contents Application. . General Remove existing pavement markings such that scars or traces of removed markings will not conflict with new pavement markings by a method approved by the Engineer .
Cost for removing conflicting pavement markings during maintenance of traffic operations to be included in Maintenance of Traffic Lump Sum .
Before applying pavement markings remove any material that would adversely affect the bond of the pavement markings by a method approved by the Engineer .
Before applying pavement markings to any portland cement concrete surface apply a primer sealer or surface preparation adhesive of the type recommended by the manufacturer .
Offset longitudinal lines at least inches from any longitudinal joints of portland cement concrete pavement .
Apply pavement markings to dry surfaces only and when the ambient air and surface temperature is at least ºF and rising for asphalt surfaces and F and rising for concrete surfaces .
Apply pavement markings to the same tolerances in dimensions and in alignment specified in .
When applying pavement markings over existing markings ensure that no more than inches on either end and not more than inch on either side of the existing line is visible .
Apply thermoplastic material to the pavement by extrusion or other means approved by the Engineer .
Conduct field tests in accordance with FM .Take test readings representative of the pavement marking performance .
Remove and replace pavement markings not meeting the requirements of this Section at no additional cost to the Department .
Wait at least days after constructing the final asphalt surface course to place thermoplastic pavement markings .
Provide temporary pavement markings during the interim period prior to opening the road to traffic .
Install markings in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations. . Thickness .. Standard Thermoplastic Markings Apply or recap standard thermoplastic pavement markings for longitudinal lines to attain a minimum thickness of .
inch or mils when measured above the pavement surface .
inch or mils when measured above the pavement surface .
Measure record and certify on Department approved form and submit to the Engineer the thickness of white and yellow pavement markings in accordance with FM .
Return to Table of Contents The Engineer will verify the thickness of the pavement markings in accordance with FM within days of receipt of the Contractors certification .
Measure record and certify on Department approved form and submit to the Engineer the thickness of white and yellow pavement markings in accordance with FM .
The Engineer will verify the thickness of the pavement markings in accordance with FM within days of receipt of the Contractors certification .
Measure record and certify on Department approved form and submit to the Engineer the thickness of the pavement markings in accordance with FM .
inch or mils when measured above the pavement surface .
Measure record and certify on Department approved form and submit to the Engineer the thickness of the pavement markings in accordance with FM . . Retroreflectivity Apply white and yellow pavement markings that will attain an initial retroreflectivity of not less than mcdlxm and not less than mcdlxm respectively for all longitudinal lines .
Black pavement markings must have a retroreflectance of less than mcdlx m. Measure record and certify on Department approved form and submit to the Engineer the retroreflectivity of white and yellow pavement markings in accordance with FM . . Glass Spheres .. Longitudinal Lines For standard thermoplastic markings apply the first drop of Type or larger glass spheres immediately followed by the second drop of Type glass spheres .
Do not allow traffic onto or permit vehicles to cross newly applied pavement markings until they are sufficiently dry .
Remove and replace any portion of the pavement markings damaged by passing traffic or from any other cause at no additional cost to the Department .
Longitudinal pavement markings are subject to a day observation period under normal traffic .
The longitudinal pavement markings shall show no signs of failure due to blistering excessive cracking chipping discoloration poor adhesion to the pavement loss of retroreflectivity or vehicular damage .
Replace at no additional expense to the Department any longitudinal pavement markings that do not perform satisfactorily under traffic during the day observation period .
Recapping applies to conditions where additional pavement marking material is applied to new or refurbished pavement markings to correct a thickness deficiency .
The number of pavement messages symbols and arrows .
Apply permanent tape pavement markings in accordance with the Contract Documents .
Application. . General Remove existing pavement markings such that scars or traces of removed markings will not conflict with new pavement markings by a method approved by the Engineer .
Ensure the permanent tape adheres to the pavement surface .
Offset longitudinal lines at least inches from construction joints on portland cement concrete pavement .
Apply permanent tape to the pavement by means approved by the Engineer .
Conduct field testing in accordance with FM .Take test readings representative of the pavement marking performance .
Apply all pavement markings prior to opening the road to traffic. . Thickness Apply permanent tape pavement markings that have a thickness as designated on the APL for the particular product used .
Measure record and certify on a Department approved form and submit to the Engineer the thickness of white and yellow pavement markings in accordance with FM . . Retroreflectivity Apply white and yellow pavement markings that will attain an initial retroreflectivity of not less than mcdlxm for white markings and not less than Return to Table of Contents mcdlxm for yellow markings .
Black pavement markings must have a retroreflectance of less than mcdlx m. Measure record and certify on Department approved form and submit to the Engineer the retroreflectivity of white and yellow pavement markings in accordance with FM . . Color Use material meeting the requirements of .
Do not allow traffic onto or permit vehicles to cross newly applied pavement markings until they are sufficiently bonded .
Remove and replace any portion of the pavement markings damaged by passing traffic or from any other cause at no additional cost to the Department .
Longitudinal pavement markings are subject to a day observation period under normal traffic .
The longitudinal pavement markings shall show no signs of failure due to blistering excessive cracking chipping discoloration poor adhesion to the pavement loss of retroreflectivity or vehicular damage .
Replace at no additional expense to the Department any longitudinal pavement markings that do not perform satisfactorily under traffic during the day observation period .
Screenings for use in hot bituminous mixture may consist of screenings from the processing of reclaimed portland cement concrete pavement to produce coarse aggregate .
Screenings for Use in Portland Cement Concrete Screenings produced from either the Miami Oolite Miami Ft. Thompson or Loxahatchee Ft. Thompson Formations may be substituted for silica sand for use in concretes except for concrete pavements approach slabs bridge decks and precast superstructure segments .
Meet the following requirements Plasticity Index AASHTO T Maximum Liquid Limit AASHTO T Maximum Passing a inch screen AASHTO T Minimum LBR No Requirement Materials for Stabilizing Limerock Bearing RatioLBR. . Commercial Materials Materials may be either limerock shell rock cemented coquina or shell base sources approved in accordance with .. . Local Materials Local materials used for stabilizing may be soils or recyclable materials such as crushed concrete roof tiles and asphalt coated base reclaimed asphalt pavement RAP or Fossil Fuel Combustion Products FFCPs provided the following limits for organic content are met .
At the option of the Contractor instead of the single longitudinal strip specified above the blanket may be furnished in three strips one strip being the neat width of the pavement with two side strips. . Additional Requirements for Polyethylene Sheeting The sheets as prepared for use shall be of such dimensions that each unit as laid will extend beyond the edges of the slab by at least twice the thickness dimension of the pavement edge and the sheets shall overlap by at least inches .
Epoxies for structural bonding where bituminous pavement overlays will come in contact with the hardened compound shall meet the requirements for Types A and B compounds above .
Examples of the type of locations for these materials are bridge decks portland cement concrete pavements and other locations required by the Contract Documents .
When splicing is used the metal shall be lapped not less than inches and securely fastened by welding or otherwise in such manner as to leave the spelter undamaged and produce a smooth sliding surface in contact with the pavement slab .
thru .. . Rigidity The dowel bars shall be supported by an approved welded assembly possessing sufficient rigidity to hold the dowel bars in position to such accuracy that error or deviation from its required position in any bar in the entire installation after the pavement has been finished shall be no greater than inch .
The certification shall conform to the requirements of Section . . Joint Sealer for Pavement and Structures .. General This Specification covers joint sealer intended for use in sealing joints in asphaltic concrete pavement and portland cement concrete pavement .
.. Material The joint sealant shall be composed of a mixture of materials typically but not limited to bituminous based that will melt when heated for application and then solidify to form a resilient and adhesive compound capable of sealing joints in portland cement concrete and asphaltic concrete against the infiltration of moisture and foreign materials throughout normal pavement conditions and at ambient temperatures .
Materials for pavement joints shall be tested according to ASTM D. Physical Requirements of Joint Sealants for Portland Cement Concrete Only Parameter Limits Pour Point At least F lower than the safe heating temperature as stated by the manufacturer .
Silicones shall be identified in the following manner Type A A low modulus nonsag nonselfleveling silicone formulation used in sealing horizontal and vertical joints in cement concrete pavements and bridges i.e .
Type B A very low modulus selfleveling silicone formulation used in sealing horizontal joints including joints on moderate slopes in cement concrete pavements and bridges i.e .
Type C An ultralow modulus selfleveling silicone formulation used in sealing horizontal joints including joints on moderate slopes in cement concrete pavements and bridges i.e .
It can also be used to seal the joints between cement concrete pavements and asphalt concrete shoulders including asphaltasphalt joints .
If the cross section of the cut specimen is out of the allowable range additional specimens shall be taken as follows One joint every feet of pavement not to exceed feet .
The smooth pavement formed by the asphalt cement shall extend over the entire interior of the pipe . .
by weight of titanium dioxide for UV protection. . Pressure Pipe Pressure pipe for direct burial under pavement shall conform to the requirements of ASTM D for Type I Grade I Schedule for sizes up to and including inches and Schedule for sizes up to inches .
.. InService Minimum Retroreflective Intensity Class B retroreflective pavement markers shall retain a minimum coefficient of luminous intensity for months of not less than of the values shown in Table of ASTM D and a minimum luminous intensity of .
.. Adhesion Provide tabs that adhere to the pavement such that no tab dislodges .
Show the designation of the Class B marker in accordance with ASTM D. Bituminous Adhesive for Class B Raised Pavement Markers. . General Bituminous adhesive as recommended by the RPM manufacturer shall be used for bonding the RPM to the pavement . .
Any pavement marking materials which although inspected and approved at the point of manufacture hardens or livers in the containers will be rejected even though it conforms to these Specifications in all other respects. . Mixing All paints shall be delivered to the project completely mixed and ready to be used without additional oil or thinner .
Thinners shall not be used under any circumstances. . Approved Product List APL All pavement marking materials shall be one of the products listed on the Departments Approved Product List APL .
The Department will test all pavement marking materials in accordance with FM Part B .
When listed this will be the minimum criteria for application of the pavement marking material . .
Yellow materials for pavement markings shall meet the following performance requirements .
The paint shall have the capability of being cleaned and flushed from the pavement marking machines using regular tap water and any required rust inhibitors .
.. Retroreflectivity The white and yellow pavement markings shall attain an initial retroreflectance of not less than mcdlxm and mcdlxm respectively .
The retroreflectance of the white and yellow pavement markings at the end of the six month period shall not be less than mcdlxm . .
The paint shall have the capability of being cleaned and flushed from the pavement marking machines using regular tap water and any required rust inhibitors .
.. Retroreflectivity The white and yellow pavement markings shall attain an initial retroreflectance of not less than mcdlxm and mcdlxm respectively .
The retroreflectance of the white and yellow pavement markings at the end of the month period shall not be less than mcdlxm . .
.. Retroreflectivity The white and yellow pavement markings shall attain an initial retroreflectance of not less than mcdlxm and not less than mcdlxm respectively .
The retroreflectance of the white and yellow pavement markings at the end of the three year APL testing period shall not be less than mcdlxm .
.. Retroreflectivity The white pavement markings other than crosswalks and bicycle markings shall attain an initial retroreflectance of not less than mcdlxm .
Black pavement markings shall have a retroreflectance of less than mcdlx m. The retroreflectance of the white pavement markings at the end of the three year period shall not be less than mcdlxm .
.. Skid Resistance The surface of the pavement markings shall provide a minimum skid resistance value of BPN British Pendulum Number when tested according to ASTM E. Bicycle markings and pedestrian crosswalks shall provide a minimum skid resistance value of BPN . .
Permanent Tape Materials. . General The materials for permanent tape pavement markings shall consist of white or yellow weatherresistant reflective film as specified herein .
Composition Permanent tape pavement markings shall consist of highquality plastic materials pigments and glass spheres uniformly distributed throughout their cross sectional area with a reflective layer of spheres embedded in the top surface. . Skid Resistance The surface of the pavement markings shall provide a minimum skid resistance value of BPN when tested according to ASTM E. Bicycle markings and pedestrian crosswalks shall provide a minimum skid resistance value of BPN. . Thickness The APL will list the specified thickness of each approved product. . Durability and Wear Resistance The film shall be weather resistant and through normal wear shall show no significant tearing rollback or other signs of poor adhesion. . Conformability and Resealing The pavement markings shall be capable of conforming to pavement contours breaks and faults under traffic at pavement temperatures recommended by the manufacturer .
The film shall be capable of use for patching worn areas of the same types of film in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations. . Tensile Strength The pavement markings shall have a minimum tensile strength of psi when tested according to ASTM D. A rectangular test specimen inches by inch by .
inchmin. . Pigmentation The pigment shall be selected and blended to provide a material which is white or yellow conforming to standard highway colors through the expected life of the pavement markings .
Test laboratory samples in accordance with ASTM E and E. . Glass Spheres The pavement markings shall have glass retention qualities such that when at room temperature a inches by inches specimen is bent over a . inch diameter mandrel axis a microscopic examination of the area on the mandrel shall show no more than of the spheres with entrapment by the material of less than .
The pavement markings shall retain a minimum retroreflectance for two years of not less than mcdlxm for white markings and not less than mcdlxm for yellow markings .
The retroreflectance of the white yellow and contrast pavement markings at the end of the five year APL testing period shall not be less than mcdlxm. . Packaging and Labeling Ship all permanent tape materials in containers which will not adhere to the product during shipment and storage .
.. Retroreflectivity The white and yellow pavement markings shall attain an initial retroreflectance of not less than mcdlxm and not less than mcdlxm respectively .
The retroreflectance of the white and yellow pavement markings at the end of the three year period shall not be less than mcdlxm . .
.. Retroreflectivity The white and yellow pavement markings shall attain an initial retroreflectance of not less than mcdlxm and not less than mcdlxm respectively .
The retroreflectance of the white and yellow pavement markings at the end of the three year period shall not be less than mcdlxm .
Return to Table of Contents .. Retroreflectivity The white pavement markings shall attain an initial retroreflectance of not less than mcdlxm .
The retroreflectance of the white pavement markings at the end of the three year period shall not be less than mcdlxm .
.. Skid Resistance The surface of the pavement markings shall provide a minimum initial skid resistance value of BPN when tested in accordance to ASTM E. .
The pavement stripes and markings shall consist of high quality plastic materials pigments and glass spheres or other retroreflective materials uniformly distributed throughout their cross sectional area with a reflective layer of spheres or other retroreflective material embedded in the top surface .
Durability is the measured percent of pavement marking material completely removed from the pavement .
The pavement marking material line loss must not exceed .
of surface area. . Conformability and Resealing The stripes and markings shall be capable of conforming to pavement contours breaks and faults under traffic at pavement temperatures recommended by the manufacturer .
inches minimum thickness. . Adhesive Precoat removable tape with a pressure sensitive adhesive capable of being affixed to asphalt concrete and portland cement concrete pavement surfaces without the use of heat solvents and other additional adhesives or activators .
Ensure that the adhesive is capable of temporarily bonding to the roadway pavement at temperatures of ºF and the above without pickup distortion by vehicular traffic. . Color Meet the requirements of .. . Removability Ensure that the manufacturer shows documented reports that the removable tape is capable of being removed intact or in substantially large strips after being in place for a minimum of days and under an average daily traffic count per lane of at least vehicles per day .
Eight feet above finished grade at the point of their installation for pedestal type application or b. Seventeen to feet above pavement grade at the center of roadway for overhead type application . .
Flexible Post Delineators .. Dimensions The post shall have a minimum width of inches facing traffic and of such length to generally provide a height of inches above the pavement surface .
NTPEP data or independent test lab data shall be submitted for product approval. . High Performance Delineators .. Dimensions The delineator shall have a minimum height of inches above the pavement surface and have a minimum dimension of inches .
The base shall be mechanically anchored to the pavement and be capable of withstanding fifty vehicle impacts without damage .
