The structure constructed on the roadbed and typically includes pavement surfacing base courses and granular subbase .
The top of subgrade on which the pavement structure curbs sidewalks median and other incidental facilities are constructed .
The engineeredstructural portion of the highway which includes the pavement structure plus the area between the roadbed shoulders or back of curb extending downward and outward at the slope of .H.V to the intercept of natural ground removal limit or slope of embankment keying benches .
Included elements are the roadway pavement structure embankment fill foundations for embankment and soft spot excavationbackfill .
Materials directly below the pavement structure .
For conventional bridge and highway work substantial completion is when bridge deck parapet pavement structure shoulder permanent signing and markings traffic barrier and safety appurtenance work is complete .
Do not exceed legal load limits on structures subbase base and pavement unless otherwise approved in writing . .
Maintain previously constructed work when the contract involves placing material on or the use of a previously constructed subgrade base course pavement or structure .
Remove wholly or in part and dispose of buildings fences structures old pavements pavement markings abandoned pipelines signs and other items that are not designated to remain except for the items to be removed and disposed of under other contract pay items .
Remove pavement markings when they no longer apply by grinding abrasive blasting or hydroblasting .
Apply fog coat to areas where pavement markings have been removed .
The Department will pay for acceptable quantities as follows Pay Item Pay Unit Removal of Miscellaneous Items LS Removal of ___________ Each ft SF SY Asbestos Removal and Disposal CA The cost of the fog coat is incidental to the removal of pavement markings .
Shape and blend abandoned roads into the surrounding area after the pavement is removed as specified in or as directed. . Materials .
When specified remove pavement as specified in .. A including removal of asphaltic or portland cement concrete pavement down to unbound base or subbase material . .
The Department will pay for acceptable quantities as follows Pay Item Pay Unit Obliteration of Old Road LS If a contract pay item does not exist for pavement removal in the work is incidental and the cost included in other earthwork contract pay items .
Provide approved Superpave HMA pavement . .
Blade the shoulder aggregate back to the pavement edge to form a smooth slope with the paved roadway edge as specified or as directed .
Broom the pavement to remove aggregate and shoulder material remaining on the overlay surface .
Finish the base top surface to allow the HMA pavement to match the existing pavement thickness .
Tack the existing pavement vertical edges before paving .
Match the existing pavement thickness .
Granular subbase ¾ inch aggregate for untreated base HMA pavement tack subgrade separation geotextile and biaxial geogrid will be paid under their respective pay items .
Recycle the existing roadway pavement and a portion of the base layer to the lines grades and thicknesses of the typical sections .
Prepare roadbed. . Pulverizing the existing pavement. . CRABS adding cement and mixing. . Shaping and compacting .
Construct the CRABS while the existing pavement temperature is above and is expected to remain above F for hours after final completion .
Pulverize the pavement to the widths and depths as specified and at a minimum to the full depth of the existing pavement .
Document the existing pavement thickness every .
Ensure that the full thickness of the pavement is being pulverized .
Mix the existing pulverized pavement base and cement to the full depth as specified .
Immediately before placement of the initial lift of plant mix pavement apply a prime coat full width at the rate specified or as directed .
Clean the edges of existing pavement that are to be adjacent to new pavement to permit adhesion .
Remove protection after chip seal is complete. . Clean the pavement surface before chip sealing .
Warranty work includes replacing all pavement markings and any other permanent features that are damaged or obliterated due to the chip seal failure or repair process at no additional cost to the Department .
Cleaning the pavement surface . .
Do not start chip sealing unless the pavement surface temperatures are F and rising and do not chip seal when pavement surface temperature exceeds F unless authorized in writing by the Engineer .
Cleaning the pavement surface before chip sealing . .
Provide a job mix formula JMF and a Superpave HMA pavement as specified in this section and .
The Department will perform asphalt pavement analyzer APA testing on SP and SP mixtures .
Temporary Superpave HMA refers to pavement that will be removed before the end of the project e.g .
detours pavement used in construction staging .
For pavement designated in the contract as nonstructural NS or temporary T the class of Superpave HMA mix will be identified in the bid schedule with the initials NS or T respectively i.e .
whereas SPT is Superpave HMA used for temporary pavement that must be removed before completion of the project .
Superpave HMA for temporary pavement may have a class of mix designated on the plans depending on the intended use .
Do not start construction on the pavement surface unless the progress schedule realistically shows the pavement can be replaced or completed within the temperature limitations listed above .
Activate screed extensions and heat vibratory screeds except for minor shoulder widening not exceeding foot and to produce a pavement equal to that produced by the rest of the screed .
The Contractor may use alternate paver configurations provided they comply with the manufacturers written instructions and can be demonstrated to produce an acceptable pavement .
Adjustments to pavingcompaction operation with respect to temperature amplitude frequency lift thickness gradation forceimpact and roller velocity. . Rubbertired rolling with respect to pickup of pavement material . .
Temperature necessary to allow public traffic onto the new pavement surface . .
The Department does not require acceptance test strips on projects less than lane mile in length or for leveling courses nonstructural pavement or temporary pavement .
e The average asphalt binder content for each test section must meet the requirements in Table .. f Samples tested in accordance with AASHTO T asphalt pavement analyzer must meet .. A. .
After acceptance the Department will pay for Superpave HMA pavement and asphalt binder in the test strip under their respective contract pay items .
Paint or spray a thin uniform tack coat of asphalt before placing pavement against the surfaces of curbing gutters manholes portland cement pavement and other structures . .
Use pavement marking tape to temporarily mark roadway centerline on pavements being used by traffic as specified in ..
foot or less on initial pavement placement .
The shoe must be inches wide on pavement overlays .
Rolling equipment used for the acceptance test strip will be the same type and weight as will be used for subsequent pavement compaction .
Do not displace the line and grade of the pavement edges .
Compact the pavement to a density between .
Following acceptance test strip approval pavement density testing for acceptance will be performed by the Department using a gauge with the readings corrected by cores in accordance with AASHTO T or FOP for AASHTO T . The Department will use the average Gmm of the test section corresponding to the Contractors JMF to determine densities for the specified mix production paving .
When an acceptance test strip is not required the Department will base acceptance for pavement density on the density of cores taken from the finished pavement .
Repair holes left in the pavement by the coring operation with nonshrink grout at no additional cost to the Department .
Test the new joint for smoothness as specified in .. P. Construct end transitions between overlays and the adjoining pavement by milling a wedge out of the adjoining pavement starting at the surface and continuing into the adjoining pavement on a HV slope or flatter until a vertical edge equal to .
The milled wedge is a transverse joint when the adjoining pavement is concrete .
Mill the wedge from the pavement to be overlaid with the vertical edge against the concrete when the adjoining pavement is concrete .
Match the pavement surface across a longitudinal joint with the transverse slope shown on typical sections .
Place miscellaneous Superpave HMA pavement in irregular areas e.g .
Do not include pavement widening for installation of guardrail in this work .
Position the blade of the motor grader so light contact with the existing pavement surface is maintained .
Operate the screed close to the existing pavement surface .
Place pavement complying with Schedule II .
Other filters off Measure the finished pavement as follows .
Identify the locations that vary more than ¼ inch from the lower edge when the straightedge is laid on finished pavement in a direction parallel with centerline or perpendicular to centerline .
The Department requires the pavement to comply with the following surface smoothness schedule requirements a .
percent or less pavement on tangent alignment and pavement on horizontal curves having centerline radius of curve feet or more must meet the surface smoothness requirements for the smoothness schedule specified .
The Engineer will exclude acceptance test strips pavement on horizontal curves having a centerline radius of curve of less than feet and pavement within the super elevation transition of such curves or pavement with a longitudinal grade greater than .
Profile the pavement to provide continuous uninterrupted profile data .
The Department will not apply profile smoothness tolerances and incentivedisincentive payments to the following a. Pavement within feet of a transverse joint that separates the pavement from a structure deck an approach slab or an existing pavement not constructed under the contract .
Do not profile pavement for approaches .
mile section along lines parallel with the pavement edge .
Apply a fog coat to the ground pavement surface as specified in after grinding has been completed .
Use powerdriven grinding equipment that is specifically designed to smooth portland cement concrete pavement with diamond blades .
Instead of diamond grinding the Contractor may use a selfpropelled milling machine of the type used for removal of asphalt pavement provided a special milling head is used that is designed to provide a texture similar to diamond grinding .
Check the pavement for smoothness after grinding as specified in this subsection and make additional corrections necessary to achieve smoothness .
If correction of the roadway as specified will not produce satisfactory smoothness results or it reduces pavement thicknesses and serviceability the Engineer may accept the completed pavement and will deduct from monies due or may become due to the Contractor the sum of for each individual high of ITD Standard Specifications for Highway Construction point or for each .
Under these circumstances the Engineers decision whether to accept the completed pavement or to require corrections is final . .
The Superpave HMA quantity will be the weight used in the accepted pavement and will include the weight of the aggregate asphalt and additives in the mixture. . Antistripping additive by the percentage of additive per ton of asphalt. . Miscellaneous pavement by the square yard .
Miscellaneous pavement measurement is in addition to the measurement of asphalt and Superpave HMA material . .
The Department will not pay an incentive for pavement on the roadway shoulders center turn lanes turn bays crossovers tapers or other miscellaneous pavement .
Construct or more courses of road mix pavement on a prepared base or road surface. . Materials .
Do not construct road mix pavement before May or after September .
Construct road mix pavement on approaches as specified or as directed .
Aggregate and asphalt for road mix pavement by the ton. . Antistripping additive by the percentage of additive per ton of asphalt . .
Aggregate for road mix pavement in stockpile by the ton or cubic yard . .
Construct a portland cement concrete pavement as specified .
A . inch maximum slump is allowed for hand finishing if a slipform concrete paver is not used to construct concrete pavement .
Construct pavement using paving equipment that uniformly spreads at the proper thickness for the width of the area being paved consolidates the freshly placed concrete and produces a finished surface meeting straightedge and profile index requirements of .. K before grinding .
If the pavement produced does not meet these requirements suspend concrete paving operations until the deficiencies or malfunction is corrected .
Do not rest vibrators on new pavements or side forms .
c. Machine Paving with Forms The Contractor may finish concrete pavement in small irregular areas as specified in .. B instead of using slipform pavers when approved .
d. Bridge Deck Machine The Contractor may finish concrete pavement in small irregular areas with a concrete bridge deck finishing machine as specified in .
Mount saws operating on to hour old nonrigid pavement on a work bridge so the machine weight is not placed on the new concrete .
Place concrete pavement on the uniformly moistened surface of the completed base or subgrade .
Moisten asphalt treated base surfaces immediately ahead of the placement of concrete pavement to ensure compliance with temperature requirements .
Place concrete pavement with the following precautions .
The water andor the aggregate may of ITD Standard Specifications for Highway Construction need to be heated to a temperature of between F and F. The Contractor may place concrete pavement when the air temperature is below F as specified in .. M. . Do not place concrete on frozen subgrade or use frozen aggregates in the concrete. . Do not place concrete if the concrete temperature is greater than F at time of placement .
Thoroughly consolidate concrete against and along forms or adjoining pavement so gravel pockets along the edges of the finished pavement are prevented .
Consolidate uniformly across the full pavement width .
The Contractor may use long handled floats having blades at least feet in length to smooth and fill in open textured areas in the pavement .
Remove free water on the pavement with the float or other suitable tool .
f. Float the surface transversely using a long handled float when the crown of the pavement will not permit using a longitudinal float .
Do not work the crown out of the pavement .
g. Remove excess water and laitance from the pavement surface after floating .
Use a straightedge at least feet long with a long handle for operating at the edge of the pavement .
h. Finish the surface of the concrete pavement as specified in .. J .
Single cut stress relief joints will be ¼ inch wide and will be saw cut to depth of the concrete pavement .
When a single saw cut joint is specified thoroughly clean the sides of the joint and the adjacent pavement surface approximately inch on each side of the joint of scale dirt dust and other foreign material by jet water blasting immediately after sawing .
Remove the residue from sawing and water blasting from the pavement surface before it is blown by traffic or wind .
Thoroughly clean the sides of the sealant reservoir and adjacent pavement surface approximately inch on each side of the joint of scale dirt dust and other foreign material by jet water blasting immediately after sawing .
Remove the residue from sawing and water blasting from the pavement surface before it is blown by traffic or wind .
spalling fracturing to the concrete pavement .
Incorporate load transfer devices into the concrete pavement by using dowel bar assemblies or dowel bar inserters .
Place the bars parallel to the pavement centerline and surface .
Repair holes left in the pavement by the coring operation at no additional cost to the Department .
Dowels are required where the new concrete pavement abuts the existing concrete pavement .
Drill holes into the existing concrete pavement as specified or as directed and epoxy grout dowel bars into the holes .
After sawing is completed remove random cracks penetrating the full depth of the pavement whether transverse or longitudinal by replacing the cracked slabs .
Construct pavement as specified .
The pavement thickness is subject to price adjustment in accordance with Table .. Once the pavement is sufficiently cured to support foot traffic the Engineer will check the completed pavement thickness of the concrete by measuring the distance from the concrete pavement surface to the underlying surface in accordance with FOP for AASHTO T. Provide five inch diameter cores for verification of the depth as directed .
Core test and repair the concrete pavement at no additional cost to the Department .
The Engineer will determine pavement thickness by average depth measurements in accordance with FOP for AASHTO T . An adjusted unit price for pavement is defined as a single placement width .
The Engineer will determine the average thickness of the pavement in accordance with FOP for AASHTO T calculated as follows .
The Department will make an adjusted payment for the test section in accordance with Table .. Each depth measurement set represents the pavement thickness for a . mile segment or in the case of a beginning or ending measurement the distance will extend to the end of the pavement section .
Finish the surface of the concrete pavement by tining and use a selfpropelled steel comb .
Give the pavement an initial and a final texturing before the curing operations .
Maintain a constant area of burlap in contact with the pavement surface when texturing .
Maintain downward pressure on the pavement surface during operation to achieve uniform texturing without measurable variations in pavement profile .
Round the edges of the pavement along each side of each slab and on each side of transverse expansion joints formed joints and construction joints to a radius of inch before the concrete has taken its initial set .
Correct areas of concrete pavement which are not finished as specified in these requirements by retexturing .
The Contractor may retexture by cutting transverse grooves in the concrete pavement surface by means of saw blades or other approved devices .
Do not polish the concrete pavement surface after cutting. . Longitudinal Tining .
Tine the concrete surface within inches but not closer than inches of longitudinal pavement edges and formed joints. . Transverse Tining .
Repeat the grooving pattern across the pavement .
Test the finished pavement the next working day after placement as follows .
When the straightedge is laid on finished pavement in a direction parallel with centerline or perpendicular to centerline locate surface areas that vary more than inch from the lower edge .
Supply a profiler calibrated in good working condition and ready for operation before work of any concrete pavement begins .
percent or less pavement on tangent alignment and pavement on horizontal curves having a centerline radius of curve feet or more must meet the surface smoothness requirements for the smoothness schedule specified .
A Schedule II project adjoining existing pavements may be revised to a Schedule I project provided the adjoining pavement is ground and maintained at the minimum specified thickness .
A profile is not required in the following areas of pavement a. Pavement on horizontal curves having a centerline radius of curve less than feet and pavement within the superelevation transition of such curves .
b. Pavement within feet of a transverse joint that separates the pavement from an existing pavement not constructed under the contract .
d. Pavement within feet of a transverse joint that separates the pavement from a structure deck or an approach slab .
Perform additional grinding as necessary to extend the area ground in each lateral direction so the lateral limits of grinding are at a constant offset from and parallel to the nearest lane line or pavement edge and in each longitudinal direction so the grinding begins and ends at lines perpendicular to the pavement centerline within any one ground area .
of ITD Standard Specifications for Highway Construction Produce a pavement surface true to grade and uniform in appearance with longitudinal corrugations that present a narrow ridge corduroy appearance .
Use power driven selfpropelled grinding equipment specifically designed to smooth and texture portland cement concrete pavement with diamond blades .
Grinding to obtain smoothness incentives will be allowed provided the grinding will not result in pavement thickness below the specified thickness .
If correction of the roadway as specified will not produce satisfactory results as to smoothness or it reduces pavement thicknesses and serviceability the Engineer may accept the completed pavement and will deduct from monies due or that may become due to the Contractor the sum of for each individual high point or for each .
In these circumstances the Engineers decision whether to accept the completed pavement or to require corrections as described is final .
Cure concrete pavement with a system whitepigmented membraneforming curing compound as specified in ..
Apply each application of the curing compound under pressure at a rate at least gallon per square feet on textured surfaces of concrete pavement .
Uniformly spray the entire surface of the pavement with the complete applications of the membraneforming curing compound after finishing the surface and sides and before the initial set has taken place by an approved machine method .
Provide a supply of suitable blanketing material alongside the work before placing the concrete pavement in quantities sufficient to cover the anticipated area of concrete pavement placed during the expected period of cold weather protection . .
Anytime the air temperature is expected to drop to F or less spread the blanketing material provided over the surface and exposed sides of the concrete pavement to a depth sufficient to prevent freezing of the concrete .
Provide at least approved calibrated temperature recording device for every square yards of concrete pavement placed .
After calendar days the cold weather protection can be suspended if it is demonstrated with fieldcured cylinders or maturity method that the concrete pavement has reached a compressive strength of at least psi . .
Monitor the temperature with a recording thermometer attached to the edge of the concrete pavement or as approved . .
Install joint sealant after grinding for surface smoothness and before the pavement is opened to traffic .
Perform joint sealing only when the ambient and pavement temperatures are F or higher the pavement surface is dry and weather conditions are dry or in accordance with the manufacturers written instructions .
Remove excess joint sealing material immediately and clean the pavement surface .
Protect the surface of the new pavement from scarring and abrasion .
Remove accumulation of concrete sand gravel or other debris deposited on the new pavement as directed .
Replace cracked or broken panels or slabs on the new pavement caused by operating the equipment at no additional cost to the Department .
Repair or replace pavement damaged before final acceptance at no additional cost to the Department .
Use metal or wood protective materials having a width of at least the thickness of the pavement at its edge for the protection of the pavement edges and covering material e.g .
burlap or cotton mats curing paper plastic sheeting for the protection of the pavement surface .
When rain appears imminent stop paving operations and begin placing forms against the sides of the pavement and cover the surface of the unhardened concrete with the protective covering .
Do not allow traffic on the pavement until a psi or greater compressive strength is attained determined by maturity testing in accordance with ASTM C. Develop the maturitystrength relationship and submit maturity curves along with supporting data and field procedures for monitoring maturity for approval at least calendar days before use .
Clean the pavement before opening to traffic . .
The Engineer will measure acceptably completed work for concrete pavement by the square yard .
The square yard measurement will be based on the width of the top surface of the pavement as shown on the typical section on the plans and additional widening where specified or directed .
The Engineer will not make a final measurement of the completed pavement except for authorized changes during construction or where many errors are found in the contract quantity .
If thickness measurements show deficient thickness the Contractor has the option of removing and replacing the pavement at no additional cost to the Department or leaving the pavement in place and receiving the deductions specified in Table .. Table .
of ITD Standard Specifications for Highway Construction The Department will not pay an incentive for thickness in evaluation sections where pavement grinding has occurred to achieve smoothness .
The Engineer will evaluate areas of pavement found deficient in thickness by more than .
inch and determine if the deficient area is sufficient to seriously impair the anticipated service life of the pavement .
Remove the affected areas of pavement within the limits specified and replace it with concrete of the specified quality and thickness at no additional cost to the Department .
Remove the sections of pavement the full length between transverse joints .
inch will not seriously impair the anticipated service life of the pavement the Contractor may elect to leave the pavement in place but will not receive payment for the deficient area of pavement .
When the pavement contains no longitudinal joints the area of such pavement for which payment will not be made is the product of the full width of the strip placed as a unit multiplied by the distance between probes on both sides of the deficient measurement that shows measurements within the thickness limits .
Where the pavement contains longitudinal joints the width used by the Department is the width between longitudinal joints and the edge of the pavement .
The Engineer may order the Contractor to core drill the finished pavement to determine thickness of the pavement in areas where smoothness corrections are made .
The Engineer will determine the pavement thickness by coring after smoothness corrections have been completed .
The profile index requirements are specified in .. K. The Department will not pay a profile incentive payment for pavement on the roadway shoulders turn lanes or other miscellaneous pavement .
The Engineer may reject the pavement when the initial IRI exceeds inches in a . mile section .
Construct portland cement concrete pavements as specified in .. . Materials .
The Engineer may require Type III cement where earlier pavement strengths are necessary .
Provide forms so the constructed pavement meets the specified thickness crosssection grade and alignment .
Remove water or laitance from the surface with a grout rod or scraping straightedge at least foot wide with a long handle and operated from the pavement edge .
Meet the requirements specified in .. G .. Limit hand methods to irregular areas irregular sections and pavement placed in confined work areas Moisten the forms and surface of the base immediately ahead of the placement of concrete pavement .
Ensure adequate consolidation next to forms and uniformly across the full pavement width .
Remove free water on the pavement with the float or other suitable tool .
Thoroughly consolidate concrete against and along forms or adjoining pavement so gravel pockets along the edges of the finished pavement are prevented .
Allow local traffic access by placing concrete in intermittent areas or leaving temporary gaps in the pavement .
Use a grout rod at least foot long with a long handle for operating at the edge of the pavement .
Use the grout rod to correct irregularities in the pavement surface and remove water and laitance .
Transverse and longitudinal joints for urban pavement may be contraction joints or construction joints .
Insert joint filler into the groove until the top is flush with the pavement surface with a deviation of not more than inch below the surface .
Restore the surface finish of the pavement against the filler strip with hand floats after the joint filler has been embedded in the concrete .
Meet the requirements specified in .. K. to test the pavement and applicable sections for grinding .
Provide as specified in .. Q except to protect curbs cast separately from the pavement for hours by keeping traffic off the adjacent pavement or by placing barricades along the curb . .
The Engineer will measure acceptably complete work for urban concrete pavement by the square yard .
Measurement will be based on the width of the top surface of the pavement as shown on the typical crosssection of the plans with additional widening where specified or directed .
The Engineer will not make a final measurement of the completed pavement except for authorized changes during construction or where many errors are found in the contract quantity .
The Department will pay for acceptable quantities at the contract unit prices as follows Pay Item Pay Unit Urban Concrete Pavement SY Drilling holes for the dowels is incidental and the cost included in the contract unit prices of other concrete pavement items .
Verifying dowel bar location is incidental and the cost included in the contract unit prices of other concrete pavement items .
If thickness measurements show deficient thickness the Contractor has the option of removing and replacing the pavement at no additional cost to the Department or leaving the pavement in place and receiving deductions in payment as specified in Table .. Table .
of ITD Standard Specifications for Highway Construction The Engineer will evaluate areas of pavement found deficient in thickness by more than .
inch and determine if the deficient area is sufficient to seriously impair the anticipated service life of the pavement .
Remove the affected areas of pavement within the limits specified and replace it with concrete of the specified quality and thickness at no additional cost to the Department .
Remove the sections of pavement the full length between transverse joints .
inch will not seriously impair the anticipated service life of the pavement the Contractor may elect to leave the pavement in place but will not receive payment for the deficient area of pavement .
When the pavement contains no longitudinal joints the area of such pavement for which no payment will be made by the Department is the product of the full width of the strip placed as a unit multiplied by the distance between probes on both sides of the deficient measurement that shows measurements within the thickness limits .
Where the pavement contains longitudinal joints the width used by the Department is the width between longitudinal joints and the edge of the pavement .
The Engineer may order the Contractor to core drill the finished pavement to determine thickness of the pavement in areas where smoothness corrections are made .
The Engineer will determine the pavement thickness by coring after smoothness corrections have been completed .
Provide a spreader box that is able to side shift the box to compensate for variations in the pavement geometry .
Apply microsurfacing if the air temperature is less than F and when both pavement and air temperature are above F and rising .
Adjust the rate of application of the fog spray during the day to suit temperatures surface texture humidity and dryness of the pavement .
Provide a foot straightedge and ensure the surface does not vary more than inch from the lower edge when the straightedge is laid flat on the pavement in a direction parallel to centerline or normal to centerline .
Perform concrete pavement rehabilitation as follows .
Grind subsealed pavement and seal crack joints the same construction season . .
Remove and replace concrete pavement in failing areas B .
Provide pavement subsealing by determining a grout hole pattern drilling holes through the portland cement concrete pavement pumping grout through the holes into the voids and patching the drilled holes with mortar .
Grind the portland cement concrete pavement surface to eliminate joint faulting restore proper drainage and provide riding characteristics and skid resistance or any combination as specified .
Repair cracks in concrete pavement by routing or sawing with a small diameter segmented saw cleaning and sealing .
Cut a sealant reservoir and seal between the existing plant mix shoulder and the concrete pavement .
Remove the existing joint materials and clean and reseal Portland cement concrete pavement joints to be rehabilitated .
Use mortar to patch holes in pavement slabs that meet or commercial rapidsetting concrete patching material meeting ASTM C. Provide materials certification for commercial rapidsetting mortar as specified in .. D. Grinding .
Remove concrete slabs designated for full or partial replacement without damaging the surrounding pavement or base .
Repair pavement spalls as specified or as directed .
The Engineer will mark spalls to be repaired on the pavement surface .
Promptly clean loose material from the pavement minimum depth .
Maintain existing pavement joints and cracks to the full depth of the cavity by forming through the patch as necessary with a minimum of ¼ inch compressible material .
Drill holes inches or less in diameter through the pavement and underlying base to the depth as specified by air or hydraulic equipment .
Protect the pavement surrounding each hole from damage .
Limit the breakout at the bottom of the drill hole to percent or less of the pavement thickness .
Pump grout with less than psi pressure through the holes until voids under the pavement slab are filled .
Upon completion of the grouting operation remove grout from the drilled holes to a depth of at least inches below the pavement surface .
Clean the holes and fill with mortar and finish flush with the concrete pavement surface .
Grind the area specified until the pavement surfaces of adjacent sides of transverse joints and cracks are in the same plane and the pavement surface deviations are .
Ensure the faulting is eliminated at joints and cracks the overall riding characteristics are within the acceptable limits and the depth of material removed is sufficient for the pavement surface to be textured including the bottom of ruts .
Designed to smooth and texture portland cement concrete pavement with diamond blades .
Meet the smoothness requirements of .. K. Produce a pavement surface that is true to grade and uniform in appearance with longitudinal corrugations that present a narrow ridge corduroy appearance .
Capable of accurate and automatic establishing and maintaining of profile grades along each edge of the cut by reference from the existing concrete pavement by means of a ski or matching shoe or from an independent grade control. . Controls dust and other particulate matter created by the cutting head .
The Engineer may require the pavement milling operations be referenced from an independent grade control rather than a ski in those areas where this type of control is appropriate .
Saw cut the sealant reservoir between the reconstructed plant mix shoulder and the existing concrete pavement to the width and depth specified .
Place sealant when the pavement surface and weather conditions are dry .
Do not use equipment that will cause spalling of the pavement surface beyond the limits of the joint .
spalling fractures to the concrete pavement at no cost to the Department .
As soon as each joint is cut thoroughly clean scale dirt dust old sealant residue and other foreign material from the sides and adjacent pavement surface for a width of approximately inch on each side at the joint .
Remove sawing and sandblasting residue from the pavement surface before it is blown by traffic or wind .
The quantity of pavement grinding milling pavement from the existing plant mix shoulder pavement removal and placing and finishing pavement will be by the square yard .
The Engineer will measure pavement grinding by multiplying the finished ground width regardless of the number of passes with the grinder by the total ground length .
Placing and finishing pavement will be based on the top surface of the pavement using the average squared dimensions .
Furnished concrete pavement and excavation of unstable material will be by the cubic yard .
The Department will pay for accepted quantities as follows Pay Item Pay Unit Drill Hole Subseal Each Grout CF Grind Concrete Pavement SY ITD Standard Specifications for Highway Construction of Resealing Joints ft Milling Pavement SY Plant Mix Surfacing Ton Sealing ft Repairing Pavement Cracks ft Repairing Spalls SF Pavement Removal SY Furnish Concrete Pavement CY Placing Finishing Pavement SY Excavate Unstable Material CY Sealing Edge Joints ft The Department will consider brooming incidental work and the cost included in the milling pavement contract unit price .
The Department will consider the cost of repairing damaged or destroyed dowels base and plant mix shoulders and slabs as incidental to the pavement removal contract unit price .
Cold mill the existing bituminous pavement to the width and depth as specified mix emulsified asphalt recycling agent EARA recycling additive dry portland cement or hydrated lime slurry and water with the millings relay and compact the mixture in place .
Provide water without harmful soluble salts and a quality that the asphalt will not separate from the emulsion before the CIR pavement is in place. . Materials Acceptance .
Recycle the existing pavement with a recycling train .
Ensure the rate of application is approximately ½ percent of dry quicklime added by weight to the existing bituminous pavement to be recycled .
Provide a selfpropelled planing machine having at least a footwide rotary cutter capable of evenly removing the existing pavement to a depth of inches in a single pass .
inch by reference from the existing pavement or from independent grade control and have a positive means for controlling cross slope elevations and an effective means for removing material from the surface .
The Engineer will not allow a heating device to soften the pavement .
Cold mill the existing bituminous pavement to the depth specified on the plans .
Restrict placing operations to the pavement temperature of ºF and rising .
When tests show that the pavement is not within the specified tolerance take immediate action to correct equipment or procedures in the paving operation to eliminate the unacceptable pavement irregularities .
The Engineer will accept cold recycled pavement visually after compaction .
Before placing the initial lift of HMA perform supplemental compaction when the moisture content of the recycled pavement is less than .
Supplemental compaction is conducted using control strip and breakover compaction methods described above when the pavement surface temperature is at least F. .
CIR pavement will be by the square yard .
The Engineer will consider water included in the CIR pavement unit contract price . .
Remove existing seal coat and plant mix pavement by cold milling to the widths and depths as specified or as directed .
Cold mill the pavement surface to the specified depths using sensing devices to control the depth and smoothness .
Do not damage the bridge deck or approach slab and do not leave excess pavement in place .
The ramp will consist of inplace unmilled pavement .
Square up the tapered area and mill to the specified depth and width before placing the new plant mix pavement .
foot vertical by reference from the existing pavement by means of a foot minimum ski or from an independent grade control .
Do not use a heating device to soften the pavement .
The texture produced by cold milling will be a grid pattern with uniform striations or other patterns which will provide optimum conditions for placement of plant mix pavement .
The Engineer will measure the placement of pavement overlays under their respective contract pay items . .
The Department will pay for accepted quantities as follows Pay Item Pay Unit Concrete Waterproof System SY The Department will pay for the placement of pavement overlays under their respective contract pay items .
Before placing the overlay obliterate all pavement markings and thoroughly texture the entire concrete deck by steel shot blasting to ensure proper bonding between the overlay and the concrete substrate .
and as shown by surface profile samples available from ICRI or ASTM E pavement macrotexture depth of .
Obliteration of pavement markings is incidental .
Before placing the overlay obliterate all pavement markings and thoroughly clean the entire concrete deck by steel shot blasting to ensure proper bonding between the epoxy and the concrete substrate .
and as shown by surface profile samples available from ICRI or ASTM E pavement macrotexture depth of .
Do not apply epoxy if the gel time is less than minutes or if pavement temperatures exceed F. In situations where road closures are not under strict time constraints obtain the Engineers approval to apply epoxy at lower temperatures .
After the epoxy has been properly mixed immediately and uniformly apply to the pavement surface with a ³ to ¼ inch Vnotched squeegee .
Completely remove residual epoxy remaining on the pavement by mechanical means e.g .
The Department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract unit price as follows Pay Item Pay Unit Epoxy Overlay SF Surface preparation including obliteration of pavement markings is incidental .
Adjust the existing manhole and valve covers to conform to the new finished pavement grade .
Locate and lower the manhole or valve covers before excavation and adjust to match the finished pavement grade .
The concrete collar will be foot wide measured from the metal cover edge to the cut pavement edge .
Adjust existing manhole and valve frames and covers to the finished pavement grade .
The Contractor may drive the posts if it can be done without damage to posts pavement shoulders or adjacent slopes .
Remove replace or reinstall misaligned loose or damaged posts and repair damage to the existing pavement shoulders or adjacent slopes at no additional cost to the Department .
Push the sealer down so it is at least ¼ inch and no more than ⅜ inch below the surface of the bridge deck at the edge of the joint and at least ⅛ inch and no more than ¼ inch below the surface of concrete pavement at the edge of the joint .
Providing the material and performing the specified work is included in the structure or pavement contract items .
Do not nail or bolt tubular markers to the pavement .
Provide temporary pavement marking tape or temporary waterborne paint pavement markings .
When used ensure temporary pavement marking tape is retroreflective white or yellow adheres to concrete or asphalt pavements with precoated with pressuresensitive adhesive inches wide and is capable of conforming to the pavement surface .
When used for brokenline pavement markings use foot long line segments .
Provide sided temporary flexible raised pavement markers when used on undivided highways .
Provide reflectorized rigid raised pavement markers for temporary applications .
Install temporary markings as soon as practical on newly placed pavements .
For temporary pavement markings omit the test strip when waterborne paint is used .
Use temporary flexible raised pavement markers or temporary rigid pavement markers to supplement or as a substitution for other pavement markings .
Remove surfacemounted tubular markers temporary paving market tape temporary raised pavement markers and rigid raised pavement markers without damaging pavement surface .
Temporary pavement marking tape and temporary pavement marking waterborne paint will be by the foot and will include removal when applicable . .
Temporary flexible raised pavement markers and temporary rigid raised pavement markers will be per each. . Floodlights will be by the hour or lump sum. . Arrow boards will be by the hour or lump sum. . Portable changeable message signs will be by the hour or lump sum . .
Prepare pavement surface and apply waterborne or preformed thermoplastic retroreflective pavement markings. . Materials .
The Departments standard practice is paint applications for permanent pavement markings and paint application for temporary traffic control pavement markings .
Apply pavement markings to clean and dry pavement when the pavement temperature is between F and F and the relative humidity is less than percent. . Limit the deviation of longitudinal pavement markings to less than inches per feet .
Provide longitudinal pavement markings with a width tolerance of percent .
feet. . Use glass beads to provide a minimum retroreflectivity of millicandelas per square meter per lux for white pavement markings and millicandelas per square meter per lux for yellow pavement markings. . Do not thin paint. . Repair tracking marks and spilled or damaged material. . Test Strips .
Place a paint no glass beads test strip onto a clean smooth ferrous metal panel to determine pavement marking uniformity and thickness .
Measure pavement marking thickness in accordance with ASTM D. Calculate the applied wet film thickness using the percent volume of solids provided by the manufacturer as follows M measured dry film thickness percent volume of solids Where M Wet film Thickness mils of paint placed .
Test in accordance with ASTM E. Place test strip when broken line or dotted pavement markings are used .
Present test strips for Engineer approval before placing pavement markings on the roadway . .
Apply pavement markings in accordance with the manufacturers written installation instructions . .
Provide a minimum pavement marking thickness of mils . .
Provide a minimum retroreflectivity of millicandelas per square meter per lux for white pavement markings and millicandelas per square meter per lux for yellow pavement markings .
Test the retroreflectivity of installed pavement markings daily .
Longitudinal pavement markings will be measured by the foot .
Subtract the length of gaps in broken and dotted line pavement markings from the measured length. . Transverse word symbol and arrow pavement markings will be measured by the square foot . .
For permanent pavement markings a payment will be made for each application of waterborne paint .
Temporary pavement markings will be paid for under .
Place a patch of the same type geotextile over the damaged area and overlap the existing geotextiles at least feet from the edge of the damaged area except for pavement overlay geotextiles .
Construct pavement overlays as follows .
Prepare the pavement surface before the sealant is applied as specified in ..
Uniformly sprayapply the asphalt sealant to the prepared dry pavement surface at the rate recommended by the geotextile manufacturer and as approved .
Use brooms or pneumatic rollers to maximize geotextile contact with the pavement surface .
ITD Standard Specifications for Highway Construction of Finish grading lawn seeding area adjacent to walks driveways and pavements to approximately inch below the adjacent walk driveway and pavement finish grades .
Finish grading the sod bed to ¼ to ½ inches below the adjacent walk driveway and pavement finish grades .
Where pipelines are run under curbs walks pavements and other such improvements which are to remain in place preserve such structures from disturbance or damage to the extent practicable and install the line by jacking whenever possible .
Except for shrubbery heads set sprinkler heads inches away from curbs walks and pavements and flush with the lawn finished grade .
Set shrubbery sprinkler heads on risers above finished grade at the heights as specified or as directed and inches away from curbs walks and pavements. . Automatic Controller and Valve Controls .
Cut the slot approximately inch wider than the loop cable and of sufficient depth to provide at least inch of cover over the top wire if located in the top pavement course and ½ inch of cover if located in the bottom course .
Mark the top inches of stakes with fluorescent paint andor plastic flagging with the following fluorescent colors Type Stake with Color Centerline Hub w tack or PK nail in pavement White Centerline Reference Point Hub w tack and lath Red White and Blue Benchmark Solid permanent point w lath White and Blue Slope Stake Stake and lath White Reference to Slope Stake Hub w tack and lath Red and White Grade Finish Stake Grade stake w stake chaser Blue Right of Way Limit Lath Orange Clearing Limits Lath or flagging Orange and White Gas Lines Petroleum Hub w guard stake and lath Yellow Drain Lines Sewers Hub w guard stake and lath Green Waterlines Irrigation Hub w guard stake and lath Blue Conduit Hub w guard stake Red Note Color standards may vary when utilities have been located by the utility marking service .
ditch bottoms edges of pavement roadway crowns that are not properly represented by the triangles .
Check pavement thickness every feet and adjust as needed .
Record the existing pavement markings in order to sufficiently replace them in the same location type and form after they are covered or removed by the work .
Replacing the pavement markings will be as specified in andor . . Materials .
Conduct field measurements record data with surveygrade equipment and standard survey methods and produce a complete accurate legible and toscale diagram of the existing pavement markings .
circular reverse compound spiral turn lanes stop bars crosswalks lane text hashchevron marks wheel off tracking locations transitions tapers roundabout markings and any other existing standard or special pavement markings e.g .
yield bars bicycle boxes route shields arrows ADA markings symbols miscellaneous messages pavement logos mile post pavement marks and permanent tubular marker locations .
Label pavement markings with dimensions and color .
When pavement markings are not parallel to the project alignment annotate project stationing and offset each item included on the diagrams .
Include on the diagrams the location and coordinates of at least control points per mile of pavement markings as well as the coordinate system datum and project combination factor used .
Submit diagrams for approval and paint reference locations at least week before commencing any work that will alter remove or eliminate existing pavement markings .
Work which will alter remove or eliminate existing pavement markings is prohibited until the record of existing pavement markings is approved .
Use a produced diagrams surveygrade equipment and standard survey methods to reestablish temporary and permanent pavement markings as approved or as directed .
It is the Contractors responsibility to ensure the pavement markings are correct and accurate .
Reestablish the temporary pavement markings on each course layer of each day before allowing the traffic to travel on the roadway or as approved . .
Record of existing pavement markings will be measured by lump sum . .
The Department will pay for accepted record of existing pavement markings at the contract unit price as follows Pay Item Pay Unit Record of Existing Pavement Markings LS Work by the Department to reestablish the pavement markings when the record is inadequate to sufficiently replace all the pavement markings will be charged to the Contractor and deducted from the Contractors next progress payment .
for concrete wearing surfaces pavements approach slabs and bridge decks except when the sand equivalent is at least then to .
bridge desks pavements approach slabs with less than percent passing the No .
Meet AASHTO M for concrete pavement and AASHTO M for bridges .
Provide adhesive lubricant that meets ASTM D for bridges and ASTM D for concrete pavement .
The Engineer will accept Category RAP for use provided the Contractor submits a letter stating the RAP is from a specific pavement including the route and mile post .
earth brick sand concrete pavement fabric joint sealants .
