Roadbed The graded part of the Roadway within top and side slopes prepared as a foundation for the pavement structure and Shoulders .
Subgrade The top surface of the Roadbed on which subbase base surfacing pavement or layers of similar materials are placed .
To gain better control with unusual pavement widths or for other reasons the Engineer may set more control stakes without added cost to the Contractor .
b. Channelizing devices Type I barricades plastic safety drums or other devices inches or more in height placed along the traffic side of the dropoff and a new edge of pavement stripes placed a minimum of feet from the dropoff .
c. Temporary concrete barrier or other approved barrier installed on the traffic side of the dropoff with feet between the dropoff and the back of the barrier and a new edge of pavement stripe a minimum of feet from the face of the barrier .
A wedge of suitable material if required shall be placed for a smooth transition between the pavement and the steel plate .
When paving hot mix asphalt the Contractor may apply water to the pavement to shorten the time required before reopening to traffic .
Where the Traffic Control Plan shows pavementmounted tubular markers the adhesive used to fasten the base to the pavement shall be suitable for the purpose as approved by the Engineer .
During the removal of pavementmounted tubular markers care shall be taken to avoid damage to the existing pavement .
Removal of Pavement Sidewalks Curbs and Gutters In removing pavement sidewalks curbs and gutters the Contractor shall .
Haul brokenup pieces into the Roadway embankment or to some offproject site. . Material that is to be incorporated into the embankment shall be broken into pieces not exceeding inches in any dimension and no part of any piece shall be within feet of the top side or end surface of the embankment or any Structure. . Make a vertical full depth saw cut between any existing pavement sidewalk curb or gutter that is to remain and the portion to be removed .
For portland cement concrete pavement removal a second vertical full depth relief saw cut offset to inches from and parallel to the initial saw cut is also required unless the Engineer approves otherwise .
For removal of bituminous pavement asphalt planing equipment may be used in lieu of sawcutting provided that a clean vertical edge remains . .
Replace at no expense to the Contracting Agency any existing pavement designated to remain that is damaged during the removal of other pavement . .
If pavements sidewalks curbs or gutters lie within an excavation area their removal will be paid for as part of the quantity removed in excavation .
The Work includes the removal of pavement sidewalks curbs and gutters as described in Section when these items lie within an excavation area .
shall also apply when pavements sidewalks curbs and gutters lie within an excavation . .
The Contractor shall maintain the Subgrade in the required condition until the pavement is placed .
The Contractor may remove material just before paving if the Plans require thicker areas of pavement . .
Pavement If the Contractor builds a Subgrade for pavement the Contracting Agency will follow the criteria in Section for HMA pavement or Section for cement concrete pavement to measure and pay for materials used to prepare the Subgrade .
.F Items to Remain If the Contractor damages or removes pavement or anything else meant to remain outside the excavation area it shall be repaired or replaced at no expense to the Contracting Agency. . ClassificationofStructureExcavation .
The excavation does not disturb the existing pavement or any other adjacent structural elements .
The Contractor shall pay all costs related to removing slide material and restoring the slide area including the repair of any pavement or structural elements damaged by the slide .
Drag push or scrape Shoulder material across completed surfacing or pavement .
Concrete Aggregate except pavement .
Concrete Aggregate pavement .
Concrete Aggregate all concrete aggregate including pavement .
Shaping and Compaction Immediately following spreading and final shaping each layer of surfacing shall be compacted to at least percent of maximum density determined by the requirements of Section .D before the next succeeding layer of surfacing or pavement is placed .
Inability to demonstrate reliable and satisfactory results will be reason to order termination of night operations and the Contractor shall procure additional equipment and personnel necessary to satisfactorily complete the Work as specified while operating during daylight hours only. . Permeable Ballast Permeable ballast shall not be placed until the abutting pavement has been completed unless designated by the Engineer .
Description This Work consists of rehabilitating or replacing sections of cement concrete pavement in accordance with these Specifications and in conformity with the lines grades thicknesses and typical crosssections shown in the Plans or established by the Engineer. . Materials Materials shall meet the following requirements of the following sections Cement Fine Aggregate Coarse Aggregate Combined Aggregate Joint Filler .
Vacant .A Mix Designs The Contractor shall use either concrete patching materials or cement concrete for the rehabilitation of cement concrete pavement .
The equipment for grinding cement concrete pavement shall use diamond embedded saw blades gang mounted on a self propelled machine that is specifically designed to smooth and texture concrete pavement .
Payment for cure boxes shall be in accordance with Section .. .B Conformance to Mix Design Acceptance of cement concrete pavement for panel replacement shall be in accordance with Section .B .
Material rejected before placement shall not be incorporated into the pavement .
Replace Cement Concrete Panel Curing cold weather Work concrete pavement construction in adjacent lanes and protection of pavement shall meet the requirements of Section .
feet long and full width of an existing pavement panel .
Removal of existing cement concrete pavement shall not cause damage to adjacent slabs that are to remain in place .
In areas that will be ground slab replacements shall be performed prior to pavement grinding .
When new concrete pavement is to be placed against existing cement concrete pavement tie bars and dowel bars shall be drilled and grouted into the existing pavement with either Type I or IV epoxy resin as specified in Section .
If the replacement panel is located in an area that will be ground as part of portland cement concrete pavement grinding in accordance with Section .
Partial Depth Spall Repair Removal of the existing pavement shall not damage any pavement to be left in place .
Any existing pavement that is to remain that has been damaged shall be repaired at the Contractors expense .
If jackhammers are used for removing pavement they shall not weigh more than pounds and chipping hammers shall not weigh more than pounds .
All power driven hand tools used for the removal of pavement shall be operated at angles less than degrees as measured from the surface of the pavement to the tool .
Slabpatch interfaces that will not receive pavement grinding shall be sealed painted with a cementwater grout along the patch perimeter .
Opening to traffic shall meet the requirements of Section .. . DowelBarRetrofit Dowel bars shall be installed in the existing concrete pavement joints and transverse cracks where shown in the Plans or as marked by the Engineer .
Saw cut slots will be required in the pavement to place the center of the dowel at middepth in the concrete slab .
The transverse joint between cement concrete pavement and a Bridge approach slab shall not be retrofitted .
The foam insert shall fit tightly around the dowel and to the bottom and edges of the slot and extend to the top of the existing pavement surface .
The top surface of the sealant shall be at least ¼ inch below the surface of the pavement. . Sealing Existing Longitudinal and Transverse Joint The Contractor shall clean and seal existing longitudinal and transverse joints where shown in the Plans or as marked by the Engineer .
The top surface of the sealant shall be at least ¼ inch below the surface of the pavement. . Cement Concrete Pavement Grinding Pavement grinding shall begin within working days of placing dowel bar retrofit patching materials .
If new cement concrete pavement in accordance with Section is to be placed next to rehabilitated cement concrete pavement grind one pass along the edge of the rehabilitated cement concrete pavement adjacent to where the new cement concrete pavement is to be placed before the new cement concrete pavement is placed .
Standard Specifications M Page Cement Concrete Pavement Rehabilitation The pavement shall be ground in a longitudinal direction beginning and ending at lines normal to the pavement centerline .
Ninetyfive percent of the surface area of the pavement to be ground shall have a minimum of ⅛ inch removed by grinding .
The ground pavement shall be feathered to match the elevation of the above features .
and the following Where the pavement is ground calculation of the profile index shall exclude dips and depressions in the existing Roadway .
Concrete Slurry and Grinding Residue All concrete slurry and grinding residue shall be removed from the pavement surface on a continual basis immediately behind the grinding or cutting operations .
The Contractor shall collect the concrete slurry and grinding residue from the pavement surface and dispose of it in accordance with Section .C .
Cement concrete pavement grinding will be measured by the square yard based on the actual width and length of area ground .
Page Standard Specifications M Cement Concrete Pavement Rehabilitation The unit Contract price per each shall be full payment for all costs to complete the Work as specified including furnishing and installing parting compound dowel bar expansion caps caulking filler foam core insert material cement patch where pavement is removed for dowel bar retrofit and for all incidentals required to complete the Work as specified .
The costs of any additional pavement grinding and profiling required to complete the Work as specified is also included in this payment .
The second application of emulsified asphalt is followed with two additional applications of aggregate. . Seal Coats This method requires the placing of one application of emulsified asphalt and one or more sizes of aggregate as specified to an existing pavement to seal and rejuvenate the surface and to produce a uniform Roadway surface with acceptable nonskid characteristics. . Pavement Sealers Fog Seal This method of treatment requires an application of emulsified asphalt over an existing or newly constructed pavement as specified. . Materials Materials shall meet the requirements of the following sections Cationic Emulsified Asphalt .
Repair of existing pavement shall be done in accordance with Section .
The pavement surface shall be dry prior to fog sealing .
Before application of the fog seal all surfaces shall be thoroughly cleaned of dust soil pavement grindings and other foreign matter .
The existing pavement surface shall be dry .
.E Crack Sealing Where shown in the Plans seal cracks and joints in the pavement in accordance with Section .A and the following .
F New Construction and Seal Coats CRS CRS CRSP CMS CMSS CMSh Fog Seal CSS CSSh Before application of the fog seal all surfaces shall be thoroughly cleaned of dust soil pavement grindings and other foreign matter .
The fog seal shall be uniformly applied to the pavement at a diluted rate of . . galsy .
Temporary Pavement Markings During bituminous surface treatment paving operations temporary pavement markings shall be maintained throughout the project .
Temporary pavement markings shall be installed on the Roadway that was paved that day .
Temporary pavement markings shall be in accordance with Section . .
HMA shall be composed of asphalt binder and mineral materials as required and may include reclaimed asphalt pavement RAP or reclaimed asphalt shingles RAS mixed in the proportions specified to provide a homogeneous stable and workable mix. . Materials Provide materials as specified in these sections Asphalt Binder .
In hot weather the Engineer may require the application of water to the pavement to accelerate the finish rolling of the pavement and to shorten the time required before reopening to traffic .
During paving operations maintain temporary pavement markings throughout the project .
Install temporary pavement markings on the Roadway prior to opening to traffic .
Temporary pavement markings shall comply with Section . . Equipment .A Mixing Plant Equip mixing plants as follows .
feet of the pavement section used in traffic lanes .
Preparation of Existing Paved Surfaces Before constructing HMA on an existing paved surface the entire surface of the pavement shall be clean .
Entirely remove all fatty asphalt patches grease drippings and other deleterious substances from the existing pavement to the satisfaction of the Engineer .
Thoroughly clean all pavements or bituminous surfaces of dust soil pavement grindings and other foreign matter .
Thoroughly remove any cleaning or solvent type liquids used to clean equipment spilled on the pavement before paving proceeds .
Apply tack coat to cover the cleaned existing pavement with a thin film of residual asphalt free of streaks and bare spots .
Use a hot compressed air lance to dry and warm the pavement surfaces within the crack immediately prior to filling a crack with the sealant material .
Do not overheat pavement .
Strike off the sand slurry flush with the existing pavement surface and allow the mixture to cure .
Clean any overflow of sealant from the pavement surface .
If in the opinion of the Engineer the Contractors method of sealing the cracks with hot poured sealant results in an excessive amount of material on the pavement surface stop and correct the operation to eliminate the excess material .
Use herbicide registered with the Washington State Department of Agriculture for use under pavement .
.C Pavement Repair Excavate pavement repair areas and backfill these with HMA in accordance with the details shown in the Plans and as staked .
Conduct the excavation operations in a manner that will protect the pavement that is to remain .
Repair pavement not designated to be removed that is damaged as a result of the Contractors operations to the satisfaction of the Engineer at no cost to the Contracting Agency .
The minimum width of any pavement repair area shall be inches unless shown otherwise in the Plans .
Before any excavation sawcut the perimeter of the pavement area to be removed unless the pavement in the pavement repair area is to be removed by a pavement grinder .
Apply a heavy application of tack coat to all surfaces of existing pavement in the pavement repair area in accordance with Section .. Place the HMA backfill in lifts not to exceed .foot compacted depth .
Table Basis of Acceptance for HMA Mixture Visual Evaluation Statistical Evaluation Criteria for Selecting the Evaluation Method Commercial HMA placed at any location Any HMA placed in sidewalks road approaches ditches slopes paths trails gores prelevel temporary pavement pavement repair Other nonstructural applications of HMA as approved by the Engineer All HMA mixture other than that accepted by Visual Evaluation Temporary pavement is HMA that will be removed before Physical Completion of the Contract .
Page Standard Specifications M Hot Mix Asphalt On bridge decks and on the five feet of roadway approach immediately adjacent to the end of bridgeback of pavement seat operate rollers in static mode only .
.B HMA Compaction Cyclic Density Low cyclic density areas are defined as spots or streaks in the pavement that are less than percent of the theoretical maximum density .
At the Engineers discretion the Engineer may evaluate the HMA pavement for low cyclic density and when doing so will follow WSDOT SOP .
When using the nuclear density gauge for acceptance testing of pavement density the Engineer will follow WSDOT SOP for correlating the nuclear gauge with HMA cores .
Material rejected before placement shall not be incorporated into the pavement .
The pavement within inches of the hotlap joint will not be excluded from random location selection for compaction testing .
When HMA is placed adjacent to cement concrete pavement construct longitudinal joints between the HMA and the cement concrete pavement .
When deviations in excess of the above tolerances are found that result from a high place in the HMA correct the pavement surface by one of the following methods .
When portland cement concrete pavement is to be placed on HMA the surface tolerance of the HMA shall be such that no surface elevation lies above the Plan grade minus the specified Plan depth of portland cement concrete pavement .
Prior to placing the portland cement concrete pavement bring any such irregularities to the required tolerance by grinding or other means approved by the Engineer .
Planing Bituminous Pavement Plane in such a manner that the underlying pavement is not torn broken or otherwise damaged by the planing operation .
Delamination or raveling of the underlying pavement will not be construed as damage due to the Contractors operations .
Asphalt for fog seal will be measured by the ton as provided in Section .. Longitudinal joint seals between the HMA and cement concrete pavement will be measured by the linear foot along the line and slope of the completed joint seal .
Planing bituminous pavement will be measured by the square yard .
Temporary pavement marking will be measured by the linear foot as provided in Section .. Water will be measured by the M gallon as provided in Section .. . Payment Payment will be made for each of the following Bid items that are included in the Proposal HMA Cl .
The unit Contract price per linear foot for Longitudinal Joint Seal shall be full payment for all costs incurred to construct the longitudinal joint between HMA and cement concrete pavement as described in Section .B .
The unit Contract price per each for HMA Core Bridge shall be full payment for all costs including traffic control associated with taking HMA density cores in pavement that is on a bridge deck .
The unit Contract price per each for HMA Core Roadway shall be full payment for all costs including traffic control associated with taking HMA density cores in pavement that is not on a bridge deck .
Description This Work shall consist of constructing a pavement composed of portland cement concrete on a prepared Subgrade or base in accordance with these Specifications and in conformity with the lines grades thicknesses and typical crosssections shown in the Plans or established by the Engineer. . Materials Materials shall meet the requirements of the following sections Portland Cement Fine Aggregate Coarse Aggregate Combined Aggregate Joint Filler .
.C Finishing Equipment The standard method of constructing concrete pavement on State Highways shall be with approved slipform paving equipment designed to spread consolidate screed and floatfinish the freshly placed concrete in one complete pass of the machine so a dense and homogeneous pavement is achieved with a minimum of hand finishing .
On other roads and on WSDOT projects requiring less than square yards of cement concrete pavement or requiring individual placement areas of less than square yards irregular areas intersections and at locations inaccessible to slipform paving equipment cement concrete pavement may be placed with approved placement and finishing equipment utilizing stationary side forms .
Hand screeding and float finishing of cement concrete pavement may only be utilized on small irregular areas as allowed by the Engineer .
.E Smoothness Testing Equipment The Contractor shall provide a Californiatype computerized profilograph complete with recorder for determining the profile index of the pavement according to WSDOT T . The profilograph shall be on the project calibrated in good working condition and ready for operation before construction of any concrete pavement begins .
.A Acceptance of Portland Cement Concrete Pavement Acceptance of portland cement concrete pavement shall be as provided under statistical or nonstatistical acceptance .
Material rejected before placement shall not be incorporated into the pavement .
Surface Preparation The Subgrade surface shall be prepared and compacted a minimum of feet beyond each edge of the area which is to receive concrete pavement in order to accommodate the slip form equipment .
Referee testing of hardened concrete will be performed by cutting cores from the finished pavement after a minimum of hours of curing .
Reference cores will be taken at the minimum rate of one for each cubic yards of pavement or fraction thereof .
Primary units of pavement as defined in Section .
The paver shall vibrate the concrete for the full width and depth of the strip of pavement being placed and the vibration shall be adequate to provide a consistency of concrete that will stand normal to the surface with sharp welldefined edges .
The plastic concrete shall be effectively consolidated by internal vibration with transverse vibrating units for the full width of pavement andor a series of equally spaced longitudinal vibrating units .
The space from the outer edge of the pavement to the outer longitudinal unit shall not exceed inches .
The term internal vibration means vibration by vibrating units located within the specified thickness of pavement section .
When concrete is being placed adjacent to an existing pavement that part of the equipment which is supported on the existing pavement shall be equipped with protective pads on crawler tracks or rubbertired wheels on which the bearing surface is offset to run a sufficient distance from the edge of the pavement to avoid breaking the pavement edge .
Side forms shall be placed to the required grade and alignment of the edge of the finished pavement .
The forms shall be firmly supported during the entire operation of placing compacting and finishing the pavement .
Side forms shall remain in place at least hours after the concrete has been placed and in all cases until the edge of the pavement no longer requires the protection of the forms .
These machines shall uniformly distribute and consolidate concrete without segregation so that completed pavement will conform to required cross section with a minimum of handwork .
Joints Joints in cement concrete pavement will be designated as longitudinal and transverse contraction joints longitudinal and transverse construction joints or isolation joints and shall be constructed as shown in the Plans and in accordance with the following provisions All contraction joints shall be constructed at the locations intervals and depths shown in the Standard Plans .
The faces of all joints shall be constructed perpendicular to the surface of the cement concrete pavement .
When cement concrete pavement is placed adjacent to existing cement concrete pavement the vertical face of all existing working joints shall be covered with a bondbreaking material such as polyethylene film roofing paper or other material as approved by the Engineer .
Transverse construction joints shall be constructed between cement concrete pavement and reinforced concrete bridge approach slabs .
All transverse and longitudinal construction joints including the joint between new and existing pavement when widened shall be sawed and sealed with joint filler conforming to the requirements of Sections .A and ..
shall be placed as detailed in the Plans through the full depth of concrete pavement when drainage features are placed within the concrete pavement . .
In addition tie bars shall be installed when concrete Shoulders are placed as a separate operation or when widening existing pavement .
When fresh concrete pavement is to be placed against preproject existing cement concrete pavement tie bars shall be drilled and set into the existing pavement with an epoxy bonding agent in accordance with the Standard Plans and specified tolerances for placement of tie bars .
The requirements of this paragraph may be waived if it is successfully demonstrated that other means will consistently produce a surface with a satisfactory profile index and meeting the foot straightedge requirement specified in Section .. Any edge slump of the pavement exclusive of specified edging in excess of ¼ inch shall be corrected before the concrete has hardened .
In advance of curing operations where longitudinal tining is required the pavement shall be given an initial and a final texturing .
The wire comb tine device shall be operated within inches but not closer than inches of pavement edges .
The installation shall be such that when texturing the area of burlap in contact with the pavement surface shall be maintained constant at all times .
Downward pressure on pavement surface shall be maintained at all times during texturing so as to achieve uniform texturing without measurable variations in pavement profile .
On projects requiring less than square yards of cement concrete pavement for irregular areas or areas not accessible to slipform pavers the surface finish may be either longitudinal tined or transverse tined .
Transverse tining shall be done by texturing with a wire comb perpendicular to the centerline of the pavement .
Regardless of the surface finish if the pavement has a raised curb without a formed concrete gutter the texturing shall end feet from the curb line .
At approximate foot intervals where designated by the Engineer the Contractor shall with an approved stamp indent the concrete surface near the right hand edge of the pavement with the stationing of the Roadway .
Surface Smoothness The pavement smoothness will be checked with equipment furnished and operated by the Contractor under supervision of the Engineer within hours following placement of concrete .
Smoothness of all pavement placed except shoulders ramp tapers intersections tight horizontal curves and small or irregular areas as defined by Section .
parallel to centerline from which the profile index will be determined in accordance with WSDOT T . Tight horizontal curves are curves having a centerline radius of curve less than feet and pavement within the superelevation transition of those curves .
For pavement placed in a foot width or less the daily profile index will be the average of two profiles made approximately feet from and parallel to each edge of the pavement .
If the pavement is placed in a width greater than feet the daily profile index will be computed as the average of profiles made approximately feet from and parallel to each edge and at the approximate location of each planned longitudinal joint .
The daily profile index of the finished pavement thus determined will be inches per mile or less .
When any of the daily profile indexes exceed inches per mile final acceptance of the pavement for smoothness parallel to the centerline will be based on profile indexes as measured with the profilograph operating by the Contractor under the supervision of the Engineer along a line parallel to the edge of pavement and each longitudinal joint and will not be averaged for acceptance purposes .
When cement concrete pavement abuts bridges the finished pavement parallel to centerline within feet of the abutting joint shall be uniform to a degree that no variations greater than ⅛ inch are present when tested with a foot straightedge .
It is further provided that if reduction of high portions of the surface involves breaking dislodging or other disturbance of the aggregates such cutting will not be permitted until the pavement has achieved its design strength .
If in the opinion of the Engineer irregularities can not be satisfactorily removed by such methods the Contractor shall remove and replace the pavement at no expense to the Contracting Agency .
Smoothness perpendicular to the centerline will be measured with a foot straightedge across all lanes with the same cross slope including shoulders when composed of cement Standard Specifications M Page Cement Concrete Pavement concrete pavement .
The overlapping foot straightedge measurement shall be discontinued at a point inches from the most extreme outside edge of the finished cement concrete pavement .
The transverse slope of the finished pavement shall be uniform to a degree such that no variations greater than ¼ inch are present when tested with a foot long straightedge laid in a direction perpendicular to the centerline .
If it becomes necessary to leave the pavement uncoated overnight it shall be covered with polyethylene sheeting which shall remain in place until weather conditions are favorable for the application of the curing compound .
In the event that rain falls on the newly coated pavement before the film has dried sufficiently to resist damage or in the event of damage to the film from any cause the Contractor shall apply a new coat of curing compound in one or two applications to the affected area at the rate which in the opinion of the Engineer will result in a film of curing value equal to that specified in the original coat .
If hair checking develops in the pavement before finishing is completed the Engineer may order the application of the curing compound at an earlier stage in which event any concrete cut from the surface in finishing operations shall be removed entirely from the pavement .
The curing compound after application shall be protected by the Contractor from injury until the pavement has reached a minimum compressive strength of psi .
The Contractor shall provide on the job a sufficient quantity of white polyethylene sheeting to cover all the pavement laid in hours of maximum operation .
This sheeting shall be reserved exclusively for the protection of the pavement in case of rain or breakdown of the spray equipment used for applying the curing compound .
The protective sheeting shall be placed over the pavement when ordered and in the manner specified by the Engineer .
.B White Polyethylene Sheeting The sheeting shall be placed over the pavement immediately after finishing operations are completed or at a time designated by the Engineer .
The sheeting shall be laid so that individual sheets overlap at least feet and the lapped areas shall be held in close contact with the pavement by weighting with earth or boards to prevent movement by the wind .
The sheeting shall extend downward to cover the edges of the pavement and shall be secured to the Subgrade with a continuous bank of earth or surfacing material .
The sheeting shall be maintained against injury and remain in place until the pavement has reached a minimum compressive strength of psi .
.C Wet Curing Wet curing shall be accomplished by applying a continuous fog or mist spray to the entire pavement surface until it has reached a minimum compressive strength of psi .
Cold Weather Work When the air temperature is expected to reach the freezing point during the day or night and the pavement has not reached percent of its design strength or psi which ever is greater the concrete shall be protected from freezing .
The Contractor shall at no expense to the Contracting Agency provide a sufficient supply of straw hay grass earth blankets or other suitable blanketing material and spread it over the pavement to a sufficient depth to prevent freezing of the concrete .
Concrete Pavement Construction in Adjacent Lanes Unless otherwise shown in the Plans or in the Special Provisions the pavement shall be constructed in multiple lanes that is two or more adjacent lanes paved in a single operation .
The Contractor shall replace at no expense to the Contracting Agency any panels on the new pavement that are cracked or broken as a result of the Contractors operations. . Protection of Pavement The Contractor shall protect the pavement and its appurtenances from any damage .
Protection shall include personnel to direct traffic and the erection and maintenance of warning signs lights barricades temporary takedown bridges across the pavement with adequate approaches and whatever other means may be necessary to accommodate local traffic and to protect the pavement during the curing period or until opened to traffic as determined by the Engineer .
The operation of construction equipment on the new pavement will not be allowed until the pavement has developed a compressive strength of psi as determined from cylinders made at the time of placement cured under comparable conditions and tested in accordance with AASHTO T . Exceptions would be one track from a slipform paving machine when paving adjacent lanes or light vehicles required for sawing operations or taking cores .
Standard Specifications M Page Cement Concrete Pavement Placement of Shoulder material may commence when the pavement has developed a compressive strength of psi as determined from cylinders made at the time of placement cured under comparable conditions and tested in accordance with AASHTO T as long as construction equipment is not operated on the new pavement .
A continuous barrier of the design shown in the Plans shall be constructed and maintained along the edge of the pavement being constructed and adjacent to the portion of the Roadway used for traffic .
The barriers shall be left in place until the new pavement is ready to be opened to traffic and shall then be removed by the Contractor .
Any damage to the pavement occurring prior to final acceptance shall be replaced or repaired in accordance with Section .. . OpeningtoTraffic The pavement may be opened to traffic when the concrete has developed a compressive strength of psi as determined from cylinders made at the time of placement cured under comparable conditions and tested in accordance with AASHTO T . Fabrication curing and testing of cylinders to measure early strength shall be the responsibility of the Contractor .
At the Contractors option the time for opening pavement may be determined through the use of the maturity test in accordance with ASTM C. The Contractor shall develop the maturitystrength relationship and provide maturity curves along with supporting data for approval by the Engineer .
The pavement shall not be opened to traffic until the maturitystrength relationship shows the pavement has a compressive strength of psi and approved by the Engineer .
The pavement shall be cleaned prior to opening to traffic .
Saw cutting full pavement depth is required along all longitudinal joints and at transverse locations .
Removal of the Page Standard Specifications M Cement Concrete Pavement existing pavement shall not damage any pavement to be left in place .
If jackhammers are used for removing pavement they shall not weigh more than pounds and chipping hammers shall not weigh more than pounds .
All powerdriven hand tools used for the removal of pavement shall be operated at angles less than degrees as measured from the surface of the pavement to the tool .
Slabpatch interfaces that will not receive pavement grinding shall be sealed painted with a cementwater grout along the patch perimeter .
Measurement Cement concrete pavement will be measured by the cubic yard for the completed pavement .
The width measurement will be the width of the pavement shown on the typical cross section in the Plans additional widening where called for or as otherwise specified in writing by the Engineer . .
The volume of the pavement section represented by the reference core shall equal the measured length width reference core depth .
Tie bars with drill holes in cement concrete pavement placed under the Contract will not be measured .
The ride smoothness compliance adjustment calculation is the volume of pavement in cubic yards represented by the profilograph .
All costs for tie bars with drill holes in cement concrete pavement placed under the Contract shall be included in the unit Contract price per cubic yard for Cement Conc .
Payment for Ride Smoothness Compliance Adjustment will be calculated by multiplying the unit Contract price for cement concrete pavement times the volume for adjustment times the percent of adjustment determined from the schedule below . .
Payment for Portland Cement Concrete Compliance Adjustment will be calculated by multiplying the unit Contract price for the cement concrete pavement times the volume for adjustment times the percent of adjustment determined from the calculated CPF and the Deficiency Adjustment listed in Section .A. . Pavement Thickness Cement concrete pavement shall be constructed in accordance with the thickness requirements in the Plans and Specifications .
A primary unit of pavement is defined as the area of pavement placed in each days paving operations or a complete intersection .
Within such primary unit of pavement there may be an area or areas which are deficient in thickness by more than .
At a time determined by the Engineer thickness measurements will be made in each primary unit of Page Standard Specifications M Cement Concrete Pavement pavement at the minimum rate of one measurement for each cubic yards of pavement or fraction thereof .
In general thickness measurements will be made at uniform intervals throughout each primary unit of pavement .
For each primary unit of pavement which is deficient in average thickness by not more than .
Thickness measurements will be made in each panel of pavement adjacent transversely and longitudinally to the panel of the original measurement .
Panels are the areas bounded by longitudinal and transverse joints and pavement edges .
The replaced pavement will be tested for thickness by means of additional measurements and will be subject to all of the requirements of the Specifications .
Equipment Class H High Vibration shall include pile drivers vibratory hammers machineoperated impact tools pavement breakers and other large pieces of equipment .
Unless otherwise shown in the Plans the pavement end of the bridge approach slab shall be constructed normal to the Roadway centerline .
Horizontal distance from the traffic side of the falsework to the edge of pavement is less than the total height of the falsework and forms or .
Traffic barrier used to protect falsework shall not be fastened guyed or blocked to any falsework but shall be fastened to the pavement according to details shown in the Plans .
Anchor block set on pavement .
Design Removal Depth the value shown in the pavement schedule or elsewhere in the Plans to indicate the design thickness of Bituminous Pavement to be removed .
Grade Controlled a Structure Deck requiring restriction of Bituminous Pavement work including restriction of pavement removal methods and restriction of overlay pavement thicknesses .
The survey shall extend beyond the bridge back of pavement seat or end of Structure Deck .
Removal of Bituminous Pavement within inches of existing permanent features that limit the reach of the machine or the edge of the following items shall be by hand or by hand operated nominal pounds class power tools existing bridge expansion joint headers steel expansion joint assemblies concrete butt joints between back of pavement seats and bridge approach slabs bridge drain assemblies thrie beam post steel anchorage assemblies fastened to the side or top of the Structure Deck .
Existing waterproofing membrane bonded to the Structure Deck need not be removed. . Repair of Damage due to Bituminous Pavement Removal Operations All concrete bridge deck pavement seat and steel reinforcing bar damage due to the Contractors surfacing removal operations shall be repaired by the Contractor in accordance with Section .
The survey shall extend feet beyond the bridge back of pavement seat .
The cover or grating of a manhole catch basin or inlet shall not be grouted to final grade until the final elevation of the pavement gutter ditch or sidewalk in which it is to be placed has been established and until permission thereafter is given by the Engineer to grout the cover or grating in place .
.B Shoring The Contractor shall provide all materials labor and equipment necessary to shore trenches to protect the Work existing property utilities pavement etc .
Material excavated from the trench shall be used for backfill above the pipe zone except that organic material frozen lumps wood rocks or pavement chunks larger than inches in maximum dimension shall not be used .
Trench backfill within the Roadway prism shall extend up to the underside of the pavement or surfacing materials .
Removal of Existing Street Improvements Removal of existing street improvements and pavement from driveways and sidewalks shall be performed as specified in Section .
Excavating and backfilling for service connections shall be as specified in Section except that the service pipeline shall be installed under pavement curbs and sidewalks by boring methods approved by the governmental agency having jurisdiction over the Roadway .
Temporary curbs shall be installed along pavement edges to prevent runoff from flowing onto erodible slopes .
Street cleaning will be measured by the hour for the actual time spent cleaning pavement as authorized by the Engineer .
Mulch shall be feathered to the base of the plant and inch below the top of junction and valve boxes curbs and pavement edges .
All live water mains to be constructed under existing pavement shall be placed in steel casing jacked under pavement as shown in the Plans .
Irrigation sleeves shall extend a minimum of feet beyond the limits of pavement .
All sprinklers adjacent to walks curbs and pavement shall be placed as shown in the Plans .
Wiring placed under pavement and walls or through walls shall be placed in an electrical conduit or within an irrigation sleeve .
Unless otherwise specified sprinkler spray patterns will not be permitted to apply water to pavement walks or Structures. . Backfill Backfill shall not be started until all piping has been inspected tested and approved by the Engineer after which backfilling shall be completed as soon as possible .
When curb or curb and gutter is placed adjacent to portland cement concrete pavement a ⅜inch thick inch deep premolded joint filler shall be installed between the two vertical surfaces to prevent cracking .
The concrete shall be cured for hours by one of the methods specified for cement concrete pavement in Section .
The pavement shall be dry and cleaned of loose and deleterious material prior to curb placement .
Cement concrete curbs shall be anchored to the existing pavement by placing steel reinforcing bars foot on each side of every joint .
Just prior to placing the curb a tack coat of asphalt shall be applied to the existing pavement surface at the rate ordered by the Engineer .
Before the cement mortar bed is laid all dirt shall be cleaned from the pavement surface by washing .
All old pavements and any portion of new pavements constructed under this Contract which are covered with oil or grease within the curb limits shall be further cleaned as follows .
The pavement shall be flushed with water . .
While the pavement is still wet sodium metasilicate complying with the requirements as specified elsewhere herein shall be evenly distributed over the pavement surface at a rate of to pounds per square feet of pavement surface . .
The sodium metasilicate shall remain on the pavement for at least minutes .
The pavement surface shall then be thoroughly rinsed .
In areas where monuments drainage structures induction loop leadins pavement markings or other features will not allow the rumble strips to be constructed as detailed the rumble strips shall be eliminated or relocated as approved by the Project Engineer .
All pavement markings junction boxes drainage structures and similar objects shall not be fog sealed .
Description This Work shall consist of furnishing and installing pavement markers of the type specified in the Plans in accordance with these Specifications and at the locations indicated in the Plans or where designated by the Engineer .
The color of pavement markers shall conform to the color of the marking for which they supplement substitute for or serve as a positioning guide for. . Materials Raised pavement marker RPM shall meet the requirements of the following sections RPM Type .
The color of the material used for spotting shall match the color of the raised pavement markers .
Markers shall not be placed over longitudinal or transverse joints in the pavement surface . .
When markers are placed on new cement concrete pavement any curing compound shall be removed in accordance with the requirements of this Section .
All liquid membrane forming compounds shall be removed from the portland cement concrete pavement to which Raised Pavement Markers are to be bonded .
Curing compound removal shall not be started until the pavement has attained sufficient flexural strength before opening to traffic .
The pavement shall be surface dry .
When applying Epoxy Adhesives in cool weather the pavement surface shall be heated by intense radiant heat not direct flame for a sufficient length of time to warm the pavement areas of marker application to a minimum of ºF .
Standard Specifications M Page Raised Pavement Markers Flexible bituminous pavement marker adhesive shall be indirectly heated in an applicator with continuous agitation or recurring circulation .
The marker shall be affixed to the prepared pavement area with sufficient adhesive so as to squeeze out a small bead of adhesive around the entire periphery of the marker .
Adhesive shall be in place and the marker seated in not more than seconds after the removal of the pavement preheat or warm air blast .
The length of the pavement preheat or warming shall be adjusted so as to ensure bonding of the marker in not more than minutes .
.B Flexible Bituminous Pavement Marker Adhesives The flexible bituminous pavement marker adhesive shall conform to the requirements of Section ..
The marker shall be affixed to the prepared pavement area with sufficient adhesive so as to squeeze out a small bead of adhesive around the entire periphery of the marker .
Markers shall be placed immediately after application of the adhesive. . Recessed Pavement Marker The Contractor shall construct recesses for pavement markers by grinding the pavement in accordance with the dimensions shown in the Standard Plans .
The Contractor shall ensure that grinding of the pavement does not result in any damage e.g .
chipping spalling or raveling to the pavement to remain .
and install Type markers in the recess in accordance with the Standard Plans and Section .. Recessed pavement markers shall not be constructed on bridge decks or on bridge approach slabs. . Tolerances for Pavement Markers Markers shall be spaced and aligned as shown in the Standard Plans and as specified by the Engineer .
Guide posts shall be of such length as to provide a height of inches plus or minus inches above the nearest edge of traveled pavement surface .
Surface mounted guide posts shall be bonded to the pavement surface .
When a guide post is placed on new cement concrete pavement any curing compound shall be removed .
All liquid membraneforming compounds shall be removed from the portland cement concrete pavement to which guide posts are to be bonded .
Curing compound removal shall not be started until the pavement has attained sufficient flexural strength before opening to traffic .
Ramming or driving will be permitted only if approved by the Engineer and if no damage to the pavement Shoulders and adjacent slopes results there from .
When the monument case and cover are placed in cement concrete pavement the concrete base will not be required .
Placement of the detectable warning surface shall be in accordance with the manufacturers recommendation for placement in fresh concrete before the concrete has reached initial set or on a hardened cement concrete surface or asphalt pavement surface .
Vertical edges of the detectable warning surface shall be flush with the adjoining surface to the extent possible not more than ¼ inch above the surface of the pavement after installation .
This Work shall include the connection to a concrete barrier bridge abutment or a transition section identified in the Plans construction of a steel reinforced concrete pad or concrete backup and anchorage to the pavement if required by the manufacturers assembly and installation procedures .
Traffic signals shall not be placed in operation for use by the public until all required channelization pavement markings illumination signs and sign lights are substantially complete and operational unless otherwise allowed by the Engineer .
Removing and Replacing Improvements Improvements such as sidewalks curbs gutters Portland cement concrete and hot mix asphalt pavement bituminous surfacing base material and any other improvements removed broken or damaged by the Contractor shall be replaced or reconstructed with the same kind of materials as found on the Work or with other materials satisfactory to the Engineer .
The outline of all areas to be removed in Portland cement concrete sidewalks and pavements and hot mix asphalt pavements shall be cut to a minimum depth of inches with a saw prior to removing the sidewalk driveway slabs and pavement material .
.E Method of Conduit Installation Conduit shall be placed under existing pavement by approved directional boring jacking or drilling methods at locations approved by the Engineer .
The pavement shall not be disturbed unless allowed in the Plans or with the approval of the Engineer in the event obstructions or impenetrable soils are encountered .
The pavement shall be sawcut a minimum of inches deep .
The controlled density fill shall be placed level to and at the bottom of the existing pavement .
The pavement shall be replaced with paving material that matches the existing pavement. . On new construction conduit shall be placed prior to placement of base course pavement .
Directional boring jacking or drilling pits shall be a minimum of feet from the edge of any type of pavement unless otherwise approved by the Engineer .
Excessive use of water that might undermine the pavement or soften the Subgrade will not be permitted .
When approved by the Engineer small test holes may be cut in the pavement to locate obstructions .
The traffic signal turnon procedure shall not begin until all required channelization pavement markings illumination signs and sign lights are substantially complete and operational unless otherwise allowed by the Engineer .
If not listed as incidental to another item or paid for under another Bid item the additional Work to remove the existing loops shall be paid in accordance with Section .. . Each loop shall be the size and number of turns indicated in the Plans. . No loop installation will be done in rainy weather or when the pavement is wet. . All sawcuts shall be cleaned with a highpressure washer and dried with psi minimum air pressure to the satisfaction of the Engineer .
shall be full pay for furnishing all pipe pipe connections elbows bends caps reducers conduits unions junction boxes and fittings for placing the pipe in accordance with the above provisions including all excavation jacking or drilling required backfilling of any voids around casing conduits pits or trenches restoration of native vegetation disturbed by the operation chipping of pavement and bedding of the pipe and all other Work necessary for the construction of the conduit except that when conduit is included on any project as an integral part of an illumination traffic signal or ITS system and the conduit is not shown as a pay item it shall be included in the lump sum price for the system shown .
Final lengths of steel posts will be determined by the Engineer prior to fabrication. . Placement of Signs All reflectorized signs located less than feet from the edge of the lane should be turned out approximately degrees from the pavement edge of oncoming traffic lanes and those located feet or more from the edge of the lane should be turned in approximately degrees from the pavement edge of oncoming traffic lanes .
Description This Work consists of furnishing installing and removing pavement markings upon the Roadway surface in accordance with the Plans Standard Plans the FHWA publication Standard Alphabet for Highway Signs and Pavement Markings and these Specifications at locations shown in the Contract or as ordered by the Engineer in accordance with Section .. Pavement Markings may be either Longitudinal long Line Markings or Transverse Markings .
Traffic letters used in word messages shall be sized as shown in the Plans. . Materials Material for pavement marking shall be paint or plastic as noted in the Bid item meeting the requirements of Section .
When required by the pavement marking manufacturers installation instructions remove pavement markings from pavement surfaces that will adversely affect the bond of new pavement marking material to the roadway surface according to Section ..
Remove all other contaminants from pavement surfaces that may adversely affect the installation of new pavement markings by sandblasting shotblasting or sweeping .
Air blast the pavement with a highpressure system to remove extraneous or loose material .
Typically Type D material applied to new HMA pavement requires a pavement cure period of days .
This cure period may be reduced if the manufacturer performs a successful bond test and approves the reduction of the pavement cure period .
Air blast the pavement with a highpressure system to remove extraneous or loose material .
Typically Type D material applied to Portland cement concrete pavement requires a pavement cure period of days .
This cure period may be reduced if the manufacturer performs a successful bond test and approves the reduction of the pavement cure period .
Page Standard Specifications M Pavement Marking After the pavement surface is clean and dry apply primer as recommended by the manufacturer to the area receiving the pavement markings .
Apply the primer in a continuous solid film according to the recommendations of the primer manufacturer and the pavement markings manufacturer . .
ProfiledMarking A profiled pavement marking is a marking that consists of a base line thickness and a profiled thickness which is a portion of the pavement marking line that is applied at a greater thickness than the base line thickness .
.D Line Applications Surface Line A line constructed by applying pavement marking material directly to the pavement surface or existing pavement marking .
Grooved Line A line constructed by grinding or saw cutting a groove into the pavement surface and spraying extruding or gluing pavement marking material into the groove .
The groove depth is dependent upon the material used the pavement surface and the location .
Grooved line pavement marking shall not be constructed on bridge decks or on bridge approach slabs .
.E Installation Apply pavement marking materials to clean dry pavement surfaces and according to the following .
The top of pavement marking shall be smooth and uniform .
Place pavement marking lines parallel and true to line and .
When applying paint Type A or Type C material ensure that both the pavement surface and the air temperature at the time of application are not less than F and rising .
When applying Type B or Type D material ensure that both the pavement surface and the air temperature at the time of application are not less than F and rising .
Standard Specifications M Page Pavement Marking Ensure that the Type A thermoplastic material meets the manufacturers temperature specifications when it contacts the pavement surface .
The time period between paint applications will vary depending on the type of pavement and paint low VOC waterborne or low VOC solvent as follows Pavement Type Paint Type Time Period Bituminous Surface Treatment Low VOC Waterborne hours min .
.F Application Thickness Pavement markings shall be applied at the following base line thickness measured above the pavement surface or above the groove bottom for grooved markings in thousandths of an inch mils Marking Material Application HMA PCC BST Groove Depth Paint first coat spray Paint second coat spray Type A flattransverse symbols extruded Type A flatlong line symbols spray Type A with profiles extruded Type A embossed extruded Type A embossed with profiles extruded Type A groovedflatlong line extruded Type B flattransverse symbols heat fused Type C flattransverse symbols adhesive NA Type C flatlong line adhesive NA Type C groovedflatlong line adhesive NA Type D flattransverse symbols spray Type D flattransverse symbols extruded Type D flatlong line spray Type D flatlong line extruded Type D profiledlong line extruded Type D groovedflatlong line extruded Page Standard Specifications M Pavement Marking Liquid pavement marking material yield per gallon depending on thickness shall not exceed the following Mils thickness Feet of linegallon Square feetgallon with profiles with profiles Solid pavement marking material Type A yield per pound bag shall not exceed the following Mils thickness Feet of line bag Square feet bag flat flat flat flat flat with profiles flat flat with profiles embossed embossed with profiles flat grooved All grooved lines shall be applied into a groove cut or ground into the pavement .
.G Glass beads Top dress glass beads shall be applied to all spray and extruded pavement marking material .
Glass beads shall be applied by a bead dispenser immediately following the pavement marking material application .
Glass bead dispensers shall apply the glass beads in a manner such that the beads appear uniform on the entire pavement marking surface with to percent embedment .
For plastic pavement markings glass bead type and application rate shall be as recommended by the marking material manufacturer .
Lane Width The lane width which is defined as the lateral width from the edge of pavement to the center of the lane line or between the centers of successive lane lines shall not vary from the widths shown in the Contract by more than plus or minus inches .
The instructions shall include equipment requirements approved work methods and procedures material application temperature range air and pavement surface temperature requirements weather limitations precautions and all other requirements for successful application and material performance .
Removal of Pavement Markings Pavement markings to be removed shall be obliterated until all blemishes caused by the pavement marking removal conform to the coloration of the adjacent pavement .
Grinding to remove pavement markings in their entirety is allowed in areas designated for applications of either Hot Mix Asphalt HMA or Bituminous Surface Treatment BST .
For all cement concrete pavement and areas that will not be overlaid with hot mix asphalt or BST grinding is allowed to a depth just above the pavement surface and then Water blasting or shot blasting shall be required to remove the remaining pavement markings .
If in the opinion of the Engineer the pavement is materially damaged by pavement marking removal such damage shall be repaired by the Contractor in accordance with Section ..
Sand or other material deposited on the pavement as a result of removing lines and markings shall be removed as the Work progresses to avoid hazardous conditions .
Description The Work consists of furnishing and installing temporary pavement markings .
Temporary pavement markings shall be provided where noted in the Plans and for all lane shifts and detours resulting from construction activities or when permanent markings are removed because of construction operations. . Materials Materials for temporary markings shall be paint plastic tape raised pavement markers or flexible raised pavement markers .
Materials for pavement markings shall meet the following requirements Raised Pavement Marker Temporary Marking Paint .
General The Contractor shall select the type of pavement marking material in accordance with the Contract . .
Preliminary Spotting All preliminary layout and marking in preparation for application and the application and removal of temporary pavement markings shall be the responsibility of the Contractor . .
Preparation of Roadway Surface Surface preparation for temporary pavement markings shall be in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations. . Pavement Marking Application .A Temporary Pavement Markings Short Duration Temporary pavement markings short duration shall meet the following requirements Temporary Center Line A BROKEN line used to delineate adjacent lanes of traffic moving in opposite directions .
If temporary raised pavement markers are used the pattern shall be based on a foot unit consisting of a grouping of three temporary raised pavement markers each spaced feet apart with a foot gap .
If temporary raised pavement markers are used the line shall consist of markers installed continuously at foot spacings .
If temporary raised pavement markers are used the pattern shall be based on a foot unit consisting of a grouping of three temporary raised pavement markers each spaced feet apart with a foot gap .
All temporary pavement markings shall be retroreflective .
Page Standard Specifications M Temporary Pavement Markings .A Temporary Pavement Marking Paint Paint used for short duration temporary pavement markings shall be applied in one application at a thickness of mils or square feet per gallon .
.A Temporary Pavement Marking Tape Application of temporary pavement marking tape shall be in conformance with the manufacturers recommendations .
Black mask pavement marking tape shall mask the existing line in its entirety .
.A Temporary Raised Pavement Markers Temporary raised pavement markers are not allowed on bituminous surface treatments .
.A Temporary Flexible Raised Pavement Markers Flexible raised pavement markers are required for new applications of bituminous surface treatments .
Flexible raised pavement markers are not allowed on other pavement types unless otherwise specified or approved by the Engineer .
Flexible raised pavement markers shall be installed with the protective cover in place .
.B Temporary Pavement Markings Long Duration Application of paint pavement marking tape and plastic for long duration pavement markings shall meet the requirements of Section .
application of raised pavement markers shall meet the requirements of Section .
and application of flexible pavement markings shall be in conformance with the manufacturers recommendations .
.C Tolerance for Lines Tolerance for lines shall conform to Section .. .D Maintenance of Pavement Markings Temporary pavement markings shall be maintained in serviceable condition throughout the project until permanent pavement markings are installed .
As directed by the Engineer temporary pavement markings that are damaged including normal wear by traffic shall be repaired or replaced immediately .
Repaired and replaced pavement markings shall meet the requirements for the original pavement marking .
.E Removal of Pavement Markings Removal of temporary paint is not required prior to paving all other temporary pavement markings shall be removed .
All temporary pavement markings that are required on the wearing course prior to construction of permanent pavement markings and are not a part of the permanent markings shall be completely removed concurrent with or immediately subsequent to the construction of the permanent pavement markings .
Temporary flexible raised pavement markers on bituminous surface treatment pavements shall be cut off flush with the surface if their location conflicts with the alignment of the permanent pavement markings .
All other temporary pavement markings shall be removed in accordance with Section .. All damage to the permanent Work caused by removing temporary pavement markings shall be repaired by the Contractor at no additional cost to the Contracting Agency . .
Measurement Temporary pavement markings will be measured by the linear foot of each installed line or grouping of markers with no deduction for gaps in the line or markers and no additional measurement for the second application of paint required for long duration paint lines .
Short duration and long duration temporary pavement markings will be measured for the initial installation only .
The recycling agent used to rejuvenate the recovered asphalt from recycled asphalt pavement RAP and reclaimed asphalt shingles RAS shall meet the specifications in Table Table RA RA RA Test ASTM Test Method Min .
Flexible Bituminous Pavement Marker Adhesive Flexible bituminous pavement marker adhesive is a hot melt thermoplastic bituminous material used for bonding raised pavement markers and recessed pavement markers to the pavement .
Hot Poured Joint Sealants .A Hot Poured Sealant Hot poured sealant shall be sampled in accordance with ASTM D and tested in accordance with ASTM D. .A Hot Poured Sealant for Cement Concrete Pavement Hot poured sealant for cement concrete pavement shall meet the requirements of ASTM D Type IV except for the following .
Page Standard Specifications M Joint and Crack Sealing Materials .A Hot Poured Sealant for Bituminous Pavement Hot poured sealant for bituminous pavement shall meet the requirements of ASTM D Type I or Type II .
The paved invert for Treatment shall consist of bituminous material applied in such a manner that one or more smooth pavements will be formed in the invert filling the corrugations for at least percent of the circumference .
The pavement shall have a minimum thickness of ⅛ inch above the crest of the corrugations except where the upper edges intercept the corrugation .
The pavements shall be applied following the coating with asphalt .
Surface Mount Guide Post Base The base for surface mount guide posts shall be approximately inches in diameter with a maximum height of inches. . Guide posts shall be of such length to provide the required mounting height above the pavement surface in accordance with the Standard Plans .
Failure shall constitute either a breakage or significant deformation of the marker at any load of less than pounds. . Raised Pavement Markers Type Raised pavement markers Type shall be extruded from high impact thermoplastic material which has been ultraviolet radiation stabilized and shall meet the following requirements Impact resistance inchlbs min .
Operation The magnetometer detector unit shall respond to changes in the earths local magnetic field caused by the passage of a vehicle containing iron or steel over the sensor unit. . Environmental Requirements Satisfactory operation shall be attained over the ambient temperature range from F to F. Operation shall be unaffected by temperature change water ice pavement deterioration or electromagnetic noise. . Modes of Operation Each detector channel shall be capable of functioning in any of four frontpanel selectable modes a .
General Pavement marking materials in this section consist of paint plastic tape or raised pavement markers as described in Sections and as listed below Low VOC Solvent Based Paint Low VOC Waterborne Paint Temporary Pavement Marking Paint Type A Liquid Hot Applied Thermoplastic Type B PreFormed Fused Thermoplastic Type C Cold Applied PreFormed Tape Type D Liquid Cold Applied Methyl Methacrylate Glass Beads Temporary Pavement Marking Tape Temporary Raised Pavement Markings .
Temporary Pavement Marking Paint Paint used for temporary pavement marking shall conform to the requirements of Section .. .
Plastic White and yellow plastic pavement marking materials shall comply with the Specifications for Type A Liquid hot applied thermoplastic Type B Preformed fused thermoplastic Type C Cold applied preformed tape Type D Liquid cold applied methyl methacrylate For black the color shall closely match Federal Standard color number and shall be chosen from a WSDOT QPLlisted manufacturer for white or yellow plastic .
Type A Liquid Hot Applied Thermoplastic Type A material consists of a mixture of pigment fillers resins and glass beads that is applied to the pavement in the molten state by extrusion or by spraying .
Retroreflectance ASTM E Newly applied pavement markings shall have a minimum initial coefficient of retroreflective luminance of mcdmlx for white and mcdmlx for yellow in accordance with ASTM E when measured with a meter retroreflectometer .
The material is applied by heating the pavement and top heating the material .
Type C Cold Applied PreFormed Tape Type C material consists of plastic preformed tape that is applied cold to the pavement .
The tape shall be capable of adhering to new and existing hot mix asphalt or cement concrete pavement .
If the tape manufacturer recommends the use of a surface primer or adhesive use a type approved by the pavement marking manufacturer .
Type D Liquid Cold Applied Methyl Methacrylate Type D material consists of a two part mixture of methyl methacrylate and a catalyst that is applied cold to the pavement .
WSDOT Type B Glass Beads are highperformance glass beads for improved retroreflectivity and durability for highperformance pavement markings .
Temporary Pavement Marking Tape Short Duration Temporary pavement marking tape for short duration shall conform to ASTM D Type II except that black tape black mask tape and the black portion of the contrast removable tape shall be nonreflective .
Temporary Pavement Marking Tape Long Duration Temporary pavement marking tape for long duration shall conform to ASTM D Type I .
Temporary pavement marking tape for long duration except for black tape shall have a minimum initial coefficient of retroreflective luminance of mcdmlx when measured in accordance with ASTM E or ASTM E. Black tape black mask tape and the black portion of the contrast removable tape shall be nonreflective . .
Temporary Flexible Raised Pavement Markers Temporary flexible raised pavement markers shall consist of an Lshaped body with retroreflective tape on the top of one face for oneway traffic and reflective tape on the top of both faces for twoway traffic .
Testing on a northern AASHTO National Transportation Product Evaluation Program NTPEP pavement marking test deck is recommended .
The maximum notrack time shall not be exceeded when the pavement temperature is between F and F with relative humidity less than percent and the pavement is dry .
The devices shall be stabilized by affixing them to the pavement by using either weighted bases or adhesive .
Adhesive used to glue the device to the pavement shall meet the requirements of Sections .
except that the maximum watercement ratio shall be .. Index Standard Specifications M Page I A Abandon existing manholes Abbreviations Acceptance of Aggregate Section Acceptance of work final Access to work inspection Acquisition of quarry and pit sites Adjusting manholes and catch basins pin nuts anchor bolts shoes sprinklers Admixtures for concrete Aeration equipment for Age concrete piling strength concrete pipe for shipment Aggregates Section bituminous surface treatment cement concrete pavement fineness modulus HMA nonstatistical acceptance statistical acceptance stockpiling washed Airentrained concrete for pavement Alignment and grade steel structures Alkali Silica Reactive ASR aggregates American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials AASHTO American Railway Engineering and Maintenance Association AREMA American Society for Testing and Materials International ASTM Anchor bolts placed in concrete structure in steel structure Annealing eyebars Antistripping additive Approaches to movable spans Approval of materials working drawings Archaeological and historical objects Arch pipe structural plate Asphalt basis of measurement certification of shipment curb gutter samples Assignment of contract Audits Authority of engineer and inspector Award and Execution of Contract Section Page I Standard Specifications M Index B Backfill abutments inverts piers walls etc .
Backfill gravel for drains for drywells for foundations for pipe zone bedding for sand drains for walls Backfilling bridges and trestles cribbing irrigation system manholes and catch basins pipe structural plate pipe arch and underpass unsuitable foundation Ballast Ballast and Crushed Surfacing Section Barricades concrete pavement Bars dowel reinforcing Base crushed surfacing gravel base Beam guardrail Bearing tests Bearing values timber piles Bedding pipe Beginning of work Bending steel reinforcing bars Bents framed Bid consideration of deposit identical proposal Bidder causes for disqualification prequalification of Bid Procedures and Conditions Section Prequalification of Bidders Bituminous Materials Section Bituminous Surface Treatment Section Bituminous Surfacing on Structure Decks Section Bolts Bolts anchor for concrete steel and timber structures anchor bolts anchor for concrete highstrength timber structure Standard Specifications M Page I Index unfinished washers Borrow and borrow sites select Box girder cell drainage of Bridge approach embankment definition backfill compacted Bridge Railings Section Buildings use of Burlap cloth C Calendar days Camber diagram structural steel timber trusses Catch basins Cement Concrete Driveway Entrances Section Cement Concrete Pavement Rehabilitation Section Cement Concrete Pavement Section cold weather curing dowel bars equipment finishing joints mixing for structures proportioning materials repair defective slabs surface smoothness thickness penalty for lack of tie bars Cement Concrete Sidewalks Section Cementitious Cement portland acceptance of Cement Section Chain Link Fence and Wire Fence Section Changed conditions Change order Check dams Chlorination Claims Cleaning Existing Drainage Structures Section Cleanup final final for structures Clearing Grubbing and Roadside Cleanup Section clearing and grubbing Clearing site for structures Cofferdams shoring Page I Standard Specifications M Index Cold weather workunfavorable weather concrete concrete pavement surfacing Collusion noncollusion declaration Compacting HMA concrete embankment subgrade surfacing Compaction control tests Completion date of contract Compost Concrete airentrained blocks cement concrete pavement cement proportions for classes consistency curbs curing pavement curing structures finishing concrete surfaces structures finishing on pavement foundation seals hand mixing lean concrete mixing for pavement mixing for structures piling castinplace pipe culvert pipe drain placed in cold or freezing weather placed in hot weather placed under water placing maximum time between layers precast concrete piles rubble spillways surface finish class surface finish class transitmixed minimummaximum revolutions vibration of Concrete barrier airentrained Concrete Barrier Section Concrete Curing Materials and Admixtures Section Concrete inlet Concrete Patching Material Grout and Mortar Section Concrete Slope Protection Section Concrete Structures Section Standard Specifications M Page I Index Conformity with and deviations from plans Construction Geosynthetic Section Section bid items ditch lining permanent erosion control separation soil stabilization underground drainage Construction stakes Contract bond Contract definition additionsalterations of work assigning award of completion date execution of extensions of time failure to execute intent of liquidated damages overrun of time subletting termination Contraction joints Contractor definition compliance with laws cooperation by and with others examination of site forest fires liability for patents and processes overweight loads prevailing wages qualification for award responsibility for damage responsibility to public and for work unauthorized work Control of Material Section Control of Work Section Coordination of contract documents plans special provisions specifications and addenda Corrugated aluminum alloy pipes Counter batch Crack sealing Cribbing Section gabion wire mesh Cross connection control device Crushed surfacing top course Crushing plant compensation for moving Culverts Section Page I Standard Specifications M Index Curb asphalt concrete cement concrete cement concrete curb ramp roundabout Curbs Gutters and Spillways Section Curing cement concrete cement concrete sidewalks concrete concrete piles precast concrete structures Cuts widening of D Damage to property contractor responsible for Date numerals for concrete structures Debris clearing and grubbing disposal of Defective work DefinitionsandTermsSection DefinitionsandTestsSection Deleted items payment for Detectable warning surface Detours Dewatering foundations seals Discrimination Disqualification of bidders Ditches roadway Documents required Dowel bars Drainage Structures and Culverts Section Drains Section french or rock Drawings working contractor responsible for Drop manhole connection Dropoffs roadway Drywells Ductile iron castings Dust ratio E Elastomeric joint seal Embankments approach to bridge structure compaction control test earth and rock compaction snow removal unsuitable foundation excavation End slopes Epoxy Resins Section Equal Employment Opportunity EEO Equipment for aeration automatically controlled weighing Standard Specifications M Page I Index Equitable adjustment Erosion Control and Roadside Planting Section Erosion Control and Water Pollution Control Section Erosion control devices Estimates partial payment for material on hand Excavation below grade borrow pits cuts widening of disposal of surplus and waste material ditches measurement overbreak payment rock cuts rock stored for future use selected material slides sluicing by special provisions stepped slope construction stripping quarries and pits trenches unsuitable foundation materials waste of material replacement Excavation below subgrade Excavation for structures backfilling classification depth disposal of excavated material in open pits riprap trench Execution of contract Expansion bearings concrete structure Expansion joint filler and sealer Explosives use of storage Extension of time for execution of contract and furnishing bond Eyebars F Fabricated Bridge Bearing Assemblies Section Falsework for concrete structures plans for concrete structures falsework and formwork plans for steel bridges removal from concrete structure Federal Highway Administration approval and inspection Fence and Guardrail Section Fence chain link wire Fertilizers Field test storm sewers Page I Standard Specifications M Index Filter blanket with riprap Final cleanup quarry and pit sites structures Final inspection and acceptance Final payment for contract Finishing cement concrete pavement precast concrete piles sidewalk surface finishes for concrete classes and Flexible Guide Posts Section Floor bridge singleplank and laminated plank subfloor for concrete deck Fly ash Force account provisions and payment for Forests protection of Forgings steel Forms concrete structure releasing agentcompound Foundation for cribbing for structures preparation for placing structures Fracture G Gabion cribbing Gaskets rubber Gates chain link and wire fence General Pipe Installation Requirements Section General Requirements for Structures Section Geosynthetic material requirements Geosynthetic Retaining Walls Section Geosynthetic retaining wall traffic and pedestrian barriers Glare Screen Section Grade requirements timber and lumber Grate inlets Gratuities Gravel backfill drains drywells foundations pipe zone bedding walls Gravel Base Section Gravel borrow Grout Grubbing Guarantees Guardrail Section Guide Posts Section Guying Standard Specifications M Page I Index H Hammer pile driving Haul Section additional for changed quarrypit site disposal of excavated material Headwalls Highvisibility apparel fence Holes hand in steel pin structural steel punched reamed subpunched rods bolts on timber structures weep retaining wall Hot Mix Asphalt Section warm mix asphalt Hour measurement of precision Hydrants Section Hydraulically Applied Erosion Control Products HECP I Identification plates Illumination Signal Electrical Section IlluminationTrafficSignalSystemsIntelligentTransportationSystemsand Electrical Section Impact Attenuator Systems Section Incentive financial materials Initial planting Inlets metal Inspection access for fabrication federal agency final of work guardrail rail element mill and shop steel structures plant material reinforcing steel bars Inspectors authority and duties Insurance public liability and property damage Intelligence Transportation System ITS Intent of the contract Irrigation electrical service water service Irrigation Systems Section Section Page I Standard Specifications M Index J Jets water for driving piles Joint and Crack Sealing Materials Section Joints concrete curb and gutters concrete pavement construction contraction expansion for concrete structures expansion for sidewalks for pipe culverts sewers etc .
metal spillways premolded joint filler sealing concrete pavement spillways at bridge ends Joint venture K Keystone L Labor and Industries State Department of Laboratory Labor prevailing wages Laminated timber structures Laws to be observed Layout of planting Legal Relations and Responsibilities to the Public Section Liability of public officers Licenses and permits Liquidated damages overruns of time Load limits Log of test boring Loose riprap Lower tier subcontractors Lumber forms for concrete structures grade requirements preservative treatment M Mailbox Support Section Section Maintenance during suspension of work rock Malleable iron castings Manholes Inlets Catch Basins and Drywells Section Manufacturers certificate of compliance Masonry Units Section Materials bought from contractor defective financial incentive found on project use of Standard Specifications M Page I Index guarantee on hand payment for source of supply and quality storage and handling tests for acceptance Measurement and Payment Section Mechanical rebar splices Mesh wire for reinforcement for wire fence Metal end sections Mineral filler for HMA Mixing cement concrete for paving cement concrete for structures Mobilization ModifiedConcreteOverlaysSection Monument Cases Section Section Mortar blocks rebar placement Moving crushing plants payment for Mowing Mudsills for falsework for timber structures Mulch N Name plates for structures Navigable streams affected by structures Nestable pipe and pipe arch Noise Barrier Walls Section Noncollusion declaration No waiver of legal rights by state O Obstructions removal and disposal of Opening bid proposal sectionsofhighwaytotraffic Overbreak P Painting application machine finished surfaces Painting Section Paints and Related Materials Section Panel concrete castinplace noise barrier concrete fascia for soil nail walls concrete fascia for soldier pile and soldier pile tieback walls concrete precast erection for structural earth walls concrete precast fabrication for structural earth walls concrete precast noise barrier timber noise barrier Patented devices materials and processes Page I Standard Specifications M Index Pavement adjacent lanes cement concrete curing cement concrete Pavement Marking Material Section Pavement Marking Section Payment final acceptance for items deleted from contract for material on hand for surplus processed materials partial and progress estimates scope of state sales tax Payrolls certified Perforated drain pipe Permanent Ground Anchors Section acceptance criteria installing tendon fabrication storage handling testing and stressing Permanent Signing Section Permeable ballast Permits and licenses Pesticides Piling Section Section before driving precast concrete strength castinplace concrete curing precast concrete equipment for driving formulas for bearing values ordering penetration and driving precast concrete precast piles steel storage and handling test piles timber piles water jets for driving Pins and rollers structural steel Pipe age before shipping concrete aluminum culvert aluminum storm sewer asphalt coatings and paved inverts cleaning and testing concrete culvert concrete storm sewer corrugated iron and steel underdrain ductile iron sanitary sewer nestable plugging existing pipe with concrete Standard Specifications M Page I Index polyethylene culvert polyethylene storm sewer polypropylene sanitary sewer reinforced concrete storm sewer removing and relaying culverts rubber gaskets steel culvert steel storm sewer structural plate testing storm sewer pipe joints treatment protective vitrified clay sanitary sewer Pipe and fittings irrigation system Pipe arch structural plate Pipe laying Pipe storm sewer Pipe zone bedding Pit sites acquisition Plans ambiguities with the specifications cofferdams and shoring conformity with and deviations from examination of site of work reclamation temporary water pollutionerosion control working drawings Plant establishment Planting Planting area preparation Plant materials Plant replacement Plastic covering Plastic Waterstop Section Plate girders Platform scales Plugging existing pipe Polyacrylamide PAM Portland Cement Concrete Compliance Adjustment Posts chain link fence glare screen guardrail guide sign wire fence Preaward information Precast concrete piles PrecastTrafficCurbSectionSection Premolded joint filler Prequalification of bidders Prestressed concrete girders prestressed concrete Page I Standard Specifications M Index Prestressing reinforcement Prevailing rates of wages Production From Quarry and Pit Sites Section Progress estimates Progress schedule to be furnished by contractor Property protection and restoration of Proposal bid definition supplement causes for rejection irregularities combination and multiple delivery of officers personal liability preparation of public opening withdrawal or revision of Proposal forms Prosecution and Progress Section Prosecution of work Protest by the contractor Pruning Public convenience and safety officers personal liability Pumping for foundation seals Q Qualified Products List QPL Quantities measurement of bid items of work Quarries pits acquisition of sites compensation for moving plan final cleanup preparation of site production requirements scalping Quarry spalls Quick coupler valves R Railings metal metal bridge timber Raised Pavement Markers RPM Section Section recessed pavement markers Readymix concrete Reclamation of pit sites Records and retention required Recycled material Regulations State Department of Fish and Wildlife state and federally owned lands Reinforced Concrete Walls Section Reinforcing bars tie bars dowels Standard Specifications M Page I Index Reinforcing Steel Section clearances inspection mortar blocks placing and fastening splicing weight of reinforcing steel welding Rejection of bids Removal of defective and unauthorized work existing pavement overburden from quarries and pits utilities Removal of Structures and Obstructions Section Removing and replacing culverts Rented equipment force account Request for approval of material Retainage Retaining walls drainage backfill Retempering concrete prohibited Ride Smoothness Compliance Adjustment Right of way Riprap Quarry Spalls Slope Protection and Rock for Erosion and Scour Protection and Rock Walls Section Riprap Section hand placed loose Roadside cleanup Roadside Restoration Section Roadway ditches Roadway Excavation and Embankment Section Rock and Gravity Block Wall and Gabion Cribbing Section Rock drilling safety requirements embankments erosion and scour walls Rubber gasketed pipe joints Rumble Strips Section S Safety and convenience of public Safety bars for culvert pipe Sales tax state Salvage of usable materials Sampling and acceptance bituminous materials cement materials general Sand drainage blanket Sand equivalent Sandsilt ratio Sanitary accommodations Page I Standard Specifications M Index Sanitary Sewers Section Scales weighing Schedule progress Scope of the Work Section Screw threads Seals foundation Seed Seeding erosion control Selected material in excavation Service Connections Section Sewer Cleanouts Section SEW Structural Earth Walls precast concrete facing panel and concrete block erection precast concrete facing panel and concrete block fabrication traffic barrier and pedestrian barrier welded wire faced structural earth wall erection Shaft construction noise barrier walls excavation soldier pile and soldier pile tieback walls ShaftRelated Materials Section Shaft Section Shear connectors keys Shoes bridge setting and grouting Shop drawings for prestressed girders details for steel structures details for timber structures Shoring cofferdams Shotcrete Facing Section application finishing mix design soil nail walls testing Side Sewers Section Sidewalks cement concrete Signing Materials and Fabrication Section Sign posts timber Signs overhead clearance at railroad track overhead clearance roadway permanent signing Site of work examination of Site Reclamation Section Slag furnace Slides Slope protection concrete Sluicing Slump Slump test Snow removal prior to grading Soil amendments Standard Specifications M Page I Index Soil Nail Walls Section concrete fascia panels shotcrete facing soil nailing soil nail testing and acceptance Soldier Pile and Soldier Pile Tieback Walls Section concrete fascia panel installing soldier piles prefabricated drainage mat shaft excavation Specifications definition coordination of contract plans special provisions Spillways airentrained concrete at bridge ends cement concrete metal Splicing mechanical splices reinforcing steel steel piles stringers wood Stakes construction Staking Steel bars for reinforcing Steel bolts for structural steel shop assembly shop storage of structural materials straighten bent material steel weighing structural steel welds Steel Structures Section alignment and camber assembling and bolting pin nuts bolts Stepped slope construction Stockpile construction Stockpile sites preparation of site Stockpiling Aggregates Section Storage cement for concrete concrete precast units explosives lumber for timber structures materials general piling structural steel Storm Sewers Section Straightening bent material steel Straw Stringers timber structures Page I Standard Specifications M Index Stripping quarries pits Structural Earth Walls Section Structural Plate Pipe Pipe Arch Arch and Underpass Section Structural Steel and Related Materials Section Structure excavation classification trench widths for measurement Structure Excavation Section Structures concrete steel timber Structures general requirements approaches to movable spans clearing site Subcontractor Subgrade cement concrete sidewalk for surfacing pavement Subgrade Preparation Section Subletting contract work Substitution of plants Substructure of bridge Subsurface boring logs Surety definition responsibility Surfacing ballast construction of courses crushed equipment gravel base hours of work maintenance during work suspension mixing percent of water content payable placing and spreading Surplus material disposal of Surplus screenings Suspension of work T Tagging plants Tax state sales tax Temperature normal Temperature of asphalt Temporary barrier Temporary Erosion and Sediment Control TESC Temporary Pavement Markings Section TemporaryTrafficControlMaterialsSection TemporaryTrafficControlSection Temporary water pollutionerosion control Test piles Standard Specifications M Page I Index Tests aggregates compaction for embankments concrete culvert pipe materials general portland cement sanitary sewers storm sewers Threads screw steel structures Thrie beam guardrail Tie bars pavement Timber and Lumber Section Timber and metal railings Timber Structures Section bracing caps timber bridge floors framing lumber storage handling painting shop details stringers trusses Topsoil Traffic curb precast Traffic detours construction and maintenance of Trafficopeningsectionsto Traffic signal controller cabinet assembly Transportable attenuator Treated timber piling Trestle ends embankment at Trimming and Cleanup Section Trusses timber structure U Underdrains perforated pipe Underpass Underweights no pay adjustment Unsuitable foundation material Utilities and similar facilities V Valves Valves for Water Mains Section Vegetation protection and restoration Vertical drains Vibration concrete structures concrete pavement protection against Vibratory rollers Vitrified clay sewer pipe Page I Standard Specifications M Index W Wages compliance with Waiver of states legal rights no Walls geosynthetic retaining noise barrier soil nail soldier pile and soldier pile tieback structural earth walls SEW Warranty Waste sites disposal of waste debris Wasting excavated material Water Distribution Materials Section Watering Section Water Mains Section Waterproof Membrane Section Water Section surfacing materials Waterstop plastic Wattles Weather unfavorable for concrete paving concrete structures crushed surfacing Web plate splices stiffeners fillers Weed control Weep holes structures Weighing equipment Weight of asphalt reinforcing steel Welded wire faced structural earth wall erection Welds reinforcing steel structural steel Wheel guards and railings Wire cold drawn for reinforcing Wire fencing Wire Mesh Slope Protection Section Work acceptance of changed conditions changes contractors responsibility for defective and unauthorized failure to complete on time force account inspection of and samples prosecution of suspension Working day Working drawings Written notice to contractor method of serving Standard Specifications M Page Found an error in the Standard Specifications Cant find an item in the Index Help us improve the manual by sending your comments to the State Specifications Engineer using one of the following methods Gregory D. Morehouse P.E .
