The layer or layers of specified materials of designed thickness placed on a subbase or a subgrade to support a pavement or surface .
A pavement structure which maintains intimate contact with and distributes loads to the subgrade and depends upon aggregate interlock particle friction and cohesion for stability .
Steel embedded in a rigid pavement slab and in concrete structures to resist tensile stresses and detrimental opening of cracks .
A pavement structure which distributes loads to the subgrade having as one course a Portland cement concrete slab of relatively high bending resistance .
A section of Portland cement concrete pavement bounded by joints and edges designed for continuity of tensile stress .
The graded portion of a highway within top and side slopes prepared as a foundation for the pavement structure and shoulder .
The material below the subgrade in cuts and embankments and in embankment foundations extending to such depth as affects the support of the pavement structure .
A layer or layers of specified or selected material or designed thickness placed on a subgrade to support a base or rigid pavement .
The top surface of the roadbed upon which the pavement structure and shoulders are constructed .
One or more applications of bituminous material and cover aggregate or thin plant mix on an old pavement or any element of a new pavement structure .
Changes in quantities for the items of Unclassified Excavation Muck Excavation Borrow Excavation Pipe Underdrain extra Concrete and Steel Reinforcement for structure foundations Piling Bituminous Plant Mix leveling and widening material and Bituminous Material used in plant mix bases and pavements Disposal of Hydrocarbon Contaminated Soil Underground Storage Tank UST Removal and Removing and Disposing UST Contents shall be excluded in determining increases and decreases under the provisions of this paragraph since it is understood that these items can not be accurately determined before the work is done .
Construction adjacent to existing pavement will require the use of portable barricades drums signs vertical sign panels delineators or other approved traffic control devices .
Proposed changes in the basic design of a bridge or pavement type or which require different rightofway limits will not normally be considered as an acceptable VE proposal .
All frames of openings for valves manholes catch basins or other fixtures encountered in areas to be covered by a pavement shall be adjusted to the proper elevation before the pavement is placed .
For control of elevations of base and pavement layers the Contractor will be furnished one set of control elevation stakes .
It shall be the Contractors responsibility to obtain from this one set of control stakes the proper elevations for each layer of subbase base and pavement . .
Within the project limits loads shall be so regulated that damage will not occur to base or pavement layers and structures but in no case shall loads exceed the legal load limit unless permitted in writing by the Engineer under special conditions .
No loads will be permitted on base pavement or structures before the expiration of any required curing period .
For the purpose of this item the following costs will be excluded from the computation for total cost Supplemental agreements regardless of whether or not time extensions are allowed on the agreements Bituminous material price adjustments Adjustments due to the cost of construction fuel for HMA production Liquidated damages Incentive or disincentive payments Price adjustments for pavement smoothness Compensation for delay claims .
All longitudinal measurements for computing area of base layers and pavements will be made along the actual surface of the roadway and not horizontally and no deductions will be made for individual fixtures in the roadway having an area of nine square feet one square meter or less .
For all transverse measurements for area of base layers and pavements the dimensions to be used in calculating the pay area shall be the neat dimensions shown on the plans or directed .
Separate scales shall be provided for bulk cement and for bulk fly ash as provided in Article .. Scales of the suspended hopper type shall have a telltale dial tare beam or other device that indicates to the operator the approach of not less than the last pounds kg of the required hopper load for structure concrete plants or the last pounds kg for concrete pavement plants .
Bituminous plant mix bases and pavements surface treatments and tack coat are the only types of bituminous materials for which a price adjustment will be computed .
Blasting if approved shall be in accordance with Article .. Where portions of existing pavement curb and gutter walks and similar items are to remain and join the surface of the new work they shall be removed to an existing joint or cut off to a neat line with vertical face using saws or other approved equipment that will not damage the retained portion of the work .
The quantity of plain or reinforced concrete pavement plain or reinforced concrete base and cement treated base removed including overlying surface will be measured and the surface area computed in square yards square meters .
The unit price for removal of concrete pavement or concrete base shall include removal of any overlying surface .
Where portions of existing pavement are to remain and join the surface of the new work they shall be cut to a neat line with a vertical face using saws or other equipment that will not damage the retained portion of the work .
Where embankment is to be placed on old concrete pavements or pavements having concrete bases the treatment of the old concrete shall be as specified on the plans .
Where embankment is to be placed on any other type of roadway pavement or surface the existing pavement or surface shall be scarified to the extent necessary to provide ample bond between old and new material. . Embankment Formation .
Cofferdams or sheeting and shoring will be required in foundation excavation work when work is adjacent to pavement sidewalks railroad tracks utilities etc .
This Section shall cover the operations required to provide a satisfactory roadbed for receiving a base or pavement structure layer .
The work described for a modified roadbed is for the establishment of a proper subgrade before constructing an overlying subbase base or pavement layer or temporary surfacing .
This Section shall cover the work of preparing a roadbed for receiving a base and pavement structure by stabilizing it with an approved local or commercial material .
Control elevation stakes will be set as provided in Article .. On a contract for base and pavement only the roadbed in addition to the check for continuity of grades shall be checked for density as required by the process used in construction of the subgrade Section or .
This type shoulder may also include a drainage plane layer or a bituminous pavement or both .
The drainage plane layer and the bituminous base andor pavement shall be constructed in compliance with Section and the appropriate Sections for the bituminous base or pavement .
If the base layer contains cement areas below required thickness or elevation shall be corrected by increasing the thickness of the next layer or for the top layer the surface may be brought to proper elevation and thickness with layers of bituminous plant mix of appropriate gradation where the pavement is to be a bituminous type .
These leveling layers shall be placed ahead of a plant mix pavement layer or after a liquid surface treatment layer if any .
Low areas in the subgrade under concrete pavement shall be corrected as specified under Subarticle .c .
Full Depth Reclamation with Portland cement shall consist of pulverizing and mixing the in place existing materials as shown in the plans with Portland cement and water to produce a uniform mixture and then compacting the mixture to serve as a base course for pavement. . Materials .
The Contractor shall establish offset reference points before beginning of construction so that the original alignment of the roadway centerlines edges of pavement etc .
A mechanical mixer shall be used that is capable of pulverizing and mixing the existing pavement base and subgrade to the required depth .
The prime coat shall be maintained until a pavement layer or additional surface treatment is applied .
The density requirements for earth work subbase base shoulders surface and pavement layers are given in this Section .
All acceptance density testing of HMA will be done by coring the pavement AASHTO T . . Nuclear Testing Device .
An electronic surface contact device will be allowed for the measurement of the density of hot mix asphalt HMA pavement layers .
This layer normally is used to facilitate drainage from the pavement structure layer through the shoulders however it may be used at other locations when shown on the plans or directed. . Materials .
The work under this Section shall also include the construction of a Permeable Asphalt Treated Base PATB layer to serve as a drainage layer in the pavement structure. . Materials .
The weather limitations as specified in Item .b shall apply except that slurry seal shall not be placed when the air temperature is F C or lower nor when the temperature of the pavement on which it is to be placed is F C or lower .
Lm² over the pavement surface immediately preceding the spreading of the mixture .
The MicroSurfacing mixture shall be spread uniformly by means of a hydraulically adjustable type spreader box with a positive screed adjustment and equipped to expand as necessary for varying pavement widths attached to the mixer equipped with ribbon flighted augers to agitate and spread the materials throughout the box .
The MicroSurfacing mixture shall be spread only when the ambient temperature for the hours prior to placement is at least F. The current pavement surface and ambient temperature is at least F and rising .
Traffic markings and stripe shall be removed flush with the pavement surface .
Care shall be taken when filling ruts to restore the designed profile of the pavement cross section .
If the coarse aggregate settles to the bottom of the mix the mix will be removed from the pavement .
The tack may be placed if allowed by the Engineer when the pavement temperature is F and rising . .
Temperature limitations for the placement of tack coat material shall be the same as specified in Subarticle .b for plant mixed pavements .
NTSSHM material shall not be used for cold applied asphalt pavement .
All existing surfaces new pavement milled pavement old pavement or concrete shall be clean and dry prior to the tack coat application .
Tack coat shall be applied uniformly to the pavement surface to obtain full coverage .
Tack shall also be applied to all adjacent pavement edges except the pavement edges where joint sealant is required .
e Curing Tack coat materials shall be fully cured before application of the overlying asphalt pavement layer is placed .
This Section shall cover the sealing of longitudinal joints in hot mix asphalt pavements by the spraying or rolling of joint sealant on the vertical face of the joint ahead of the asphalt spreader .
Joint sealant application shall be a separate construction operation from the tack coat application Joint sealant shall not be applied to the joints between HMA pavement and paved shoulders unless shown otherwise on the plans .
Joint sealant shall not be applied to the joints between HMA pavement and curbs unless shown otherwise on the plans. . Materials .
Unless shown otherwise on the plans joint sealant shall only be applied to the joints in the wearing layers of Section Superpave and Section Stone Matrix Asphalt mixes and to the joints in the surface layers between existing HMA pavement and new HMA pavement .
Joint sealant shall not be applied to the joints between HMA pavement and paved shoulders unless shown otherwise on the plans .
Joint sealant shall not be applied to the joints between HMA pavement and curbs unless shown otherwise on the plans .
This Section shall cover the work of removing existing asphalt pavement by either planing or micromilling .
Micromilling equipment shall be capable of removing pavement to an accuracy of of an inch .
The existing pavement shall be removed to varying depths in a manner which will restore the pavement surface to a uniform longitudinal profile and cross section as shown on the plans or as directed by the Engineer .
The depth of removal shall be increased or decreased across the width of the pavement to obtain the required roadway cross slope .
The pavement removal shall be done to effectively minimize the amount of airborne dust .
Wetting of the pavement may be required to minimize the airborne dust .
The Contractor shall provide a means of drainage to prevent water accumulation on the surface where the pavement has been removed .
Unless otherwise noted on the plans the pavement removal shall be limited to an area that will be covered with a surface treatment or a layer of pavement within the time shown below For planing within seven calendar days after removal has begun .
The Contractor shall collect transport and dispose the removed pavement material .
After pavement removal and immediately prior to resurfacing or opening to traffic the surface shall be thoroughly swept with a power broom to remove fine material and dust particles .
The planing of pavement will be measured in square yards square meters computed from surface measurements taken to the nearest .
m on the planed pavement .
The micromilling of pavement will be measured in square yards computed from surface measurements taken to the nearest .
m on the micromilled pavement .
The planing and micromilling of pavement will be paid for at the contract unit price which shall be full compensation for removing the pavement collecting transporting and disposing of the removed pavement and other debris the removal and disposal of pavement markers sweeping the pavement and collecting transporting and disposing of the swept debris and for all materials equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to complete the work .. b Payment will be made under Item No .
The work under this Section covers the general requirements that are applicable to all types of hot and warm mix asphalt pavements of the plant mix type .
In general widening shall consist of narrow width buildups three feet or less one meter or less required for widening existing pavement paving for turnouts beyond three feet one meter from the edge of pavement pavement crossovers and turning lanes of less than feet m for crossovers .
More than one job mix formula may be submitted and approved for a layer of pavement .
When directed the Contractor shall use mechanical equipment to cut samples for testing from the compacted pavement .
Equipment known to accomplish this remixing operation and currently approved by ALDOT are listed below Manufacturer Model BlawKnox MCTWIN PUG TUB ROADTEC Shuttlebuggy SB SB MTVD MTVE TerexCedarapids CR RM Weiler E E A material remixing device will not be required for temporary work of short duration bridge replacements having less than feet m of pavement at each end of a bridge acceleration and deceleration lanes less than feet m in length tapered sections widening patching spot leveling shoulders crossovers side street returns and other areas designated by the Engineer .
It will be permissible to use a hydraulically extendable strikeoff for paving turnouts and short sections of pavement including variable width sections and crossovers .
If shown to be required on the plans special attachments to the pavers and spreaders will be required to shape and finish the pavement. . Compaction Equipment .
Failures in existing pavement or base shall be corrected as noted in Item .c in advance of the placement of an overlying layer .
When patching of an existing surface is provided by the plans the Engineer will examine the pavement surface and designate the area to be patched .
When leveling of an existing pavement or base is provided by the plans the surface shall be brought to required grade and cross section with plant mix material .
In case the surface layer shall not be featheredged at the end of the overlay layer but a sufficient amount of the surface beyond the ends of the deficient unit shall be removed to a neat line across the pavement to allow placing the full pounds per square yard kgm and to make a joint that will meet the surface requirements .
Alignment of the outside edges of the pavement shall be controlled by preset control lines and shall be finished in conformity with these controls .
For areas of a hot and warm mix asphalt plant mix surface inaccessible to the mechanical spreader patching of pot holes and correcting failures in existing pavement the plant mix may be dumped in low areas in the amounts directed windrowed spread and compacted to bring the elevation and section to the desired level .
For areas inaccessible to mechanical spreading equipment and when patching potholes and minor pavement failures hand spreading of the hot and warm mix asphalt mixture may be permitted .
Adequate precaution shall be taken to prevent dropping of gasoline or oil on the pavement .
The finished surface shall not vary more than of an inch mm in any foot m section from a taut string applied parallel to the surface at the following locations foot mm inside of the edges of pavement at the centerline and at other points designated by the Engineer .
Unless shown otherwise on the plans surface binder and leveling pavement edges not confined by curbing or other structures may be lightly tamped behind the placement operation as a preventative measure against cracking and bulging during the rolling process .
These edges shall be neatly shaped to line behind the breakdown roller and shall be trimmed as necessary after final rolling to an accurately lined string or wire providing a maximum tolerance of inches mm outside the theoretical edge of pavement with a maximum variation from a true line of of an inch mm in feet m and a slope not flatter than .
times the rate in kilograms per square meter another core shall be taken as close a practical to the original location where the Engineer believes the pavement is thick enough for roadway density determination .
Density pay factors will not be applied to pavement layers placed at these rates .
Unless otherwise covered by a separate pay item the cost of excavation for patching and widening compacting the subgrade backfilling spreading or disposing of excess excavated material removal and disposal of old pavement removal and resetting of roadway signs and mailboxes and removal and disposal of pavement markers shall be subsidiary obligations of the associated plant mix pay item and no additional payment will be made for performing the work .
The work covered by this Section shall consist of constructing a hot mixed hot laid polymer modified open graded friction course wearing layer generally placed on an existing pavement .
Requirements for all hot mix asphalt pavements as specified in Section are applicable to this Section subject to any exceptions contained herein .
The work covered by this Section shall consist of constructing a hot mix asphalt layer of fiber stabilized stone matrix asphalt pavement on a prepared surface in accordance with these specifications and in conformity with the lines grades typical cross section and the placement rate shown on the plans or as directed .
The plant equipment and construction requirements for this pavement are specified in Sections and subject to any exceptions herein .
Unless otherwise shown on the plans for pavement layers in the top inches the liquid asphalt binder shall meet the requirements of Section and shall be polymermodified to meet a PG as given in Section .
For pavement layers below the top inches the liquid asphalt binder shall be PG and shall meet the requirements of Section .
Description The work covered by this Section shall consist of a hot or warm bituminous plant mixed pavement layer placed on a prepared surface in accordance with these specifications and in reasonably close conformity with the lines grades typical cross section and placement rate shown on the plans or as directed by the Engineer .
General requirements for all bituminous concrete pavements as specified in Section are applicable to this Section subject to any exceptions contained herein .
ALLOWABLE ASPHALT BINDER GRADES FOR SUPERPAVE ESAL Range Traffic ESALs Base Lower Upper Binder Layers Wearing Surface Layers AB ESALs .x PG PG CD .x ESALs .x PG PG E .x ESALs .x PG PG The asphalt binder shall be PG for leveling when the top of the leveling is within inches mm of the final pavement surface .
The asphalt binder may be PG for leveling that is not within inches mm of the final pavement surface and for all patching and widening .
If Open Graded Friction Course Section layers are required the final pavement surface shall be the surface of the layer below these layers .
This Section shall cover the work of scoring bituminous plant mix pavement surfaces at locations shown on the plans or directed by the Engineer .
The scoring shall consist of cutting grooves at regular intervals in the shoulder pavement surface. . Materials .
It is intended that areas of the pavement surface designated by the plans or by the Engineer to be scored shall be so done as to produce a rumble strip effect to alert inattentive drivers .
Unless ordered otherwise by the Engineer all grooves shall be perpendicular to the pavement edge .
The equipment shall be operated in a workmanlike manner that will satisfactorily produce a pavement surface having uniform grooves of the dimensions and spacing as shown on the plans or specified in this Article .
The scoring of bituminous pavement surface ordered and accepted will be measured per mile kilometer along the centerline of each row of grooves placed either by direct measurement and computation to the nearest .
The scoring of bituminous pavement surface measured as noted above will be paid for at the contract unit price bid which shall be full compensation for the scoring of the pavement and for all materials equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
The work covered by this Section consists of constructing a pavement of Portland Cement Concrete .
The requirements given in the following Sections are directly applicable to the materials furnished for the concrete pavement Section Coarse Aggregate Section Fine Aggregates Section Bituminous Materials Section Mineral Admixtures Section Water Section Air Entraining Additives Section Chemical Admixtures for Concrete Section Cement Section Concrete Curing Material Section Concrete Joint Fillers Sealers and Waterstop Material Section Steel Reinforcement b Aggregates. . Fine Aggregate .
The coarse aggregate for mainline and ramp pavement shall be granite sandstone quartzite or gravel with a specific gravity greater than .
The coarse aggregate for shoulder pavement shall be limestone or the aggregates allowed for mainline and ramp pavement . .
Mineral admixtures may be used in any concrete pavement mixture design except where it is specified otherwise by the plans and proposal .
The material requirements given in Section shall apply to the reinforcing steel for the concrete pavement .
Maturity Meters may be proposed only for use in estimating the compressive strength of the concrete for opening the pavement to traffic .
The maturity meters used in establishing the StrengthMaturity relationship shall be the same ones used in estimating the early age compressive strength of the concrete in the pavement .
A mainline pavement testing unit shall be defined as feet or fraction thereof of mainline roadway lane length placed in one paving pass .
A complete mainline pavement testing unit shall be SECTION PORTLAND CEMENT CONCRETE PAVEMENT removed and replaced in accordance with the details shown on the plans if the quality of the pavement in any portion of the pavement testing unit is determined to be unacceptable .
Concrete shoulder pavement placed integrally with mainline roadway may be accepted using the tests for the mainline roadway pavement .
The Engineer may include transitional areas of pavement adjacent to mainline pavement testing units for acceptance using the tests for the mainline roadway pavement .
Ramps shoulders and transitional areas are classified as nonmainline pavement .
A nonmainline pavement testing unit shall be defined as a cubic yards or fraction thereof of ramps shoulders and transitional areas placed in one paving pass .
A complete non mainline pavement testing unit shall be removed and replaced in accordance with the details shown on the plans if the quality of the pavement in any portion of the nonmainline pavement testing unit is determined to be unacceptable .
The Engineer may combine ramps shoulders andor transitional areas into one non mainline pavement testing unit if the combined elements are placed in the same paving pass .
Sampling and testing frequency applies for both mainline and nonmainline portland cement concrete pavement. . A set of cylinders consist of two in x in cylinders to be tested at days . .
The Departments certified ALDOT Concrete Technician will make a minimum of one set of two days concrete cylinders that will represent the pavement testing unit .
The Engineer will select using ALDOT a minimum of two longitudinal locations within the pavement testing unit to be measured .
The Engineer will then select using ALDOT two transverse locations within the width of the pavement at each of the longitudinal locations selected .
The average of all the measurements within a pavement testing unit will be used by the Engineer to determine the thickness of the pavement testing unit. . Verification of Contractors Determination of Concrete Pavement Thickness .
The Department will use the Magnetic Imaging Technology MIT ScanT to verify the Contractors measurements of the concrete pavement thickness .
The average of all the MIT ScanT readings within a pavement testing unit will be used by the Engineer to verify the thickness of the pavement testing unit .
If the Contractors average thickness of the pavement testing unit varies from the verification thickness done by the Department by .
All concrete batching plants used in the production of concrete pavement for the Department shall be on List I Portland Cement Concrete Producers in the Departments Materials Sources and Devices with Special Acceptance Requirements manual .
Vibration equipment shall be used to vibrate the concrete for the full width and depth of the pavement without coming in contact with steel bars other internal materials and the underlying layer .
The vibration equipment shall be capable of being stopped when the vibration equipment is not moving along the pavement .
Low areas shall be filled with material integral with the underlying layer HMA or concrete pavement .
Fixed forms shall not be used for mainline pavement including shoulders when the total amount of concrete pavement required to be placed is greater than square yards .
The slip form method shall be used when the total amount of concrete pavement required to be placed is greater than square yards .
The slip form method may be used instead of fixed forms when the total amount of concrete pavement required to be placed is less than square yards. . Slip Form Paver .
Concrete shall be placed so that only minor hand finishing will be necessary to provide a dense and homogeneous concrete pavement .
The paver shall vibrate the concrete for the full width and depth of the strip of pavement being placed .
The edge slump shall be measured within an area that is inches from the longitudinal edges of each pavement slab .
The edge of the finished surface shall not vary more than of an inch from a foot straightedge placed perpendicular at a right angle to the edge of the outside of the pavement slab or to the edge of a pavement slab that is adjacent to another pavement slab .
If the evaporation rate measured in accordance with the requirements given in Section exceeds the maximum allowable rate continuous fogging or an evaporation barrier material monomolecular film shall be used to maintain moisture on the surface of the pavement .
Continuous fogging or an evaporation barrier shall be applied to the pavement no further than five feet behind the screeding operations .
If water begins to pond on the pavement the Contractor shall adjust the rate of fogging to minimize the ponding of water .
Where concrete is placed adjacent to a previously placed concrete pavement the previously placed pavement shall have attained a compressive strength of at least psi as determined by tests of standard specimens cured under the same climatic and moisture conditions as the concrete pavement unless other means of determining the compressive strength are allowed by the Engineer. . Vibrators .
All vertical joints shall be constructed perpendicular to the pavement surface .
All uncontrolled cracked pavement shall be removed and replaced in accordance with the details shown on the plans without additional compensation from the Department. . Types of Required Joints .
SECTION PORTLAND CEMENT CONCRETE PAVEMENT Longitudinal joints shall be constructed coincident with or parallel to the pavement centerline .
When using the slipform method the tie bars shall be inserted in the fresh concrete or anchored in appropriately sized holes drilled into the previously placed pavement .
A weakened plane joint shall be constructed by sawing the concrete when adjacent lanes of pavement are constructed at the same time by the simultaneous placement of concrete .
Transverse contraction joints shall consist of planes of weakness created by sawing grooves in the surface of the pavement in accordance with the details shown on the plans .
SECTION PORTLAND CEMENT CONCRETE PAVEMENT The construction joint shall be formed by placing the concrete against a header board set so as to form a joint at right angles to the pavement centerline vertically and horizontally .
The board shall be shaped to the cross slope of the pavement and shall be sufficiently rigid to prevent bending or movement during finishing operations .
The surface shall be checked foot inside of the edges of pavement at the centerline and at other points designated by the Engineer .
The pavement surface shall be finished with a burlap drag .
The burlap drag finish shall consist of dragging longitudinally along the full width of the pavement with a seamless strip of damp burlap or cotton fabric which will produce a gritty texture.The drag shall be maintained in such condition that the resultant surface is of uniform appearance .
Immediately after the pavement has been finished by the burlap drag the surface shall be grooved .
Grooving after the concrete has hardened shall be done by equipment designed specifically for grooving pavements .
Immediately after the finishing operations have been completed and as soon as marring of concrete will not occur the entire pavement surface shall be cured for a minimum period of hours . .
Before the pavement is opened to traffic and as early as is feasible all joints both longitudinal and transverse shall be filled with joint sealing material of a type specified by the plans .
They shall be removed carefully so as to avoid damage to the pavement .
Special pavement slabs reinforced as shown on the plans shall be constructed adjacent to bridges using concrete of the same type and proportions that are in the adjoining concrete pavement .
The end slabs shall be constructed in the same manner required for the construction of concrete pavement .
The Contractor shall protect the pavement and its appurtenances against both public traffic and traffic caused by his own employees and agents .
Any material deposited on the pavement considered detrimental to the surface shall be removed immediately .
This requirement shall include erection and maintenance of warning signs lights watchmen to direct traffic pavement bridges or crossovers etc .
The Contractor shall protect the concrete pavement from vehicular traffic during the curing period .
Completed portions of the concrete pavement may be opened tolight construction traffic only small pickup trucks with four wheels and cars when the compressive strength of the concrete pavement reaches psi but not earlier than hours .
Traffic shall not be parked on the pavement during the curing period and any curing compound andor moisture removed by the traffic tires shall be replaced immediately .
The compressive strength required for opening the pavement to traffic shall be determined by tests of standard concrete cylinders cured under the same climatic and moisture conditions as the slab unless maturity meters are used .
The pavement may be opened to unrestricted traffic after days if the day compressive strength has been achieved and the Engineer has accepted the pavement without restriction .
Any part of the pavement damaged by traffic or other causes prior to its final acceptance shall be repaired or replaced at no additional cost to the Department in a manner acceptable to the Engineer .
The smoothness test shall be performed as soon as practical after the pavement hardens sufficiently to prevent damage to the surface finish but no later than the next work day after placement of the concrete unless otherwise authorized by the Engineer .
Diamond grinding at any location shall be for the full width of the pavement test section .
If diamond grinding is performed the measurement of pavement thickness for acceptance and payment will be made after diamond grinding is completed .
The determination of the pavement thickness will be by coring a location determined by the Engineer using ALDOT .
All test sections of pavement where the Mean Roughness Index remains greater than inches per mileshall be removed and replaced in accordance with the details shown on the plans by the Contractor without additional compensation .
Concrete cylinders inches x inches in size will be made by the Department from randomly selected concrete batches in each pavement testing unit as designated by the Engineer .
If the average compressive strength of the cylinders is or greater but less than of the required day compressive strength a price adjustment will be applied to the applicable pay item for the increment of pavement represented by the low break .
If the average compressive strength of the cylinders is less than of the required strength the concrete pavement shall be removed and replaced in accordance with the details shown on the plans without additional compensation . .
The amount of concrete pavement to be paid for under this section shall be the number of square yards square meters of pavement completed and accepted measured in place and calculated to the nearest square yard square meter .
The width will be the width of the pavement shown on the typical cross section of the plans plus additional widening where called for or directed by the Engineer in writing .
The width will be the outside to outside measurement of the pavement including any area covered by integral curb or concrete median strip .
The square yardage square meters of concrete pavement and bridge end slab measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price bid per square yard square meter which payment shall be full compensation for furnishing and placing all materials including any reinforcing steel and supports anchor concrete sleeper slab concrete structural steel except bridge joint armor plates dowels and all other joint material any additives and for all materials equipment tools labor and incidentals required to complete the work including the finishing grooving or tining of the surface .
No additional payment over the contract unit bid price will be made for any pavement which has an average thickness in excess of that shown on the plans .
The descriptions of mainline pavement testing unit and nonmainline pavement testing unit are given in .h and .h respectively .
SECTION PORTLAND CEMENT CONCRETE PAVEMENT Mainline pavement testing unitswill be designated for acceptance and payment based on smoothness concrete strength and pavement thickness .
Nonmainline pavement testing units will be designated for acceptance and payment based on concrete strength and pavement thickness. . Price Adjustment based on Smoothness .
Where the thickness of pavement measured as described in Article .
Payment for concrete pavement will be adjusted based on compressive strength as described in Article ..
The range of price adjustment based on pavement thickness is to .
If more than one price adjustment is required the product of the price adjustments percentage price adjustments multiplied together will be applied to the contract price for the pavement .
The pavement shall be removed and replaced without extra compensation if the following price adjustments occur The Mean Roughness Index is greater than inches per mile per section The deficiency in pavement thickness exceeds .
inches The compressive strength is less than of the required compressive strength The product of the price adjustments for pavement thickness and compressive strength in the pavement is less than .
Other conditions of deficiency may result in a requirement that the pavement must be removed and replaced without additional compensation .
The work covered by this Section consists of the raising and leveling of concrete pavements that have settled by the injection of grout under the pavement using hydraulic pressure to raise the pavement to its designated grade .
The equipment for slabjacking of concrete pavement shall be that customarily used in the slabjacking of concrete pavement consisting of at least the following a .
inch mm diameter or other approved diameter holes through the rigid pavement .
h. A positive action pump capable of forcing grout through a drilled hole into voids and cavities beneath the pavement slab .
Slabjacking shall stop if the temperature is F C and falling or when the subgrade contains an abnormal amount of moisture as evidenced by standing water on the pavement or in joints or cracks .
Hole drilling patterns for pavement jacking shall be determined by the Contractor in the field based on conditions such as the size or length of the pavement area to be raised the elevation difference subgrade and drainage conditions location of joints and cracks and similar local circumstances .
The injection holes shall be drilled through treated base so the base may be lifted with the pavement .
SECTION SLABJACKING OF PORTLAND CEMENT CONCRETE PAVEMENT The Contractor shall pump in a pattern and in the amount required to raise the pavement to within of an inch mm of the designated grade .
During the jacking operation the discharge end of the grouting apparatus shall not extend below the lower surface of the concrete pavement .
If the pavement is bonded to the subgrade brief bursts of pressure to psi .
Any part of the pavement raised above the tolerances listed in Subitem .b.a .
foot mm the Department at its option may require removal and replacement of the pavement without cost to the Department and to its satisfaction with regard to area involved method and time of replacement and materials involved .
After the slabjacking has been completed at a location and before cleaning and sealing of cracks the pavement surface shall be tested with a foot .
m straightedge placed on the surface parallel to the centerline of the lane at points as directed across the width of the pavement and lapping the length of the straightedge progressing longitudinally along the pavement or with an approved rolling straightedge .
m straightedge the pavement in the affected area shall be repaired to the Engineers satisfaction without additional compensation such repair may require removal and replacement of the affected area .
The work covered by this Section consists of the stabilization of existing unstable concrete pavement slabs by pressure pumping of a specified grout under the slabs along with the removal and replacement of designated shattered paving slabs or sections of slabs .
The word slab in this Section shall mean not only a slab or a portion of a slab in a jointed concrete pavement system but also a portion of a continuously reinforced concrete pavement .
Pressure pumping of grout or subsealing of the pavement slabs is intended to stabilize the slab by filling voids and cavities under the slabs with a grout mixture that will form a hard insoluble mass .
Removal and replacement of concrete pavement shall be as directed by the Engineer .
Cracking in concrete pavement is defined as follows Hairline cracks Small tight cracks which in width resemble shrinkage cracks .
Appropriate repair procedures for the various types of cracked slabs in a jointed pavement are as follows Low severity cracking will not require the removal of pavement .
Concrete for Portland Cement concrete pavement replacement shall meet the requirements of Section utilizing either Type III cement or Type I cement containing a nonchloride SECTION PRESSURE GROUTING AND REPAIR OF PORTLAND CEMENT CONCRETE PAVEMENT accelerator .
The equipment for pressure grouting of concrete pavement shall be that customarily used in the pressure grouting of earthen embankments or in mudjacking of concrete pavement consisting of at least the following a .
inch mm diameter or other approved diameter holes through the rigid pavement .
d. A portable gage apparatus which operates from the shoulder and is capable of monitoring slab movement during grouting of holes near the pavement edge .
m outside the edge of paving during the monitoring of movement and shall be moved along the shoulder during the grouting of holes along the pavement edge .
h. A positive action pump capable of forcing grout through a drilled hole into voids and cavities beneath the pavement slab .
The equipment for removal and replacement of the concrete pavement slabs shall be suitable for the purpose intended and approved by the Engineer .
Pressure grouting shall stop if the temperature is F C and falling or when the subgrade contains an abnormal amount of moisture as evidenced by standing water on the pavement or in joints or cracks .
The drills shall be rotated to avoid cracking the pavement and to provide satisfactory holes of the proper diameter for effective operations in pressure grouting .
When drilling holes the drills shall be held as nearly perpendicular to the pavement surface as possible .
The discharge end of the pipe shall not extend below the lower surface of the concrete pavement .
The grout shall be removed to a minimum depth of inches mm below the pavement surface .
concrete sand by volume shall then be placed in the hole rodded and leveled with the pavement surface .
The sections of pavement to be removed may be removed in any manner approved by the Engineer which does not damage the underlying base layer adjacent concrete slabs or the joint steel .
Joint steel shall be cleaned and reconditioned to provide the same load transfer andor tie as in the original pavement design .
Any damaged or destroyed steel which in the opinion of the Engineer would not function properly shall be replaced in kind and retied to the old pavement by drilling an appropriate size hole of the proper depth and anchoring the new bar with an approved adhesive material .
All tie bars and dowel bars tied to the old pavement shall be anchored into place with an approved adhesive material in such a manner as to meet a pound kN minimum pullout requirement .
Unless shown otherwise by the plans the surface finish and slope of the new pavement shall be the same as the adjoining pavement slabs .
If the pavement is to be covered by a bituminous overlay a wood float finish and straight slope will be acceptable .
All joints except expansion joints with adjacent pavement shall be butt type tied construction joints .
All materials necessary to repair or reconstruct the joints in or adjacent to the concrete pavement replacement is considered incidental to said replacement .
The Contractor shall use such approved methods as necessary to keep all pavement surfaces adjacent to this operation reasonably clean of excess grout or other materials at all times .
Concrete pavement removed will be measured in square yards square meters computed from surface measurements taken to the nearest .
Concrete pavement replacement slabs will be measured by computing the theoretical cubic yards cubic meters of concrete necessary to replace the removed slab .
Drill holes for stabilizing the concrete pavement measured as noted above will be paid for at the contract unit price bid per each which shall be full compensation for the drilling of the holes and the sealing of the holes after the satisfactory use thereof and includes the furnishing of equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to complete this item of work. . Portland Cement Pressure Grout .
Removal of concrete pavement slabs measured as noted above will be paid for at the contract unit price bid per square yard square meter which shall be full compensation for the sawing and satisfactory removal and disposal of the old concrete for the reconditioning or replacement of all steel and the concrete joint including all equipment tools labor and other incidentals necessary to complete this item of work . .
Concrete pavement replacement slabs measured as noted above will be paid for at the contract unit price bid per cubic yard cubic meter which shall be full compensation for the furnishing of the concrete mix the hauling of the mix the forming placing including any SECTION CLEANING AND SEALING JOINTS AND CRACKS IN CONCRETE PAVEMENT new steel sawing and sealing of joints finishing and curing of the slab and for all equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to complete this item of work. . Smoothness Acceptance .
This Section shall cover the work of cleaning and sealing joints and cracks in existing concrete pavement .
The Engineer will prohibit the use of equipment that may damage the pavement or result in a joint or crack that can not be sealed .
Material placed to form an expansion joint during the original construction of the pavement shall not be removed .
If water is used to facilitate cutting the resulting slurry shall be completely removed from the joint and the pavement surfaces before it dries .
Removal of the slurry shall be by flushing the joint and pavement surface with a jet of water under pressure and by the use of other tools as required by the Engineer .
After a joint or crack has been sealed all surplus primer or sealant on the pavement surfaces shall be promptly removed .
Spalls adjacent to joints and cracks that are smaller than square inches mm² measured across the surface of the pavement shall be cleaned with the cleaning of the joint or crack .
The cleaning and sealing of concrete pavement joints and cracks will be measured in linear feet meters of joint or crack length to the nearest .
m along the surface of the pavement . .
The contract unit price for cleaning and sealing concrete pavement joints and cracks shall be full compensation for sawing the joints routing the cracks furnishing all materials equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to clean and seal all designated concrete pavement joints and cracks .
This Section shall cover the work of grinding Portland Cement Concrete pavement at locations shown on the plans or directed by the Engineer .
It is intended that areas of the pavement surface designated by the plans or Engineer to be processed shall be ground to eliminate joint or crack faults and to provide a constant pavement cross slope within the designated grinding limits in each lane .
Grinding equipment shall be a selfpropelled unit specifically designed to grind Portland Cement concrete pavement using diamond grinding blades capable of grinding the designated surfaces without causing spalls at cracks or joints or at other locations .
It is the intent that the work of grinding of the pavement surface be performed under traffic .
The area of pavement surfaces to be ground will be designated on the plans unless directed otherwise by the Engineer .
This preliminary work includes the stabilization of designated pavement slabs and removal and replacement of certain slab sections as noted by plan details or as directed by the Engineer .
It is the intent of this specification that the faulting at joints and cracks be eliminated the overall roughness be within the specified limits and that the pavement surface of the lane designated for treatment be textured .
The grinding process shall produce a pavement surface that is true to grade and uniform in appearance with a longitudinal line type texture .
The transverse slope of the ground pavement shall be uniform to a degree that no depressions or misalignment of slope greater than of an inch mm in feet .
m straightedge placed perpendicular to the pavement centerline .
Smoothness requirements shall be applicable to the grinding of the concrete pavement surfaces if Pay Item C Smoothness Testing Certified Inertial Profiler is included in the contract. . Smoothness Testing Procedure .
The Mean Roughness Index shall be measured after the grinding of the concrete pavement surface .
The grinding of pavement ordered and accepted will be measured in square yards square meters computed from surface measurements taken to the nearest .
m on the processed pavement .
Those areas of pavement requiring corrective action due to inappropriate or unacceptable work or negligence on the part of the Contractor will be excluded from measurement for payment .
The grinding of pavement ordered and accepted measured as noted above will be paid for at the contract unit price bid which shall be full compensation for the grinding of the pavement the removal of grinding residue and the satisfactory disposal thereof the cleaning of the pavement and for all materials equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
Any pavement that settles or breaks over a pipe shall be replaced or repaired by the Contractor at the option of the Engineer without additional compensation .
This type pipe is designed to be placed with the slotted drain at or near the pavement shoulder or median surface .
The geotextile will be measured by the square yard square meter computed from the width from pavement edge drain to pavement edge drain and the length as shown on the plans or established in writing by the Engineer .
This Section shall cover the work of constructing pavement and special underdrain .
Pavement underdrain shall be drain lines in the median and at the edges of pavement and shall include collection pipes and outlets .
The installation of pavement and special underdrain shall be done in coordination with other work to prevent damage to the roadway .
Type A and B Special Underdrain Outlets will be measured in units of feet m with measurements made along the center of the outfall pipe from the center of the pavement median or edge drain to the centroid of the outfall end .
This section shall cover the work of furnishing and placing a geotextile between pavement layers for the purpose of incorporating a waterproofing and stress relieving membrane within the pavement structure .
This specification is applicable to geotextile membranes used for full SECTION PAVING GEOTEXTILES coverage of the pavement or as strips over transverse and longitudinal pavement joints .
It is not intended to describe membrane systems specifically designed for pavement joints and localized spot repairs. . Materials .
The material used to impregnate and seal the geotextile as well as bond it to both the base pavement and overlay shall be a paving grade asphalt recommended by the geotextile manufacturer and approved by the Engineer .
When the ambient temperature is so low that the normal wicking of the asphalt sealant into the geotextile does not occur a pneumatic roller may be used to ensure geotextile bond to the adjoining pavement layers especially where thin lifts or chip seals are being placed. . Construction Requirements .
Air and pavement temperatures shall be sufficient to allow the asphalt sealant to hold the geotextile in place .
The asphalt sealant shall be spray applied uniformly to the prepared dry pavement surface at the rate of .
Brooming andor pneumatic rolling will be required to maximize geotextile contact with the pavement surface .
This section shall cover the furnishing and placing of geotextiles for use as a permeable separator to prevent mixing of dissimilar materials such as subgrades and surfaced and unsurfaced pavement structures zones in embankments foundations and select fill materials .
Weep holes approximately inches mm in diameter shall be placed in alternate runs of the pavement where deemed necessary by the Engineer .
Longitudinal contraction joints may be ordered for paving widths in excess of feet m to control pavement cracking .
To line up with expansion joints of adjoining pavement curbs gutters etc .
Castings shall be set below the finished grade of the pavement about mm .
Expansion joints shall be placed in curb andor gutter to match those in concrete pavement where the two are adjacent . .
Expansion joint filler shall extend from the bottom of the curb andor gutter to within inch mm of the top the sealer shall be of an inch mm thick and shall be recessed of an inch mm from the top. . Contraction joints shall be placed in curb andor gutter to match those in concrete pavement where the two are adjacent but in no instance more than feet meters between joints .
The contraction joints shall be sawed or otherwise cut inches mm deep by of an inch mm wide and shall extend inches mm below the pavement surface .
Concrete used in the construction of the median strip shall be Class A concrete complying with the requirements of Section except that when the median strip is placed on concrete pavement the concrete may be of the same type used in the pavement .
The median strip shall be constructed on any approved surface normally a subbase base or pavement layer .
Cast Iron valve boxes shall be plumb and centered over the wrench nut of the valve with the box cover flush with the finished pavement or unpaved area .
Backfill shall be tamped around each box located in the pavement area to the required density of the adjacent material .
Backfill shall be tamped around each box located in the pavement area to the required density of the adjacent material .
Water Mains shall have a minimum cover of inches mm under pavement and inches mm under ditches .
m when under pavement .
Valve boxes shall be plumb and centered over the wrench nut of the valve with the box cover flush with the finished pavement or unpaved area .
Backfill shall be tamped around each box located in the pavement area to the required density of the adjacent material .
Gas Mains shall have a minimum cover of inches mm under ditches and inches mm under pavement unless stated otherwise on the project plans .
Care shall be exercised during covering operations to preserve the line grade and crosssection of the seeded areas so that areas adjacent to pavement walks etc .
A temporary solid line stripe of marking tape used on an underlying pavement layer or any type temporary stripe of marking tape used on a wearing surface shall be removed .
Areas to be striped shall be thoroughly cleaned of all dirt oil and other debris in a way that will not damage the pavement surface .
Striping shall not begin until the Engineer has inspected the pavement surface and has informed the Contractor that striping may begin . .
The rate of placement for temporary applications shall be gallons per mile for a inch wide solid stripe Lkm for a mm wide solid stripe on rough pavement surfaces such as Open Graded Friction Course OGFC milled surfaces or when used as a temporary stripe that will not be covered within calendar days .
Lkm for a mm wide solid stripe on rough pavement surfaces such as Open Graded Friction Course OGFC and milled surfaces .
Asphalt pavement shall be allowed to cure for a period of calendar days before the application of the Class H paint .
Concrete pavement shall be allowed to cure for a period of calendar days before the application of the Class H paint . .
Areas to be striped shall be thoroughly cleaned of all dirt oil and other debris in a way that will not damage the pavement surface .
Striping shall not begin until the Engineer has inspected the pavement surface and has informed the Contractor that striping may begin .
Permanent Class H paint shall not be placed during rain or mist or if the pavement surface is wet .
Class H paint shall only be placed when thepavement temperature is ºF ºC and rising. . Equipment for Application .
Rough pavement surfaces are such surfaces as Open Graded Friction Course OGFC and milled surfaces .
Lkm for a mm wide solid stripe on rough pavement surfaces such as Open Graded Friction Course OGFC and milled surfaces .
Asphalt pavement shall be allowed to cure for a period of calendar days before the application of the thermoplastic .
Concrete pavement shall be allowed to cure for a period of calendar days before the application of the thermoplastic . .
Areas to be striped shall be thoroughly cleaned of all dirt oil and other debris in a way that will not damage the pavement surface .
A primer sealer or surface preparation adhesive of the type recommended by the manufacturer of the Class thermoplastic shall be applied to concrete surfaces concrete pavement and bridge decks before the application of the thermoplastic .
Striping shall not begin until the Engineer has inspected the pavement surface and has informed the Contractor that striping may begin . .
Class thermoplastic shall not be placed during rain or mist or if the pavement surface is wet .
Thepavement surface temperature shall be at least F C and rising before application will be allowed to asphalt pavement surfaces .
Thepavement surface temperature shall be at least F C and rising before application will be allowed to concrete pavement surfaces. . Equipment for Application .
Asphalt pavement shall be allowed to cure for a period of calendar days before the application of the thermoplastic .
Concrete pavement shall be allowed to cure for a period of calendar days before the application of the thermoplastic . .
Areas to be striped shall be thoroughly cleaned of all dirt oil and other debris in a way that will not damage the pavement surface .
A primer sealer or surface preparation adhesive of the type recommended by the manufacturer of the Class T thermoplastic shall be applied to concrete surfaces concrete pavement and bridge decks before the application of the thermoplastic .
Striping shall not begin until the Engineer has inspected the pavement surface and has informed the Contractor that striping may begin . .
Class T thermoplastic shall not be placed during rain or mist or if the pavement surface is wet .
Thepavement surface temperature shall be at least F C and rising before application will be allowed to asphalt pavement surfaces .
Thepavement surface temperature shall be at least F C and rising before application will be allowed to concrete pavement surfaces. . Equipment for Application .
Class tape shall be applied in accordance with the procedures recommended by the manufacturer.Tape stripe shall not be placed when the pavement temperature is below F C. Tape may be placed at lower temperatures if shown in the manufacturers recommendations for placement and allowed by the Engineer .
Existing traffic stripe permanent or temporary markers and adhesive shall be removed by a method that will not damage or disfigure the appearance of pavement surfaces that will be visible at the completion of construction .
Hiding the old stripe by covering it with a striping material that is colored to match the appearance of the pavement surface will only be allowed if approved in writing by the Engineer .
Covering the old stripe will only be considered for hiding what may remain of the stripe on rough pavement surfaces like Open Graded Friction Course after other methods of removal have failed to adequately remove the old stripe .
Portions or as much as the entire pavement surface shall be overlaid with a bituminous plant mix layer in extreme cases of disfigurement of the pavement due to stripe removal .
Sections of traffic stripe that have been marred or picked up by trafficshall be repaired and the pavement shall be cleaned outside the limits of the stripe .
The length of Solid or Broken Traffic Stripe Item A and the length of Solid or Broken Traffic Stripe Item G measured as noted above will be paid for at the respective contract unit prices and shall be full compensation for the stripe including the cleaning of the pavement the furnishing and applying of the striping material and for all equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to complete the item of work .
The length of Dotted Traffic Stripe Item B measured as noted above will be paid for at the contract unit price which shall be full compensation for furnishing all materials of the appropriate color consistent with the use of the stripe in accordance with the plan details the SECTION TRAFFIC CONTROL MARKINGS AND LEGENDS preparation of the pavement the application of the striping material and for all equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to complete this item of work .
When the traffic stripe to be removed consists of pavement markers used as traffic stripes the cost of removing markers marker adhesive and existing paint plastic or tape located between the markers shall also be included in the price .
Asphalt pavement shall be allowed to cure for a period of calendar days before the application of the thermoplastic .
Concrete pavement shall be allowed to cure for a period of calendar days before the application of the thermoplastic .
Areas to be striped shall be thoroughly cleaned of all dirt oil and other debris in a way that will not damage the pavement surface .
Striping shall not begin until the Engineer has inspected the pavement surface and has informed the Contractor that striping may begin .
Preformed thermoplastic shall not be placed during rain or mist or if the pavement surface is wet .
The white and yellow pavement markings shall attain an initial retroreflectance of not less than mcdlxm .
The accepted square feet square meters of Traffic Control Markings or Legends Items A B H and I measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price bid which shall be full compensation for the item complete in place and includes the cleaning of the pavement furnishing and applying the markings or legends and for all materials equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
The accepted square feet square meters of Temporary Traffic Control Markings or Legends Items D and E measured as noted above will be paid for at the contract unit price bid which shall be full compensation for the item complete in place and includes the cleaning of the pavement furnishing and applying the markings or legends traffic control for placing and for all materials equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
This Section shall cover the work of furnishing and installing pavement markers of the Class and Type specified by the plans or proposal at the locations designated on the plans or directed by the Engineer all in conformity with the plans and these Specifications .
and metering the amount of adhesive required to affix each marker to the pavement .
Reflective pavement markers shall be placed at the designated location in such a way that the color of the reflected light is in accordance with the plan details or as directed by the Engineer .
The portions of the highway surface to which the marker is to be attached shall be free of dirt curing compound grease oil moisture loose or unsound pavement or any other material which might affect the attachment of the marker to the pavement with the area to which the marker is to be affixed prepared by sand blasting immediately prior to placement of the marker .
The general locations of the pavement markers will be indicated by the plan details or directed by the Engineer .
After placement of any temporary markers the Contractor shall maintain them at his expense in such a manner as to provide good definite delineation during hours of both daylight and darkness until they are overlaid by a subsequent pavement layer or they are removed as directed by the plans or the Engineer or in case of a detour road until traffic is removed from the detour .
Upon completion of the work under this Section any damage to the pavement or other facilities caused by the operation or the Contractors equipment shall be repaired by the Contractor as directed without additional cost to the State .
Said contract unit prices bid shall be full compensation for furnishing and installing the pavement markers removing pavement markers if required and for all materials equipment labor and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
The posts shall be set by driving or other approved means to a depth of not less than inches mm below top of the median and to such greater depth as may be required to erect the delineator at the required elevation above the pavement .
After the post has been set the hole up to the bottom of the pavement shall be backfilled and compacted the hole for the depth of the median pavement shall then be filled with one of the appropriate bituminous plant mixes provided in the Specifications. . Attaching Delineators .
Any damage to slopes pavement etc .
Positioning of the mile kilometer post relative to the pavement or shoulder edge shall be as shown on the plans .
In addition should the Contractors equipment damage the shoulders ditches slopes or pavement during the performance of this work he shall restore said areas to the original condition without cost to the State . .
All horizontal members of supporting frames shall be truly horizontal and at correct height so that the bottom of the sign shall be at the height above pavement specified and proper horizontal position .
Improvements such as sidewalks curbs gutters portland cement concrete and asphaltic concrete pavement bituminous surfacing base material and any other improvements removed broken or damaged by the Contractor shall be replaced or reconstructed with the same kind of materials as found on the work or with materials of equal quality .
All foundations when abandoned the top of the foundation anchor bolts frame and conduit shall be removed to a depth of not less than inches mm or as directed below the surface of existing pavement .
Before cutting required loops into the pavement any existing loops that are not quadrupole loops shall be sawed in two locations and quadrupole loops shall be sawed in three locations on the long side to prevent false readings when the required loops are placed into the pavement .
Each loop wire shall be placed in its own individual sawcut to the edge of pavement .
No portion of the loop shall be located within feet m of any conductive material in the pavement such as manhole covers water valves and grates etc .
After installation of the loops the slots shall be sealed with an approved sealant manufactured specifically for embedding loop detector wire in concrete or bituminous pavements .
Slots for installing the loops shall be formed by sawing with approved equipment designed for sawing pavement to the width and depth indicated by the plan details or directed .
If the Contractor should encounter extraordinary circumstances such as major utilities under existing pavement which the location can not be accurately determined he may request in writing permission to open cut a trench in lieu of jacking or boring .
All excavation required for the installation and placement of conduits foundations junction boxes poles and other appliances shall be performed in such manner as to cause the least possible injury to pavement curbs or other improvements .
All conduits required under pavement sidewalks etc .
Loop wire shall be installed in slots cut in the pavement at locations designated on the plans or as directed by the Engineer .
The slot shall be formed by sawing pavement with approved equipment designed for sawing pavement to the width and depth indicated by the plan details or directed .
After installation of the loops the slots shall be sealed with an approved sealant manufactured specifically for embedding loop detector wire in concrete or bituminous pavements .
Installation of the casing shall be made either prior to placement of the pavement with thick wall rigid metallic or rigid casing or it shall be jacked or bored through the roadbed under the pavement using thick wall rigid metallic casing providing a minimum cover of inches mm .
Unless specified on the plans trenches shall not be excavated in existing pavement or paved shoulders to install conduit .
When it is necessary to place conduit under an existing pavement the conduit shall be installed in accordance with Section .
All excavation required for the installation and placement of conduits and other materials shall be performed in such manner as to cause the least possible injury to pavement curbs or other improvements .
All conduits required to be under pavement sidewalks etc .
If the Contractor should encounter extraordinary circumstances such as major utilities under existing pavement which the location can not be accurately determined he may request in writing permission to open cut a trench in lieu of jacking or boring .
The location legends sheeting dimensions spacing of supports and horizontal and vertical placement with respect to the pavement of warning signs barricades and other traffic control devices shall be as required by plan details MUTCD and as directed or approved by the Engineer .
Cones of smaller height may be used for operations such as pavement striping and marking but no direct payment will be made .
Other traffic control items such as traffic control stripes legends and markings portable concrete barriers sequential chevron and arrow boards and pavement markers when so required will be measured and paid for under the appropriate Section for such provided in the Specifications .
Unless shown otherwise on the plans trenches shall not be excavated in existing pavement or paved shoulders to install conduit .
When it is necessary to place conduit under an existing pavement the conduit shall be installed in accordance with the requirements given in Section .
Improvements such as sidewalks curbs gutters Portland cement concrete and asphaltic concrete pavement bituminous surfacing base material and any other improvements broken or damaged by the Contractor shall be replaced or reconstructed with the same kind of materials as found on the work or with materials of equal quality .
The outline of all areas to be removed in Portland cement concrete sidewalks and pavements shall be cut to a minimum depth of .
inches mm with a saw prior to removing the sidewalk and pavement materials .
Installation of the casing shall be made prior to placement of the pavement or it shall be jacked or bored through the roadbed under the pavement providing a minimum cover of inches mm .
Installation of the casing shall be made prior to placement of the pavement or it shall be precision directional bored through the roadbed under the pavement at the depth shown on the plans or as approved by the Engineer .
In general this will include materials such as Pavement Markers Concrete Joint Fillers and Sealants Concrete Patching Materials Epoxies Reflective Material for Object Safety Markings Membranes for Waterproofing Joints and certain pavement marking materials .
There will be no fineness modulus or mortar strength requirements for concrete sand used in bituminous pavements .
Gravel used to produce manufactured sand for use in concrete pavement or bridge superstructure concrete except prestress concrete shall have a bulk specific gravity greater than .
AASHTO T . Manufactured sand produced from crushing limestone shall not be used in bridge decks or concrete pavement .
when used in Portland cement concrete pavement shall be .
When used in bituminous pavements local source material shall be nonplastic .
Type white pigmented shall be used on concrete pavement .
For concrete pavement the rate of application shall be gallon L to not more than square feet m² applied in two applications .
When this type of curing is used the pavement shall be cured initially with burlap cloth polyethylene sheets or waterproof paper as specified in Article .
As soon as the covering material is removed the surfaces and sides of the pavement shall be covered with a blanket of earth or sand not less than inches mm thick .
When permission is given to open the pavement to traffic the covering material shall be removed and the pavement cleaned and swept .
Expansion joint filler for concrete pavement curb gutter combination curb and gutter flumes slope paving and other miscellaneous concrete structures shall be one of the materials provided by AASHTO M or AASHTO M with the latter being modified to allow a maximum of water absorption .
The lubricant adhesive used in installing the compression seals in joints shall meet the requirements of ASTM D for concrete pavement and ASTM D for bridge joints. . Construction Method .
Paved inverts shall be formed by the addition of a smooth pavement in the invert of the pipe filling the corrugations for at least of the circumference for a round pipe and for an arch pipe .
The pavement shall have a minimum thickness of of an inch mm above the crest of the corrugations except where the upper edges intersect the corrugations .
Bituminous coating and pavement lining shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M for Type B sheets with the pavement lining formed from material compatible with the coating material and otherwise meeting the same basic requirements of Section of AASHTO M . Connecting bands shall meet the requirements of Subarticle .d and have appropriate waterproof seals in accordance with Article .. Damage to coating and pavement linings shall be repaired in accordance with the appropriate provisions of AASHTO M for polymeric material and approved asphalt mastic as noted in AASHTO M . .
Preformed thermoplastic materials and permanent tape products shall be marked with content color date of manufacture and lot number. . Color and Luminance Factor The materials for pavement stripe markings and legends shall meet the performance requirements given in ASTM D as tested in accordance with the requirements given in ASTM E with the instrument set to read x y and Y coordinates with degree degree bydirectional geometry observer angle degrees and illuminant D with the exception of the following The initial daytime chromaticity for yellow materials shall fall within the box created by the following coordinates SECTION TRAFFIC MARKING MATERIALS Initial Daytime Chromaticity Coordinates Corner Points X . . . . Y . . . .
Areas subject to frequent mowing are roadway shoulders medians and front slopes flatter than extending feet beyond the edge of pavement or to the toe of the front slope whichever is less .
During this season Ryegrass Bermudagrass and Clover are required where vegetation must be established within an area no further than feet m from the edge of mainline pavement .
This is usually required for short duration work that is done on pavement resurfacing projects . .
Annual Ryegrass is required where vegetation must be established within an area that extends further than feet m from the edge of mainline pavement .
During this season Ryegrass Bermudagrass and Clover are required where vegetation must be established within an area no further than feet m from the edge of mainline pavement .
This is usually required for short duration work that is done on pavement resurfacing projects . .
Annual Ryegrass is required where vegetation must be established within an area that extends further than feet m from the edge of mainline pavement .
During this season Ryegrass Bermudagrass and Clover are required where vegetation must be established within an area no further than feet m from the edge of mainline pavement .
This is usually required for short duration work that is done on pavement resurfacing projects . .
Annual Ryegrass is required where vegetation must be established within an area that extends further than feet m from the edge of mainline pavement .
Adhesives furnished for use to affix permanent pavement markers to the pavement shall be listed on List V PERMANENT PAVEMENT MARKERS MARKER ADHESIVE DELINEATORS AND HAZARD MARKERS of the Departments Materials Sources and Devices With Special Acceptance Requirements Manual .
Adhesives furnished to affix temporary markers to the pavement shall be any suitable type of adhesive for the intended purpose except that in those locations where the markers will be required to be removed the adhesive shall be a type that will allow for the complete removal of the marker without scarring or disfiguring the pavement. . Epoxy Adhesives for Bonding Concrete to Concrete and Concrete to Other Materials .
Epoxy adhesive furnished for use in bonding concrete and other materials except pavement markers shall meet the appropriate requirements of AASHTO M for the type of work for which the adhesive is to be used .
The Department has established LIST V PERMANENT PAVEMENT MARKERS TEMPORARY PAVEMENT MARKERS MARKER ADHESIVE DELINEATORS AND HAZARD MARKERS of the Departments manual Materials Sources and Devices With Special Acceptance Requirements for permanent pavement markers .
Class A pavement markers shall meet the requirements of ASTM D with Surface Characteristics No Designation Marker with plastic lens surface .
Class AH pavement markers shall meet the requirements of ASTM D with Surface Characteristics Designated H Marker with hard abrasionresistant lens surface .
Class B pavement markers shall be formed of heat fixed ceramic base material constructed in such a manner as to form a solid watertight unit .
Bituminous adhesive used to affix permanent pavement markers to the pavement shall be one of those listed in List V of the Departments manual Materials Sources and Devices with Special Acceptance Requirements .
The adhesive used to affix the temporary markers to the pavement shall be any suitable type of adhesive for the intended purpose except that in those locations where the markers will be required to be removed the adhesive shall be a type that will allow for the complete removal of the marker without scarring or disfiguring the pavement .
Rigid metallic conduit shall be placed under existing pavement by approved jacking or drilling methods .
Jacking and drilling pits shall be kept at least feet mm clear of the edge of any type pavement whenever possible .
Excessive use of water that may cause undermining of the pavement will not be permitted .
INDEX A abbreviations abutment and bulkhead anchors acceptance acceptance inspection final acceptance for maintenance accidents reporting adhesives advertisement for bids aggregate bases and subbases coarse fine slope protection aggregate foundations air entraining additives asphalt pavement asphalt binders emulsions pay factors quality assurance quality control quality control quality assurance referee testing sampling of lots and sublots test strips testing lots assignment of contract authority of inspectors of the engineer award of contract B backfill at bridge structures at culvert pipes cement mortar flowable foundation barricade permanent barricades and signs base soil and aggregate cement treatment classification lime treatment maintenance of work mixing placing sampling and testing shoulder bidders qualifications bituminous base surface treatment triple layer surface treatments bonds bridge deck overlay bridges construction requirements detour elastomeric bearings materials for construction precast nonprestressed concrete members prestressed concrete members reinforced concrete decks seals for joints Buy America C cable guiderail cancelled work cement masonry Portland Cement changed conditions claims appeal board auditing committee compensation documentation notice of intent record keeping cleaning drainage structures clearing and grubbing coatings .
See paint cofferdam and pumping cofferdams or sheeting and shoring collusion combination bids compaction density requirements of embankment of foundation backfill of lime stabalized roadbed of soil and aggregate base layers computer bidding concrete acceptance chemical admixtures classification construction joints curing curing materials finishing forms handling and placing materials minor structure prequalification requirements for mixture design sampling and inspection seal weather limitations for placement INDEX concrete pavement cleaning and sealing joints and cracks construction requirements grinding pavement surface materials pressure grouting slabjacking conduits electrical conduits under roadways construction fuel contaminated soil contract documents furnished by the Department contract time assignment of contract time beginning and end of contract time days work not permitted extension of contract time failure to complete work within contract time contractors personnel superintendent cooperation between contractors culverts concrete box culverts corrugated metal pipe pipe end treatments curb concrete curb and gutter D default of contract definitions delineators density embankment layers materials subject to compaction requirements modified and improved roadbed nondestructive testing devices roadbed or lime stabilization subbase and base layers disadvantaged business enterprise DBE disqualification from bidding drainage plane layer drains grouted rubble slotted structures for inlets junction boxes trench drilled shaft construction casing concrete placement requirements construction methods drilling equipment encased excavations materials slurry testing tolerances drilled shaft excavation exploratory shaft excavation obstruction removal slurry E embankment encasement pipe for utilities epoxy adhesive erosion control excavation hydraulic erosion control products rolled erosion control products temporary erosion control temporary seeding errors plan and specifications errors excavation benching borrow channel disposal of surplus material finishing and dressing for bridges for structures other than bridges measurement muck roadway roadway and drainage rock unclassified undercutting extra work F fence barbed wire chain link construction safety materials for fence reset woven wire field office final estimate documentation final inspection flowable backfill flumes bituminous treated glass fiber soil cement flumes force account work fuel .
See construction fuel full depth reclamation G gas line pipe and appurtenances geometric controls INDEX geosynthetics reinforcement for slopes and soft soil geotextiles for paving for permeable asphalt treated base for separation of soil and aggregate for underdrain material requirements graves guardrail guardrail materials relocate H handrail for bridges and sidewalks hazard markers materials for hazard markers headlight glare screen herbicide postemergent preemergent I Immigration Law Alabama impact attenuator permanent portable truck mounted improved roadbed index asphalt index construction fuel inlets for drainage structures inspection by the engineer J joint filler materials joint sealant for HMA pavement L laboratories asphalt plant base soil and structure concrete plant field landslide corrections laws ordinances and regulations bidders knowledge of compliance with lighting nightime operations rehabilitation of roadway lighting roadway roadway lighting materials structures for lime sinks stabilized roadbed lines and grades liquidated damages load restrictions for hauling lumber M machine graded shoulders mailbox maintenance of the work markers land survey rightofway masonry brick and concrete block mortar rubble stone materials found on rightofway guarantee pits and waste areas requirement for new special acceptance requirements unacceptable median concrete median barrier concrete median strip micropiles microsurfacing mineral admixtures mineral filler mobilization MSDSAR N nightime operations notice to contractors P paint partial payments patents pavement markers payments final to subcontractors permeable asphalt treated base pest control piling cut off lengths lengths of piles load testing methods materials pile points piling materials concrete and steel INDEX splicing piles piling encasement pipe relaid roadway pipe culverts roadway pipe rehabilitation side drain planing milling pavement police officer polymer additives for asphalt materials precast concrete products price adjustments bituminous materials Q quantities altered approximate quantities in contract asphalt basis of payment final measurement R reinforcement .
See steel reinforcement removal and relocation of structures removal of miscellaneous facilities repair of bridges repair of defective work retaining wall soil nail soldier pile riprap construction requirements materials roadbed lime stabilized processing stabilized rock slopes S safety barrier portable concrete safety markings sand and gravel for miscellaneous use sanitary sewer scoring pavement surface seeds .
See Vegetation Establishment sequence of construction sewer sanitary storm sheet piling shotcrete sidewalks and driveways signs portable changeable message relocation and renovation sequential arrow and chevron sheeting type and class type sign materials structure renovation and relocation structures site conditions site conditions differing slope protection aggregate slope protection concrete slope protection slurry seal coat soil or aggregate surface special provisions specifications and plans coordination Specialty Items Items Specialty steel bridge coating steel reinforcement fabrication and installation reinforcement materials steel required to be USA product structural steel bolting structures for traffic signals Suspension of Work T tack coat taxes thin polymer overlay timber topsoil removal traffic control devices for construction work zones maintenance markings and legends traffic signals traffic stripe materials for traffic stripe U unbalanced bidding underdrain pavement underdrain pipe underdrain underground storage tanks underwater embankment utilities cooperation with minor utility adjustments utility encasement pipe V value engineering INDEX vegetation establishment acceptance mulching seeding in stubble seeds sequence soil preparation solid sodding tree wells vines shrubs and tree planting vines shrubs and trees vehicle permit oversize overweight W water for general use water line water pipe and appurtenances water wells waterproofing and dampproofing
