The graded portions of a highway within top and side slopes prepared as a foundation for the pavement structure and shoulders .
For work such as pavement markings manufacturers fabricators material suppliers brokers and services soliciting certified DMWBEs within miles of the contract location or on an upstate or downstate basis . .
The Department will be the sole judge in determining if the proposed VECP will result in a sufficient amount of direct or indirect cost savings to offset the Departments effort to review the VECP. . A VECP shall be consistent with the Departments design policies and basic design criteria provide the same service life or more facilitate economy of operations ease of maintenance and achieve the desired appearance and safety. . A VECP will not be allowed that changes the type andor thickness of the pavement structure and material or solely substitutes one material for another .
Examples of materials that may fall into this inappropriate substitution situation are drainage pipes bridge coatings pavement NEW YORK STATE DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS USC May markings etc .
The above paragraph shall not apply to concrete foundation for pavement or portland cement concrete pavement rejected as a result of core tests .
Prior to the use of construction equipment or vehicles with overlegal gross weights or axle loadings on any structure on any new pavement or on any resurfaced pavement within the contract limits the Contractor shall submit a written request to the Engineer .
When directed in writing by the Regional Construction Engineer the Contractor shall open to traffic any portion of new pavement andor structures before contract final acceptance .
Recycled materials currently approved by the Department include glass recycled asphalt pavement RAP recycled portland cement concrete aggregate RCA blast furnace slag fly ash microsilica waste stream plastics and tires .
As an alternative the pavement beneath overhead lines may be marked with spray paint or by other means approved by the Engineer .
Silica may be in soil concrete or asphalt pavement superstructure or substructure materials .
Exposure can occur during common construction tasks including but not limited to Using masonry saws grinders drills jackhammers andor chipping of rock cement concrete or asphalt concrete NEW YORK STATE DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS USC May Operating vehiclemounted drilling rigs milling operating crushing machines Concrete pavement rubblizing Using heavy equipment for demolition of brick cement concrete or masonry structures Abrasive blasting if the abrasive contains silica or of cement concrete rock or asphalt concrete Dry sweeping or pressurized air blowing of cement concrete rock sand or asphalt concrete dust .
Prior to nonemergency excavation for the purpose of movement or removal of earth rock pavement or other materials in or on the ground by use of mechanical equipment or blasting including but not limited to digging auguring backfilling boring drilling grading plowing in pulling in fence post or pile driving jack hammering pipe jacking pavement milling tree root removal sawcutting trenching tunneling and the installation of guiderail posts sign posts or underground conduit the Contractor shall notify the OneCall system of the date and location of the proposed work .
Excavation does not include the movement of earth by tools manipulated only by human or animal power vacuum excavation or saw cutting and jack hammering in connection with pavement restoration of a previous excavation where only the pavement is involved .
Powered equipment may be used to remove pavement or masonry within the tolerance zone but only to the depth of such pavement or masonry .
The removal of pavement or granular surfacing from and regrading of temporary roads or areas .
recycled asphalt pavement RAP in the form of chunks or millings and recycled portland cement concrete aggregate RCA .
Spoil may include excess soil and rock and contains recognizable uncontaminated concrete including incidental pavement markings asphalt pavement including incidental pavement markings brick glass or soil materials generated by the cleaning of drainage ditches culverts storm sewers catch basins or related appurtenances .
Nonhazardous industrial waste includes but is not limited to asbestos pavement marking waste contaminated soil empty drums and empty fuel tanks .
Pavement marking wastes including millings from the localized removal of only pavement markings and not surface milling including the pavement material and debris containing the removed markings generated by cleaning and removal operations shall be disposed of as nonhazardous industrial solid waste at a permitted solid waste management facility typically a municipal landfill .
Solid waste management facilities may question whether pavement marking wastes are regulated hazardous wastes because yellow pavement marking products may contain lead and chromium in the pigments .
Testing by the Department toxicity characteristic leaching potential TCLP of yellow pavement marking waste as well as the dried pure paint samples indicated that although it contained lead and chromium it did not meet the regulatory limit for classification as a hazardous waste and was therefore considered a nonhazardous industrial waste . .
The essential items in the contract shall include but will not be limited to the completion of or the safe working order of all pavement shoulders barrier guide rail impact attenuators drainage signs signals and other safety appurtenances so that the highway is safe for use by the traveling public without the use of temporary or emergency devices .
Grubbed stumps shall be moved immediately at least feet from the edge of pavement .
Exposed stumps not required to be removed but which are within feet of the edge of the pavement or are in a builtup area shall be chipped out to a depth of not less than inches below the finished grade and the holes backfilled if directed by the Engineer .
The Contractor shall repair any damage that may occur to the building pavement and other features as a result of the move .
Pieces of broken up concrete pavement from onsite pavement removal or inplace recycling i.e .
Proof rolling consists of applying test loads over the subgrade surface by means of a heavy pneumatictired roller of specified design to locate and permit timely correction of deficiencies likely to adversely affect performance of the pavement structure .
Sod and topsoil shall be removed where the final pavement grade is ft. or less above the existing ground surface and in other areas designated in the contract documents or by the NEW YORK STATE DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS USC May Engineer .
Where old pavement is encountered within ft. of the top of the subbase course it shall be broken up or scarified .
When the Contractor in placing conduits direct burial cable or utilities excavates into the pavement subgrade subbase or shoulder courses such courses must be replaced in kind character and condition to maintain a uniform road section except when the Contract Documents specify that other materials shall be used . .
When the Contractor is required to excavate through portland cement concrete asphalt concrete composite pavement or sidewalk a saw cut shall be made along neat lines and to the depth as shown in the contract documents or as directed by the Engineer .
Any damage to existing pavement sidewalk curb or other facilities caused by the Contractors operations under this item shall be repaired by the Contractor at no additional cost to the State. . Test Pits .
With exception of the Conduit Excavation and Backfill including Surface Restoration item the work of replacing pavement subcourses and shoulder courses will be paid for and performed under the provisions of their respective items and subsections . .
The unit price bid for this work shall include the cost of furnishing all labor materials and equipment necessary to satisfactorily excavate and backfill the trench including sawcutting and to restore and replace any pavement shoulder and sidewalk courses subcourses curbs drives lawns and other top surfaces as required to complete the work. . Test Pits .
The unit price bid for this work shall include the cost of furnishing all labor materials and equipment necessary to satisfactorily excavate and backfill the test pit and replace any pavement shoulder and sidewalk courses subcourses curbs drives lawns and other top surfaces required to complete the work .
Silt fence shall be removed when disturbed soil upslope of the practice has been fully stabilized with permanent vegetation pavement or stone .
Sediment filter logs shall be removed when disturbed soil upslope of the practice has been fully stabilized with permanent vegetation pavement or stone or sediment filter logs may be left in place on long or steep slopes to provide longterm runoff control .
The rockfall catchment area is defined as the area between the edge of roadway pavement and the base of an adjacent rockslope that is used to restrict rockfall from reaching the roadway .
The catchment area width is the horizontal distance between the roadway edge of pavement and the base toe of a rockslope .
The cost of installing and removing the sand including the final cleaning of the pavement and shoulder shall be included in the bid price for this Item .
The Contractor shall have the choice of using one or more of the following warning lights delineators pavement marking reflective tape placed on the barrier reflective paint or any other device subject to the approval of the Engineer .
This work shall consist of furnishing and placing a course of bituminous stabilized granular material and stabilized reclaimed asphalt pavement shoulder in conformance with this specification the payment lines and typical sections shown on the plans or as specified by the Engineer .
Where this course constitutes a base course for a shoulder the Contractor shall organize the work and conduct the various operations so as to keep the surface of the adjacent pavement clean at all times or shall bear the full expense of cleaning the pavement as ordered by the Engineer . .
Where used as a base course supporting other pavement courses the final surface elevation of this course shall not vary more than inch above or below the design grade elevation at any location .
RAP will not be allowed as an acceptable alternate to Types and at intersection locations or in areas with a high percentage of truck traffic as shown in the contract documents unless Portland Cement Concrete pavement is to be installed as part of the pavement structure .
of the bottom of a pavement course .
The Department reserves the right to suspend any mixture design when the mixture produces unacceptable paving results or exhibits properties that will affect the anticipated pavement performance . .
The Engineer may require the Contractor to core the pavement to determine if the inplace density is acceptable at no additional cost to the State .
When cores are required the Engineer will divide the pavement area being evaluated into sublots in accordance with the requirements of .
This work will consist of providing placing and performing density monitoring of one or more courses of HMA pavement constructed on the prepared foundation in accordance with the contract documents or as directed by the Engineer .
Participants will review all aspects of the requirements including but not limited to the following HMA mixture delivery temperature Equipment and setup Mix codes to assure correct mixture is delivered Gauge operator certification Proper construction practice to provide quality product WZTC Activities Provide a certified density gauge operator to monitor pavement density using a density gauge for Series Series and Series compaction methods with a current Density Gauge Inspector Certification from the Associated General Contractors New York State or its equivalent as determined by the Director Materials Bureau .
Place HMA mixture only when the pavement surface temperature is equal to or greater than those specified in Table Temperature Requirements .
The Engineer will measure pavement surface temperatures on the surface where the mixture is to be placed .
HMA mixture placement for temporary detours which are not and will not become part of the permanent pavement are not subject to the temperature and seasonal limitations but must be approved by the Engineer when placed outside temperature and seasonal limits .
When screed extensions are necessary for placement of mainline pavement provide extensions of the same design as the main screed .
NEW YORK STATE DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS USC May Ensure the manufacturer or supplier provides recommended settings for amplitude frequency and tire pressure pneumatic for each roller model for the thickness of pavement being rolled .
When specified in the contract documents clean the surface of the existing pavement fill joints and cracks and level the surface to a uniform grade and cross slope prior to the application of a new HMA course in accordance with the provisions of Section Conditioning Existing Pavement .
Clean any foreign material from the pavement resulting from construction operations at no additional cost to the State .
Top Course If a Truing and Leveling TL course is specified in the contract documents place the courses of a minimum variable thickness of proper plant mixture necessary to bring the surface of the existing pavement to the same transverse slope and longitudinal grade required for the finished pavement surface .
Apply tack coat between all HMA pavement lifts prior to placing HMA mixture regardless of time period between lifts .
Apply tack coat to all contact surfaces of existing HMA and Portland Cement Concrete including such areas as adjacent pavement edges curbing gutters manholes and other structures where the HMA mixture will be in contact .
Apply joint adhesive to all pavement edges in accordance with Section Asphalt Pavement Joint Adhesive prior to placing the asphalt mixture in order to provide bonding with the newly laid pavement .
Erect and maintain taut reference line positioned at or near the pavement centerline or edge to guide the paver when the initial pavement course is laid for new or reconstructed pavement .
The moving reference may be a floating beam ski or other suitable type such that the resulting pavement course surface is even .
A short ski or shoe may also be used for the initial course with the approval of the Engineer if a satisfactory fixed reference such as a curb gutter or other fixed reference is adjacent to the pavement .
Place all pavement courses using one of the reference line methods required above .
Top Course mixture in an existing pavement place mixture in each wheelpath rut separately .
The intent of the operation is to fill the low area only and not to place the material over the pavements full lane width .
Supply Top Course HMA mixture from a single plant for the duration of the work such that the pavement surface has a uniform color and texture except when a contract includes multiple paving sites or the paving length is more than miles and supply from multiple plants to either end of the paving length is practical .
Compact the HMA mixture sufficiently using the appropriate compaction method specified in Table Compaction Methods to achieve pavement densities in a range of NEW YORK STATE DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS USC May to expressed as a percentage of the mixtures maximum theoretical density MMTD .
Initially compact all courses with the roller traveling parallel to the centerline of the pavement beginning at each edge and working toward the center .
Upon completion of the HMA mixture placement ensure there are no visible defects in the pavement such as shallow ruts ridges roller marks cracking tearing segregation bleeding or any other irregularities .
Correct any defects that become apparent or replace the defective pavement at no additional cost to the State .
Any pavement section placed under or Series which is monitored by a gauge operator whose certification is revoked for reasons outlined in the New York State Inspector Certification Program Manual under Decertification will be evaluated by sampling and testing of pavement cores in accordance with .
Pavement Density Samples and subject to pavement density adjustment .
The above requirement also applies when a density gauge is used for monitoring pavement density in the areas other than mainline under Series compaction method .
Once the test section is complete the Engineer will select and mark pavement core locations excluding the first feet in accordance with .
Extract pavement cores at the marked locations before the road is open to traffic .
Do not place HMA mixture under Routine Paving until the results of the pavement cores from the test section have a minimum pavement density QAF of ..
If the pavement density QAF is less than .
If the pavement density QAF on the first day of paving is less than .
When the quantity placed is less than tons in a day pavement samples are not required .
provided the procedures used in these areas to obtain pavement densities are similar to previously placed pavement sections based on the density gauge test data .
NEW YORK STATE DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS USC May When the quantity exceeds tons the Engineer will select one additional pavement core location for up to every tons over tons up to a maximum number of cores for a lot of .
The Engineer will select and mark a pavement core location in each sublot in accordance with .
Extract pavement cores at the marked locations in each sublot before the road is open to traffic fill the pavement core holes take loose mix samples representing the lot and deliver the sealed pavement cores and loose mix samples to the Regional Materials Laboratory in accordance with .
The results of this analysis will be used to determine the pavement density QAF in accordance with MP .
On the first day of mainline paving place and compact the pavement under the provisions of Option or Option .
Place and compact a test section on the mainline a maximum of feet long at a location approved by the Engineer to determine a Project Target Density PTD using the correlation of a density gauges to the pavement cores results and to determine if the mixture can be compacted uniformly within the of MMTD .
Once the test section is complete the Engineer will select and mark pavement core locations excluding the first feet in accordance with .
Take density gauge readings in accordance with MP at each pavement core location prior to extracting pavement cores based on the type of density gauge used .
Extract pavement cores at the marked location in each sublot before the road is open to traffic fill the core holes take loose mix samples representing the lot and deliver density gauge readings sealed pavement cores and loose mix samples to the Regional Materials Laboratory in accordance with .
If the average density of the four pavement cores results in a QAF of .
Place and compact a test section as described under Option on the mainline a maximum of feet long at a location approved by the Engineer to determine a Project Target Density PTD using the correlation of a density gauges to the pavement cores results and to determine if the mixture can be compacted uniformly within the of MMTD .
Once the test section is complete the Engineer will select and mark pavement core locations excluding the first feet in accordance with .
Take density gauge readings in accordance with MP at each pavement core location prior to extracting pavement cores based on the type of density gauge used .
Extract pavement cores at the marked locations in each sublot before the road is open to traffic fill the core holes take loose mix samples representing the lot and deliver sealed pavement cores and samples to the Regional Materials Laboratory in accordance with .
Use the Interim PTD to monitor pavement density until the Actual PTD is established by the RME .
Take density gauge readings at every feet along the length of the pavement for each paver pass at locations randomly selected and marked by the Engineer in accordance with MP .
If the moving average of the last density readings is below of the Actual PTD the Engineer will randomly select and mark pavement core locations in accordance with .
NEW YORK STATE DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS USC May Take density gauge readings in accordance with MP at each pavement core location prior to extracting pavement cores based on the type of density gauge used .
Extract pavement cores at the marked locations in each sublot before the road is open to traffic fill the core holes take loose mix samples representing the lot and deliver sealed pavement cores and samples to the Regional Materials laboratory in accordance with .
If the average density of the pavement cores is not between and of the MMTD the Engineer will apply Pavement Density Quality Adjustment to the material placed under Interim PTD excluding the material placed on the test section . .
Use only density gauges that have been correlated with pavement cores during the construction of the test section and a PTD has been determined by the Regional Materials Engineer .
Compact the pavement sufficiently to achieve the PTD value at each test location .
Take density gauge readings at every feet along the length of the pavement for each paver pass at locations randomly selected by the Engineer in accordance with MP .
Before extracting the pavement cores take density gauge readings and record on Form BR .
Deliver the sealed pavement cores loose mix samples and the density gauge readings to the Regional Materials Laboratory for testing .
In addition to the daily density monitoring with a gauge the Engineer will select and mark pavement core locations every rd day of HMA mixture placement on the mainline from that days placement for pavement density verification .
Extract a set of pavement cores and loose mix samples in accordance with .
The RME will calculate the PTD based on additional pavement cores taken every rd day of HMA mixture placement for pavement density verification .
If the average density of the pavement cores is not between and of the MMTD the Engineer will apply Pavement Density Quality Adjustment to the material placed on day .
Provide additional pavement samples to verify pavement density of HMA placed under the following situations Insufficient number of density readings recorded either at a specific location or at the required frequency .
and need to evaluate the pavement section in accordance with .
The Engineer will select and mark pavement core locations in accordance with .
Take density gauges readings in accordance with MP at each pavement core location prior to extracting pavement cores based on the type of density gauge used .
Extract a pavement core at the marked location in each sublot before the road is open to traffic fill the core holes take loose mix samples representing the lot and deliver sealed pavement cores and samples to the Regional Materials laboratory in accordance with .
The RME will establish a new PTD based on these pavement cores .
If the average density of the pavement cores is not between and of the MMTD the Engineer will apply Pavement Density Quality Adjustment to the material placed under these situations .
Provide additional pavement samples to verify PTD used for the situations listed below .
Changes in condition of existing pavement being overlaid .
For the rest of the paving sites provide pavement cores loose mix samples and gauge readings on the first day to verify PTD .
When a contract includes multiple sites the requirement of additional set of pavement cores applies to each paving site .
Initially compact the pavement with a breakdown roller once NEW YORK STATE DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS USC May sufficient HMA mixture is placed in the testable area .
Make necessary vibratory and static passes to peak the pavement density such that the density gauge reading is within of the MMTD .
Stop further compaction if the pavement shows signs of distress .
Use the calculated PTD to monitor the pavement density .
The Engineer may request pavement cores to verify the PTD in accordance with MP .
Use only the density gauges that were correlated during the construction of the test section and its corresponding PTD to monitor pavement density during routine paving operations .
Compact the pavement sufficiently to achieve the PTD value at each test location .
Take density gauge readings at every feet along the length of the pavement for each paver pass at locations randomly selected by the Engineer in accordance with the MP .
The Engineer may request pavement samples for density verification of HMA placed under the following situations at no additional cost to the State .
One vibratory pass is defined as one movement of a single drum of the roller over the pavement section in each direction .
One static pass is defined as one movement of the roller over the pavement in each direction .
One pass is defined as one movement of the roller over any point of the pavement in either direction .
Impacts are defined as the number of times a drum hits the pavement within one foot of travel and are determined using the following formula 𝐼𝑚𝑜𝑎𝑐𝑟𝑟 𝑜𝑐𝑟 𝑐𝑜𝑜𝑟 𝑉𝑃𝑀 𝑆𝑜𝑐𝑐𝑐 VPM Frequency of the roller vibration per minute Speed Speed of the roller feet per minute If the impacts are less than the minimum adjust the settings andor the speed to meet the minimum impacts requirement .
Provide density gauges to monitor pavement density in accordance with MP . . Nuclear Density Gauge .
Capable of determining the density of HMA pavements by measuring changes in the electromagnetic field resulting from the HMA compaction process .
The Engineer will select one pavement core location for each sublot in accordance with MP .
Take inch diameter pavement cores from within the inch diameter circles outlined by the Engineer .
The Engineer will not designate pavement core locations before the rolling operation is completed and all compaction equipment has moved off the sublot designated for coring .
Notify the Engineer immediately if a pavement core is in a location that is believed to not represent the sublot .
Extract the pavement cores no later than the end of the following days placement .
If necessary cool the pavement so that the core samples are not damaged during coring .
Do not separate the core sample from the underlying layers if the pavement core sample does not debond during coring .
The Regional Materials Laboratory will separate the pavement core layer required for testing from the underlying material by sawing if necessary .
Fill all pavement core holes with a similar HMA mixture immediately after extracting the cores or before opening the lane to traffic .
On each paving day when pavement cores are required take loose mix samples in accordance with AASHTO T Standard Test Method for Sampling Bituminous Paving Mixtures .
The Engineer will secure and seal the pavement cores in accordance with MP once they have been extracted from the pavement .
Submit pavement cores density gauge readings and loose mix samples as required for or Series methods together at the end of the days placement but no later than a day following placement of the lot .
Pavement cores damaged during extraction pavement cores delivered to the Regional Materials Laboratory for testing that are damaged or pavement cores with damaged or missing security seals will not be tested .
The Engineer will select new pavement core locations within a foot forward of the original locations at the same offset .
Extract new pavement cores from the newly identified locations .
Upon receipt of test results of the pavement cores and loose mix samples provided by the Regional Materials Laboratory if the results are not representative of the density gauge data or previous results for similar sublots notify the Engineer and the Regional Materials Engineer in writing within work days .
Ensure the finished pavement at all joints complies with the surface tolerance requirements and exhibits the same uniformity of texture and compaction as other sections of the course .
Joint Adhesive to all pavement edges in order to provide bonding with the newly laid pavement .
Place successive HMA courses over an underlying course such that all longitudinal joints are offset no more than inches from the longitudinal joint of the lower pavement course unless otherwise approved by the Engineer .
Place HMA courses on existing PCC pavement such that all longitudinal joints are stacked on top of the joint of the underlying PCC pavement .
Place boards of proper thickness at the edge of the pavement for the off pavement movement of the roller .
For all HMA courses other than Top Course ensure no more than feet of the longitudinal pavement joint is exposed at the end of the working day when traffic is maintained on the roadway during paving operations .
Place the HMA mixture for the first mat with an attachment to the paver to provide a sloping wedge with a vertical stepdown at the longitudinal pavement joint .
If the exposed longitudinal pavement joint becomes damaged due to rounding of the notched wedge sawcut the joint prior to placing the adjacent lane .
Construct each pavement course to a ¼ inch surface tolerance .
The Engineer may test the surface with a foot straight edge or string line placed parallel to the centerline of the pavement and with a foot straight edge or string line placed transversely to the centerline of the pavement on any portion of the pavement .
Variations exceeding ¼ inch will be appropriately corrected or the pavement be removed and replaced at no additional cost to the State. . Thickness Tolerance .
Construct the pavement so that the final compacted thickness is as near to the nominal thickness as is practical and within the tolerances specified below .
The thickness indicated for each of the various courses of HMA pavement is the nominal thickness .
The Engineer may request pavement cores to determine the thickness of the completed pavement course for final acceptance and payment .
Provide work zone traffic control and take pavement cores in accordance with .
Conditioning of Existing Surface will not be considered in pavement thickness determinations .
The allowable tolerance for HMA mixture specified under a single pay item is as follows inch or less for a required course whose nominal thickness is inches or less inch or less for a course or courses whose nominal thickness is over inches FIRST PASS SECOND PASS TAPERED WEDGE JOINT VERTICAL STEPDOWN ON SLOPE OR FLATTER NEW YORK STATE DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS USC May The tolerance for the total thickness of all HMA mixture courses is as follows inch or less when the total nominal thickness indicated on the plans is inches or less inch or less when the total nominal thickness is over inches but not more than inches inch or less when the total nominal thickness is more than inches When the HMA mixture is placed on newly constructed subbase material an additional tolerance of inch will be allowed both in the nominal thickness of the course placed directly on the subbase and the total pavement thickness .
Tolerances indicated for the thicknesses of individual courses of multi course pavements including composite pavements are guides which should be met as closely as practical .
Tolerance for the total thickness of such pavement is also a guide .
The HMA mixture placed may be accepted under the following conditions When the individual course placed does not meet the thickness tolerance but substantially conforms to the plans and specifications true to line and grade in order to attain a smooth riding pavement .
When the total thickness of such pavements is less than the specified thickness including tolerances but substantially conforms to the plans and specifications .
When the total thickness of such pavements is greater than the specified thickness and the excess thickness is necessary to attain a smooth riding pavement surface .
Payment for excess thickness necessary to achieve a smooth riding surface will be considered only in cases where an existing pavement surface has been resurfaced. . Paver and Equipment Cleaning .
Do not clean tools and equipment used for HMA placement on the pavement surface or near streams ponds drainage structures or other areas that are tributaries to waterways .
Place HMA mixture on the pavement shoulders where the outside edge of Top and Binder Course consist of an angle of or flatter measured from finished grade to the preceding course surface .
the RME will evaluate the pavement section in accordance with .
Pavement Density Quality Adjustments will be measured in Quality Units determined for each days production using the daily Quality Adjustment Factor QAF for pavement density .
The pavement density QAF will not apply to HMA mixture placed on ramps with a uniform full width section less than feet in length shoulders widening crossovers and bridges .
Quality Units for pavement density quality adjustments under and Series compaction methods will be calculated using the formula below .
No pavement density quality adjustments will be made under and Series compaction methods .
When pavement density samples are taken and if payment adjustment is applicable the Engineer will make the adjustment in accordance with Table Quality Adjustment Factors for Series .
A payment adjustment will be made based on the Quality Unit Index Price to all the material placed on the mainline for the day the pavement cores represent .
The unit price bid for all HMA mixture shall include the cost of all labor materials and equipment necessary to satisfactorily complete the work including extracting the pavement cores filling and compaction of all core holes .
This work shall consist of constructing one or more courses of cold mix bituminous pavement on a prepared base in accordance with these specifications and in substantial conformance with the lines grades thicknesses and typical crosssections shown on the plans or established by the Engineer .
Bituminous material or mixture shall not be applied on any soft surfaces when the surface is wet when the temperature of the surface on which the mixture is to be placed is below F or when other weather conditions would prevent proper construction of the pavement. . Equipment .
After spreading the mixture shall be thoroughly and uniformly compacted with a selfpropelled steelwheeled roller or an approved vibratory roller to obtain a thoroughly compacted pavement .
The finished surface of the pavement shall be tested with a foot straight edge laid parallel with the center line of the pavement .
A size key stone the pavement shall be opened to traffic for a minimum of days before placing the seal coat .
Prior to the application of the seal coat the pavement surface shall be thoroughly swept and cleaned of all excess material .
The bituminous cold mix pavement shall be measured by the number of tons of compacted aggregate including key and cover stone placed in accordance with the specifications .
An attached bristle broom that drags on the pavement behind the spray bars may be attached to the distributor .
If the broom is used it shall be adjustable laterally and vertically so that the full width of the applied tack coat is bristled uniformly into the pavement surface .
The tack coat shall be applied to a prepared clean pavement .
The tack coat shall not be applied on a wet pavement surface or when the pavement surface temperature is below F. The application rate shall be as determined in Table Tack Coat Application Rates .
If the Engineer elects to leave the material in place the Contractor shall receive a pay reduction of of the tack bid price for the pavement section represented by the failing sample .
This work shall consist of the construction of a single course chip seal for pavements andor shoulders in accordance with the contract documents .
Complete a mix design for pavements andor shoulders in accordance with Materials Method .
Material shall not be applied to a pavement surface when the .
The selfpropelled rotary power broom shall be designed equipped maintained and operated so the pavement surface can be swept clean .
The selfpropelled equipment shall be designed equipped maintained and operated so that the pavement can be swept clean .
The Contractor shall remove pavement markings. . Chip Seal A .
Pavement cleaning pavement marking removal work zone traffic control and pilot vehicles will be paid for separately .
After the sodium chloride stabilized gravel surface course has been brought to final grade and cross section and rolling has been completed the course shall be permitted to cure for a minimum of days at a minimum temperature of F before any additional pavement courses are applied .
The work in this section shall include work required for crack sealing asphalt pavements .
This specification includes two processes for inplace recycling hot mix asphalt pavements heater scarification HS and hotinplace recycling HIPR .
The HMA pavement surface is heated using specialized equipment to soften the asphalt .
The scarified asphalt pavement is then mixed with a recycling agent that rejuvenates the asphalt .
In the case of the HIPR the multistep recycling process of the existing pavement includes heating milling and adding a recycling agent to rejuvenate the asphalt then mixing placing and compacting the mixture .
The resulting recycled pavement does not require an overlay .
mix during the HIPR process then the resulting pavement will require an overlay .
Determine the application rate of the recycling agent for heater scarification and hot inplace recycling by taking and analyzing a minimum of three cores per lane mile or a maximum of cores per project from the existing HMA pavement .
Make sure that the designed application rate of the recycling agent provides the average penetration value of the recovered asphalt binder from the loose mix samples taken during both the HS and HIPR process to have an increase of at least or more than the average penetration value of the recovered asphalt binder from the existing pavement cores .
Remove all epoxy or thermoplastic pavement markings and other markings when ordered by the Engineer .
Clean the existing pavement and shoulder to be heater scarified or hot inplace recycled by using mechanical sweepers or other effective means until the surface is free of all debris material which might interfere with the scarification or milling process .
This unit must generate sufficient radiant heat with no open flame to soften the asphalt pavement to the depth required .
This equipment must be a selfcontained machine designed to reprocess only the upper layers of the existing HMA pavement .
The heater scarification unit must be selfpropelled and capable of operating at speeds of to feet per minute while uniformly heating and scarifying the existing HMA pavement to the minimum loose mix depth specified in the contract documents .
This unit must also be able to conform to the pavement contours to ensure a uniform penetration from the tines and prevent damage to utility structures .
This unit must be immediately behind the scarifying unit and capable of uniformly applying the recycling agent to the reclaimed asphalt pavement at the approved rate .
Immediately following the application of the recycling agent an enclosed milling unit is required to mill the asphalt pavement to the loose mix depth specified in the contract documents thoroughly mixing the recycling agent with the scarified and milled pavement .
Mixture Verification and QC Testing. . First day Prior to the scarification process the Engineer will select two core locations on the existing pavement .
Determine the penetration of the PG binder recovered from the recycled mixture in NEW YORK STATE DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS USC May accordance with AASHTO T . The average penetration value of the loose mix samples must be at least or more than the penetration of the core samples taken from the existing pavement .
Samples of the scarified pavement prior to rejuvenation can be taken as an option instead of the core samples .
If at anytime the average penetration value of the loose mix samples is greater than the Engineer may evaluate the pavement section and request the scarified pavement be removed and replaced at no additional cost to the State .
Also if the recycled pavement is not satisfactory to the Engineer additional tests may be required at no cost to the State .
Radiantly heat the existing HMA pavement surface with no open flame using specialized equipment to soften the HMA surface and scarify to a specified depth as detailed in the contract documents .
Take care not to overheat the existing pavement thereby softening the underlying asphalt pavement not to be milled or scarified and that burning of the existing asphalt cement does not occur .
Control the speed of the equipment to ensure that the recycled pavement is properly milled mixed and uniformly distributed to the proper thickness slope and crown shown on the contract plans .
Add recycling agent uniformly to the scarified HMA pavement at the predetermined application rate to produce a homogenous HMA recycled mix .
Ensure that the final recycled pavement conforms to the requirements of .
Once work is completed overlay the recycled HMA pavement to the satisfaction of the Engineer .
The equipment must be capable of processing the existing pavement to a minimum depth of inches .
This unit must generate sufficient radiant heat with no open flame to soften the asphalt pavement to the depth required .
This equipment must be a selfcontained machine designed to reprocess only the upper layers of the existing HMA pavement .
The HIPR train must be selfpropelled and capable of operating at speeds of to feet per minute while uniformly heating and recycling the existing HMA pavement to the minimum loose mix depth specified in the contract documents .
This unit must be capable of uniformly loosening the preheated asphalt pavement to the depth specified in the contract documents .
The recycling equipment must have a chamber capable of blending the recycled pavement virgin HMA if any and recycling agent into a homogenous uniformly blended mixture .
Production Facility Laboratory for the virgin hot mix asphalt. . First day Prior to the recycling process the Engineer will select two core locations on the existing pavement .
Determine the penetration of the PG binder recovered from the recycled mixture in accordance with AASHTO T . The average penetration value of the loose mix samples must be at least or more than the penetration of the core samples taken from the existing pavement .
Samples of the recycled pavement prior to rejuvenation can be taken as an option instead of the core samples .
If at anytime the average penetration value of the loose mix samples is greater than the Engineer may evaluate the pavement section and request the recycled pavement be removed and replaced at no additional cost to the State .
Also if the recycled pavement is not satisfactory to the Engineer additional tests may be required at no cost to the State .
Radiantly heat the existing HMA pavement surface with no open flame using specialized equipment to soften the HMA surface and recycle to a specified depth as detailed in the contract documents .
Take care not to overheat the existing pavement thereby softening the underlying asphalt pavement which is not to be milled and that burning of the existing asphalt cement does not occur .
Control the speed of the HIPR train to ensure that the recycled pavement is properly milled mixed and uniformly distributed to the proper thickness slope and crown as shown on the contract plans .
Blend the milled asphalt pavement recycling agent and virgin HMA if specified to produce a homogenous HMA recycled mix .
Ensure that the final recycled pavement conforms to the requirements of .
This work will be measured as the number of square yards of pavement surface recycled as detailed in this specification . .
This work will be measured as the number of square yards of pavement surface recycled as detailed in this specification .
Removal of pavement markings and cleaning of the existing pavement will be paid under separate pay items in the contract documents. . General Vacant NEW YORK STATE DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS USC May .
If the Engineer elects to leave the material in place the Contractor shall receive a pay reduction of of the bid price of the recycling agent for the pavement section represented by the failing sample .
Prepare longitudinal and transverse construction joints as discussed below and place adjacent asphalt pavement on the same day that the joint adhesive is applied .
Reapply joint adhesive to any areas damaged by construction andor vehicular traffic prior to placing the adjacent asphalt pavement .
The work in this section shall include work required for porous asphalt pavement .
Material removed during the milling process including foreign debris within or on the pavement shall become the property of the Contractor and shall be disposed of at a site obtained by the Contractor .
Milled and adjacent surfaces shall be cleaned again as directed by the Engineer prior to the placement of tack coats or pavement courses if traffic has been allowed on the milled surface andor if more than hours have elapsed since the initial cleaning .
If the pavement surface is not being constructed or has not been constructed to this tolerance based upon visual observation or upon riding quality the Engineer may test the surface with a foot straight edge or string line placed parallel to the centerline of the pavement and with a foot straight edge or string line placed transversely to the centerline of the pavement on any portion of the pavement .
The quantity shall be measured as the number of square yards of pavement surface milled in accordance with the plans and this specification .
In no case will a deduction in area be made for minor unmilled areas due to catch basins manholes transverse joints or minor low areas in pavements from the measured surface area that has been milled .
The unit price bid per square yard shall include the cost of furnishing all labor and equipment necessary to complete the milling including the removal of pavement by other means the removal and disposal of milled material the removal and hauling of milled material to a designated storage area when indicated in the contract documents and cleaning the resultant surface after milling .
No payment will be made for additional cleaning that may be necessary just prior to placement of any overlaying pavement courses or tack coats .
The cost of providing tack coats overlay courses and temporary pavement wedges around drainage structures manholes valve boxes bridge abutments and beginning and ends of milled pavement shall be paid for separately .
These general requirements apply to concrete furnished for pavement structures and incidental construction .
Regional Director approval required for pavement applications including approach slabs .
The Engineer will identify pavement areas if any represented by failing samples according to the procedures of Materials Method Friction Aggregate Control and Test Procedures .
For use in concrete pavements bridge decks precast pavers or any other item used in concrete highway wearing surfaces sand natural or manufactured must contain at least .
. . . . CA thin structural applications overlays E . . . . . CA structural slabs and structural approach slabs NEW YORK STATE DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS USC May F . . . . . CA high early strength for pavement or structural applications G . . . . . CA underwater GG .
Also no deductions will be made in concrete pavement for catch basins manholes etc .
Construct a portland cement concrete PCC pavement and shoulders if required as detailed in the contract documents .
Bring all equipment needed to place consolidate finish texture cure saw cut seal and test the PCC pavement and permeable base to the job site a minimum of full work day before its use to allow examination by the Engineer .
Use equipment guided by a reference system that ensures the pavement is placed to the specified line grade and cross section .
However if the pavement is specified as nonprofilographed .
Depth Equal to the sum of the edge thicknesses of all pavement layers placed within the form .
Use equipment having gangmounted diamond saw blades on a multiblade arbor specifically designed for pavement bump cutting or production grinding .
When production grinding use equipment capable of producing a foot minimum grinding pass width that is equipped with a vacuum system capable of removing slurry from the pavement surface .
Rest and reference the drill rig frame on and to the pavement surface such that the drilled holes are cylindrical perpendicular to the surface being drilled and repeatable in terms of position and alignment .
Handheld drills or gang drills resting on the permeable base or subbase are permitted for drilling holes in longitudinal joints if there is not enough room to use gang drills resting on the pavement surface .
Use nozzles that apply the silicone within the joint confines for the full width of the joint and to the level below the pavement surface depicted in the Standard Sheets .
Use nozzles that apply the joint sealant within the joint confines for the full width of the joint to inches below the pavement surface .
Construct a smooth well consolidated properly finished textured and cured pavement to the line and grade depicted in the contract documents inch vertically at any location . .
If the subsequent PCC placement is a profilographed traveled way and the area is available widen the prepared subbase course at the same line grade and cross slope such that it is at least NEW YORK STATE DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS USC May feet beyond the longitudinal edges of a slipform pavement .
In a slipform paving operation test the surface both perpendicular to the pavement centerline and diagonally across the pavement using a stringline placed across the referencing system .
In a slipform paving operation place the permeable base slightly wider than the pavement width being placed .
Remove and replace permeable base placed wider than the pavement if it is damaged or contaminated .
Determine edge slump by extending a foot minimum long straightedge over the longitudinal pavement edges .
Set forms to string lines placed at the pavement elevation line and grade and to achieve the specified smoothness .
Set the shims perpendicular to the forms and the pavement surface .
Keep handheld vibrators perpendicular to the pavement surface .
Remove forms after the concrete has developed sufficient strength to allow removal without damaging the pavement .
Repair pavement damaged during form removal .
Construct transverse joints perpendicular to both the pavement surface and longitudinal joints in the area being paved .
Use a foot typical transverse joint spacing for pavements having standard slab widths of and feet .
For pavements having other slab widths determine typical maximum and minimum transverse joint spacings in accordance with the following Lmax maximum transverse joint spacing slab length feet Wmin .
Wmax maximum slab width across the pavement load carrying slabs only feet feet Wmin minimum slab width across the pavement load carrying slabs only feet The range of slab lengths may be extended to to .
Typically contraction joints are constructed in a straight line across the full width of the PCC pavement and shoulders .
Contraction joints may be slightly angled rather than straight across a pavement at tied longitudinal joints between lanes placed separately if the placements do not have the same centerline e.g .
where a ramp centerline diverges from parallel to the pavement centerline .
Before placing concrete position transverse joint supports such that the Entire longitudinal axis of each dowel is located at the middepth of the pavement slab inch .
Longitudinal axes of the dowels are aligned parallel with the pavement centerline and pavement surface such that the maximum misalignment of one dowel end relative to the other is inch .
In a slipform paving operation mark the joint support midpoint on the subbase or permeable base immediately adjacent to the pavement .
Sweep or wash firststage saw cut debris from the pavement before profilographing before it rains or before opening the pavement to any traffic such that debris does not enter the joint. . Transverse Expansion Joints .
Construct these joints as wide as the concrete placement typically or lanes but not necessarily the full pavement width .
This situation typically occurs near structures that are skewed from perpendicular to the pavement centerline .
Instead position transverse hinge joint supports such that the NEW YORK STATE DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS USC May Entire longitudinal axis of each deformed bar is located at the middepth of the pavement slab inch .
Longitudinal axes of the bars are aligned parallel with the pavement centerline and pavement surface such that the maximum misalignment of one bar end relative to the other is inch .
It is highly desirable to align longitudinal joints with the permanent pavement markings .
Tied longitudinal joints located in the wheelpaths of the completed pavement will require additional ties. . Longitudinal Joints Between Lanes Paved Simultaneously .
Make firststage saw cuts parallel to the pavement centerline and perpendicular to the pavement surface within hours of concrete placement and after firststage transverse saw cuts are complete .
Sweep or wash firststage saw cut debris from the pavement before profilographing before it rains or before opening the pavement to any traffic such that debris does not enter the joint. . Tied Longitudinal Joints Between Lanes Paved Separately .
Pavements having or more tied lanes or lane pavements inches or more thick may require a decreased spacing in accordance with the contract documents .
Isolate utilities and drainage structures from the pavement using the isolation joint systems or telescoping manhole castings depicted in the Standard Sheets .
Wherever paving equipment operates on existing PCC pavement that is to remain install bolton track covers or rubber tired flangeless wheels .
Remove all debris on the existing PCC pavement in the equipment track .
When paving from or to a transverse construction joint or intersecting pavement use handheld vibrators to thoroughly consolidate any concrete inaccessible to the paving equipment vibrators .
Do not dump the grout box head into the pavement concrete when approaching a construction joint . .
Mechanically finish the pavement after consolidation and strike off .
After mechanical finishing hand finish the pavement to correct and seal minor imperfections .
Use work bridges to hand finish concrete inaccessible from the pavement edge .
If the contract has a closed drainage system provide a inch blank in the texture along the pavement edges to enhance drainage to catch basins .
Texture the concrete parallel to the pavement centerline with a set of evenly spaced spring steel tines .
Produce a consistent texture free of ridges or gouges parallel to the pavement centerline either by hand or by attaching a weighted strip to the paver texturecure machine or work bridge .
Texture the concrete perpendicular to the pavement centerline with a set of variably spaced spring steel tines .
During curing equipment breakdown cure the pavement in accordance with .B Curing Covers .
If rain damages the curing compound before it sets reapply curing compound after the pavement surface dries .
Cover all exposed surfaces and extend the covers a minimum of inches beyond the pavement edges or beyond the forms when used .
Insulate the pavement vertical edge andor forms as well .
Place recording surface thermometers between the pavement surface and insulating material inches from one of the placement edges wherever insulation is used .
In this case sweep the pavement to ensure debris does not enter the joints .
Immediately wash the widening cut slurry from the pavement such that it does not reenter the joint .
Do not allow any traffic on the pavement between cleaning and sealing .
Seal the joint from the bottom of the cut to within inch of the pavement surface .
Wash the resulting slurry from the pavement and joint immediately after making secondstage saw cuts andor bevels .
Do not allow any traffic on the pavement between cleaning and sealing .
Wash the resulting slurry from the pavement and joint immediately after making secondstage saw cuts andor bevels .
Do not allow any traffic on the pavement between cleaning and sealing .
Install one piece of transverse joint sealer in a compressed condition across the full pavement width including concrete shoulders and down the vertical saw cut at the free edge .
Protect the pavement and appurtenances from traffic and construction operations .
Damage and defects include but are not limited to cracking spalling honeycombing or imperfections caused by inadequate pavement protection traffic andor construction practices .
The Engineer will mark high and low deviations in the pavement surface exceeding inch in feet .
Diamond grind the pavement longitudinally beginning and ending at lines normal to the pavement centerline and in full travel lane width increments .
Continuously vacuum the slurry from the pavement when production grinding .
Production grinding equipment can be used to grind bumps or increase the amount of Quality Units payable subject to the following For pavements textured with longitudinal tining or artificial turf drag any amount of a reporting segment surface area may be diamond ground to increase the amount of Quality Units payable .
For transverse tined pavements Quality Units are payable if less than or more than of the reporting segment surface area is ground .
Any pavement damaged from opening to construction traffic in a reduced time frame will be treated in accordance with .
Any pavement damaged from opening to general traffic in a reduced time frame will be treated in accordance with .
Mark the cylinders and place them adjacent to the pavement under similar curing conditions .
The pavement may be opened to construction or general traffic if all the following apply Average compressive strength of all cylinder pairs exceed psi or psi .
If the above conditions are not met after additional testing or if the required number of additional cylinders were not cast open the pavement in accordance with the nonreduced time frames of .A Construction Traffic and .B General Traffic .
The Engineer will measure the following quantities for items incorporated into the finished pavement .
No deductions will be made for catch basins manholes or other similar pavement obstructions. . PCC Pavement Unreinforced .
The work will be measured for payment as the number of cubic yards of unreinforced PCC pavement satisfactorily placed based on the payment lines shown in the contract documents .
Deductions and separate payment will be made for catch basins manholes or other similar pavement obstructions requiring either mesh reinforced or heavily reinforced placements. . PCC Pavement Mesh or Heavily Reinforced .
No deductions will be made for drainage and utility structures or other similar pavement obstructions being isolated from the surrounding pavement .
No Quality Units are computed for pavements specified as nonprofilographed .
The work will be measured for payment as the number of feet of transverse joints satisfactorily sealed excluding preformed sealers turned down at the pavement edges. . Sealing Longitudinal Joints .
Also include the cost of all labor material and equipment necessary to profilograph and diamond grind the pavement to meet the Level smoothness requirements of Table Smoothness NEW YORK STATE DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS USC May Adjustment Factors if paving equipment other than a paver equipped with a fullwidth finishing pan or triple transverse screeds is used .
Construct a portland cement concrete PCC foundation for pavements and shoulders if required as detailed in the contract documents .
Place bar reinforcement around utilities drainage structures and other projections into the pavement as depicted in the Standard Sheets for PCC Pavements .
Saw cut skewed contraction joints at a on skew across the pavement approximately from perpendicular to the centerline before uncontrolled cracking occurs .
Skewed joints may be cut at the same angle across the pavement or chevronshaped with the vertex at a longitudinal joint between separate placements .
Hand finish the pavement to correct surface irregularities . .
Seal skewed contraction joints in accordance with .A Sealing Transverse Contraction Joints Highway Joint Sealant if a construction delay occurs that prevents the placement of the final pavement course until the subsequent construction season .
No deductions will be made for catch basins manholes or other similar pavement obstructions. . Constructing Longitudinal Joints .
All damage to the adjacent pavement or ground caused by the use of the chosen SS e.g .
voids beneath the pavement or shoulder pavement or shoulder cracking or subsidence ground settlement shall be repaired at no additional cost to the State .
For walls supporting a pavement section install the tape in .
In all travel lanes use equipment having gangmounted diamond saw blades on a multiblade arbor specifically designed for PCC pavement or superstructure production grinding .
A bridge deck or a highway pavement and paved shoulder under a structure from which wastes may be collected and removed by vacuuming may be used in place of a cover providing that within that area such usage is confined to lanes and shoulders closed to traffic .
All waste materials that collect on a bridge deck or on a highway pavement and paved shoulder under a structure or on covers shall be removed at least once a day or more frequently if directed by the Engineer .
No waste material shall remain on the bridge deck pavement pier pedestals abutments or containment covers overnight. . Environmental Waterway Protection .
All waste materials that collect on a bridge deck or on a highway pavement and paved shoulder under a structure or on covers shall be removed at least once a day or more frequently if directed by the Engineer .
No waste material shall remain on the bridge deck pavement pier pedestals abutments or containment covers overnight. . Class B Containment .
Care shall be taken on pavement and other surfaces to collect all waste material so as to prevent it from being redistributed into the air and environment by traffic or other means .
Care shall be taken on pavement and other surfaces to collect all waste material so as to prevent it from being redistributed into the air and environment by traffic or other means .
This work shall consist of the construction placing or applying of architectural pavements and treatments in accordance with the Contract Documents or as directed by the Engineer .
The Contractor shall adjust pattern at pavement edges such that cutting of edge pavers is minimized .
Architectural pavements and treatments will be measured by the number of square yards placed .
The unit price bid per square yard shall include the cost of all labor materials and equipment necessary to satisfactorily complete the work including setting bed material except that any sawcutting of existing pavement excavation concrete base curb curb and gutter and subbase course will be paid for separately .
Do not place pavement until the embankment has been completed over the pipe and settlement has been completed to the satisfaction of the Engineer .
Schedule and conduct the diversion of water operations prior to and during the placement of pavement in a manner satisfactory to the Engineer .
Prior to placing pavement clean and dry the surfaces to be in contact with concrete to the satisfaction of the Engineer .
Finish the pavement to a smooth surface acceptable to the Engineer .
The adjustment ring or frame shall be placed so the manhole cover or drainage unit grate will not protrude above the finished surface of the pavement .
The unit price bid for each shall include the cost of all materials labor and equipment necessary to satisfactorily complete the work including all necessary cleaning excavation backfill and replacement of any pavement shoulder and sidewalk courses subcourses curbs drives lawns and any other surface .
If the Contractor elects to reset the existing casting or frames the costs of the work involved in the removal and replacement of existing disturbed pavement shall be included in the price bid for the adjustment rings and frames. . Transverse Drainage Interceptors .
Underdrain pipe shall meet the requirements of the following subsections of Section Materials and Manufacturing for the type of pipe specified in the contract documents Corrugated Steel Pipe Type III gage Porous Concrete Pipe Underdrain Extra Strength Porous Concrete Pipe Underdrain Perforated Corrugated Polyethylene Underdrain Tubing Corrugated Aluminum Pipe Type III gage Perforated Polyvinyl Chloride Underdrain Pipe Optional underdrain pipe shall meet the requirements of any of the above at the Contractors option except that porous concrete pipe shall not be used in an edge of pavement underdrain installation. . Underdrain Filter .
The small area adjacent to the post and foundation tubes disturbed during installation or where gaps exist at the post and foundation tubes after pavement repairs shall be sealed with a bituminous material approved by the Engineer .
Beginning with the first post where the rail is parallel to the edge of pavement every sixth post in the line of guide rail shall be reflectorized foot spacing for reflectors except those posts in the approach terminal and intermediate anchorage area which curve away from the shoulder or used in a median barrier .
The barrier shall be separated from cement concrete pavement or shoulders by a ½ thick ⅛ premoulded resilient joint filler meeting .
The joint filler shall cover the entire pavementshoulder face .
The Contractor shall abrasive blast the barrier and pavementshoulder in the reservoir and seal the joint using material meeting NEW YORK STATE DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS USC May Highway Joint Sealant Type IV .
Contraction joints shall be formed in or saw cut normal to the pavement .
Expansion joints shall be formed normal to the pavement with Premoulded Resilient Joint Filler meeting the requirements of and shall provide for expansion of ½ inch .
The barrier shall be separated from the cement concrete pavement or shoulder by a inch wide vertical joint extending down to the bottom of the pavement or shoulder .
The barrier shall be separated from the cement concrete pavement or shoulder by a inch wide vertical joint extending down to the bottom of the pavement or shoulder .
Contraction joints shall be formed or saw cut normal to the pavement .
Expansion joints shall be formed normal to the pavement with Premoulded Resilient Joint Filler meeting the requirements of and shall provide for expansion of inch .
Do not use polyphosphoric acid PPA downstate to modify the PG binder properties for mixtures containing limestone limestone as an aggregate blend component limestone as a constituent in crushed gravel aggregate or recycled asphalt pavement RAP that includes any limestone .
Do not use PPA downstate as a crosslinking agent for polymer modification of mixtures containing limestone limestone as an aggregate blend component limestone as a constituent in crushed gravel aggregate or recycled asphalt pavement RAP that includes any limestone .
Install a premoulded resilient joint filler at all joints between sidewalk and curb pavement buildings or other vertical surfaces and at all transverse construction joints .
Provide equipment guided by a reference system that ensures the pavement is placed to the specified line grade and cross section .
Precast concrete curb stone curb and granite curb excluding granite traversable sloped curb shall be backed up with concrete using one of the following methods depending on the type of pavement A. Portland Cement Concrete Rigid Pavement .
The minimum height of the concrete backing shall be one half of the concrete pavement thickness and shall be measured from the bottom of the curb .
The minimum height of the concrete backing shall be inches or to the top of the hot mix asphalt pavement whichever is greater measured from the bottom of the curb .
NEW YORK STATE DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS USC May When the curb is set next to a concrete rigid pavement grout conforming to Concrete Repair Material Concrete Repair Material High Early Strength or Masonry Mortar shall be placed in the joint formed between the curb and the pavement .
The grout shall extend from the bottom to the top of the pavement slab .
Curb anchors shall be installed a minimum of inches from the ends of a pavement slab .
Curb anchors for new concrete pavement when placed simultaneously with pavement concrete shall be placed by equipment which can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Engineer placement of the anchors in accordance with these specifications .
Curb anchors when not placed simultaneously with pavement concrete shall be placed rigidly secured by chairs or other supports to prevent displacement of the anchors when pavement concrete is placed .
Curb anchors for existing concrete pavement shall be inserted into holes drilled in the side of the existing concrete pavement .
NEW YORK STATE DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS USC May When curb and curb gutter is constructed next to concrete pavement the curb and curb gutter joints shall line up with the pavement joints or additional joints shall be provided in the curb and curb gutter which line up with the pavement joints . .
adjacent to expansion joints in the pavement and where shown in the Contract Documents or directed by the Engineer .
The cut or formed joints shall extend slightly below the surface of the adjacent pavement and shall be spaced at feet intervals .
When the curb and curb gutter is constructed next to concrete pavement the curb and curb gutter joints shall line up with the pavement joints or additional joints shall be provided in the curb and curb gutter which line up with the pavement joints .
adjacent to expansion joints in the pavement where shown in the Contract Documents or directed by the Engineer .
Granite traversable sloped curb shall be set such that the front bottom arris line is at the top of pavement and is on a on slope .
The Contractor shall place the granite traversable sloped curb on a wedge bed of dry concrete mix as above on the edge of the existing pavement .
The granite traversable sloped curb shall be placed on a wedge bed of dry concrete mix as above on the edge of the new pavement .
The Contractor shall sawcut inches of the pavement and place the granite traversable sloped curb as above .
When curb is to be laid on a cured or aged concrete base hot mix asphalt pavement or performance graded binder treated base the surface shall be thoroughly swept and cleaned by compressed air .
After a curing period of not less than hours exposed surfaces of the curbing shall be sprayed or hand brushed with two coats of pavement marking paint yellow or white as required .
Work shall consist of controlling traffic over a reasonably smooth traveled way which shall be marked by signs delineators channelizing devices pavement markings and other devices as shown in the contract documents or as directed by the Engineer .
Work shall be scheduled to keep the time and distance that existing pavement is removed or substantially disturbed to a minimum and consistent with the physical requirements of the contract .
Work shall consist of furnishing and maintaining protection for edge dropoffs adjacent to the pavement or shoulder .
Work shall consist of removing or covering existing permanent pavement markings interim pavement markings and temporary pavement markings including but not limited to edge lines lane lines center lines crosswalks stop bars arrows symbols and diagonal markings in gores and medians as shown in the contract documents or as directed by the Engineer . .
Work shall consist of furnishing and applying temporary pavement markings as shown in the contract documents or as directed by the Engineer .
The work for removable pavement tape removable wetnight reflective tape temporary overlay markers and removable raised pavement markers shall include removal .
Temporary pavement markings are intended for use on any new pavement or milled surface until the subsequent course is placed or interim pavement markings or final pavement markings are installed .
Work shall consist of furnishing applying and maintaining interim pavement markings as shown in the contract documents or as directed by the Engineer .
Interim pavement markings are intended for use in diversions temporary pavement realignments and crossovers lane shifts and closures and other traffic patterns associated with construction activities .
Interim pavement markings are intended for use for a given phase or season for a maximum of year . .
Work shall consist of furnishing installing moving and maintaining interim tubular markers attached to the pavement as shown in the contract documents or as directed by the Engineer .
Work shall consist of providing and installing pavement patching materials to maintain pavements open to traffic in acceptable condition as shown in the contract documents or as directed by the Engineer. . Mailboxes .
Materials used to repair pavement surfaces shall be compatible with the pavement .
In general plantmixed hot mix asphalt is suitable for all pavement surfaces to be repaired .
Tape used to cover existing pavement markings shall be nonreflective pavement marking masking tape substantially similar in color to the pavement surface in accordance with Removable Pavement Tape . .
Temporary pavement markings shall consist of removable raised pavement markers in accordance with Removable Raised Pavement Markers or removable pavement tape in accordance with Removable Pavement Tape or removable wet night reflective tape in accordance with Removable WetNight Reflective Tape or traffic paint in accordance with Traffic Paint and Glass Beads for Pavement Markings or temporary overlay markers in accordance with Temporary Overlay Markers. . Interim Pavement Markings .
Interim pavement markings shall consist of traffic paint in accordance with Traffic Paint and Glass Beads for Pavement Markings epoxy paint in accordance with Epoxy Paint and Glass Beads for Pavement Markings removable pavement tape in accordance with Removable Pavement Tape removable wetnight reflective tape in accordance with Removable WetNight Reflective Tape .
Interim pavement markings shall be supplemented where specified with removable raised pavement markers in accordance with Removable Raised Pavement Markers . .
Asphalt Emulsion Tack Coat shall be used to adhere the rumble strip to the existing pavement .
Removabletape rumble strips shall be formed from black nonreflectorized removable pavementmarking tape .
Reflective pavement marking material applied to the face of the barrier shall not by itself be considered acceptable delineation .
In general hot mix asphalt HMA is suitable for all pavement surfaces .
Except when construction operations necessitate disturbance of the normal surface the Contractor shall maintain the pavement surface in such a condition as to permit the safe comfortable passage of vehicles at the posted speed limit .
Milling operations shall be conducted to prevent pavement runoff from collecting along milled joints .
Where longitudinal tapered wedge paving joints are used temporary pavement markings shall be provided prior to reopening lanes to traffic .
Transverse bumps or vertical faces unpaved surfaces milled or grooved pavement rough pavement and other surface irregularities inch or more in height shall be adequately sloped or tapered or BUMP W or other appropriate warning signs shall be posted in advance of the condition .
Where traffic will be riding on milled pavement the Contractor shall install GROOVED PAVEMENT W signs on the approaches .
Where the posted speed limit is mph or higher the Contractor shall place a portable variable message sign PVMS in advance of pavement that has been milled or grooved and is open to traffic warning motorcycle riders to use caution .
For expressways where the posted speed limit is mph or higher the Contractor shall not leave milled or grooved pavement for more than calendar days before placement of the next pavement course .
Maintaining positive drainage shall include cleaning of drainage grates on roadway pavements .
The Contractor will not be responsible for snow and ice control on the pavement shoulder or sidewalks which are not restricted by construction operations and open to the public During periods of seasonal shutdown the traveled way shall be maintained in an acceptable manner for travel and all traffic control devices and safety features maintained in a safe operable condition .
Surfaces shall consist of pavement firmly compacted granular material or other surfaces noted in the contract documents or approved by the Engineer .
including but not limited to pavement marking application pavement marking removal and sweeping When located in an open travel lane of a multilane roadway the shadow vehicle shall display the flashing arrow panel in the appropriate mode .
All mounting heights are measured from the bottom of the lower sign panel to the nearest edge of pavement or to the ground directly below the sign whichever results in a higher mounting .
Arrow panels shall be mounted so that the base of the panel is at least feet above the pavement surface .
Where construction operations obliterate pavement markings or otherwise change or disrupt the normal traffic pattern the Contractor shall use channelizing devices to physically separate traffic from portions of the roadway not available for travel to separate traffic from hazards adjacent to the roadway to separate opposing or adjacent travel lanes to mark the location of hazards within or adjacent to the roadway and to clearly define the intended travel path for vehicles bicycles and pedestrians .
One Type A flashing warning light shall be installed on channelizing devices used to mark the location of hazards in or adjacent to the travel lane NEW YORK STATE DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS USC May including but not limited to pavement discontinuities drainage structures excavations fixed objects and other obstructions and potential hazards remaining at the end of the work shift .
The Contractor shall use drums tall cones extra tall cones vertical panels oversized vertical panels or Type II construction barricades where the work introduces or exposes hazards within the roadway or at the outside edge of the roadway and pavement edge markings or permanent delineators are not installed .
Workers placing or removing traffic control channelizing devices ontofrom the roadway from the back or side of a moving vehicle shall be protected by a fall restraint system consisting of side racks harness and lanyard andor cone basket so that a worker can not fall off the vehicle and strike the pavement .
The Contractor shall provide pavement edge dropoff protection in accordance with Table Pavement Edge DropOff Protection .
Where pavement edge lines are not provided channelizing devices shall be preceded by a NO SHOULDER W sign repeated at all ramps and roadway intersections .
Where pavement edge lines are provided channelizing devices shall be preceded by SHOULDER DROPOFF W signs repeated at all ramps and roadway intersections .
The Contractor shall remove or cover existing permanent pavement markings interim pavement markings and temporary pavement markings as indicated in the contract documents or directed by the Engineer to accommodate traffic pattern changes by covering the markings with preformed removable pavement marking masking tape or by NEW YORK STATE DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS USC May removing the markings .
Masking tape shall be placed in blocks to prevent the underlying shape of pavement marking symbols or letters from being confused with existing markings .
Removal shall be completed prior to the installation of temporary pavement markings or interim pavement markings .
Grinding to remove pavement markings will typically remove to ¼ inch of pavement surface .
Prior to installation the existing marking and adjacent pavement shall be cleaned of debris by compressed air or sweeping .
Removable pavement marking masking tape shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturers written instructions .
Prior to installation the existing pavement marking and adjacent pavement shall be cleaned by compressed air sweeping or other means adequate to remove debris but that does not result in damage to the existing pavement marking .
The width of the removable pavement marking masking tape shall be sufficient to completely cover the existing pavement marking .
The masking tape shall firmly adhere to the entire length and width of the existing pavement marking to be covered .
Any tape that is loosened removed or that fails to retain its original matte finish or that for any other reason fails to obliterate the existing pavement marking shall be replaced immediately at no additional expense to the State .
When the covered pavement markings are to be restored to service masking tape shall be removed .
Temporary adhesive residues will be allowed to remain providing that the existing pavement marking visibility is not impaired .
Any damage to the existing pavement markings or to the pavement surface that results from the removal of the masking tape shall be repaired at no additional cost to the State .
If the existing marking can not be repaired satisfactorily the Contractor shall remove damaged pavement markings completely andor replace the pavement section at no additional cost to the State . .
The Contractor shall install and maintain temporary pavement markings in accordance with the contract documents using patterns and colors shown in the MUTCD to establish temporary traffic patterns during construction on any pavement including milled or grooved surface resurfaced new pavement or other paved surface without pavement markings for a maximum of calendar days .
Within calendar days after placement the Contractor shall either install the succeeding pavement course or install the remaining temporary pavement markings including edge lines stop bars and simple crosswalks with no hatching .
Removable pavement tape removable wetnight reflective tape temporary overlay markers and removable raised pavement markers shall be removed before placing a subsequent course at no additional cost to the State .
Temporary pavement marking stripes shall be a minimum of inches in width .
Temporary pavement markings shall be applied to a clean dry pavement in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
Hatch lines and symbols will not be required as temporary pavement markings unless required by the contract documents .
Traffic paint pavement markings shall be applied at a minimum wet film thickness of mil immediately followed by an application of glass beads at a rate of lbgal of paint .
Where specified removable raised pavement markers shall be used to supplement line pavement markings .
The raised markers shall not be a substitute for line pavement markings letters or symbols .
Removable raised pavement markers spaced every feet may be used to supplement line pavement NEW YORK STATE DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS USC May markings .
Two removable raised pavement markers spaced at each end of the foot marking may be used to supplement a foot broken line pavement marking .
If unanticipated weather or other conditions prevent the application of temporary pavement markings the Contractor shall apply foot removable pavement tape markings or temporary overlay markers at foot spaces at no additional cost to the State for a maximum of days until such time as temporary pavement markings may be applied or the next pavement course is installed .
For twolane twoway highways the Contractor shall install a temporary pavement markings consisting of full barrier centerline markings in no passing zones and foot broken line markings at foot spacing in passing zones .
Twolane twoway highways may for a maximum of days have the centerline marked with yellow foot by inch removable pavement tape or yellow temporary overlay markers at foot spaces with NO CENTER STRIPE W signs and DO NOT PASS R signs at no additional cost to the State .
A NO CENTER STRIPE sign shall be installed in advance of the area marked with yellow foot removable pavement tape markings or temporary overlay markers as well as after major intersections and after major traffic generators within the area marked with the removable pavement tape markings or temporary overlay markings .
A DO NOT PASS sign shall be installed within feet of the beginning of the area with the removable pavement tape markings or temporary overlay markers and a second DO NOT PASS sign shall be installed within feet of the first DO NOT PASS sign and subsequent DO NOT PASS signs shall not exceed feet spacing .
On an approach without centerline pavement markings where passing will not be permitted a black on orange NO PASSING ZONE W pennant shaped sign shall be installed on that approach .
Full barrier partial barrier or broken line temporary centerline pavement markings shall be placed within three calendar days. . Interim Pavement Markings .
Work shall consist of furnishing applying and maintaining interim pavement markings as shown in the contract documents or as directed by the Engineer .
The work for removable tape removable wetnight reflective tape temporary overlay markers and removable raised pavement markers shall include removal .
Interim pavement markings are intended for use in diversions temporary pavement realignments and crossovers lane shifts and closures and other traffic patterns associated with construction activities .
Interim pavement markings are intended for use for a given phase or season for a maximum of year .
Interim pavement markings shall be applied to a clean dry pavement in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
Interim pavement markings on roadways open to traffic shall be applied in the direction of traffic .
Traffic paint and epoxy paint pavement markings shall be applied at a minimum wet film thickness of mils immediately followed by an application of glass beads at a rate of lbgal of paint .
Painted markings may be supplemented with removable raised pavement markers .
Removable raised pavement markers shall be spaced at feet to supplement a solid line and markers spaced shall be used to supplement a foot segment of broken line .
Removable raised pavement markers shall not be used alone to simulate interim pavement markings .
Traffic paint or removable tape shall be replaced upon abrasion of the line such that more than percent of the underlying pavement is visible within any feet segment of line or loss of more than consecutive skip lines or loss of more than feet of continuous line or failure of any line to be clearly visible at night under lowbeam headlamp illumination when viewed from a distance of feet .
Missing removable raised pavement markers shall be replaced upon loss of more than percent of the markers within a feet long segment of line or loss of more than consecutive markers or failure of any line to be clearly visible at night under lowbeam headlamp illumination when viewed from a distance of feet .
In the event that such pavement markings are damaged or lost the Engineer will determine whether to replace the lost pavement markings in kind or with other marking materials .
Separate payment will be made for pavement markings replaced or installed due to damage or loss caused by snowplowing . .
Where there is no usable shoulder or the shoulder is less than feet wide the rumble strips should be ended feet short of the edge of usable pavement .
The surface temperature of the pavement shall be F or greater unless otherwise authorized by the Engineer .
The pavement surface shall be cleaned with compressed air just prior to tack coating and subsequent installation of the rumble strips .
The strips shall be formed using a rumble strip paver drag box pulled transversely across the pavement or by hand placement between forms fixed to the pavement .
Raised removable tape rumble strips shall be formed by applying one or more layers of removable preformed pavement marking masking tape .
The tape shall be applied to a clean dry pavement surface in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
The pavement surface shall be swept or cleaned with compressed air just prior to application of the tape .
Raised preformed rumble strips shall be applied to a clean dry pavement surface in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
The pavement surface shall be swept or cleaned with compressed air just prior to application of the strip .
Sawcut rumble strips shall be saw cut into existing pavement using wet cutting methods .
Before a travel lane with sawcut rumble strips is reopened to traffic the pavement shall be cleaned by sweeping flushing or with a stream of compressed air .
Sawing slurry from the wet sawing process shall be flushed from the pavement surface immediately .
Milledin rumble strips shall be milled into existing pavement using a rotarytype cutting head with a maximum nominal outside diameter of inches .
The cutting head shall be on its own suspension system independent from that of the power unit to allow the head to align itself with the slope of the pavement andor any irregularities in the pavement surface .
Prior to beginning work the Contractor shall demonstrate to the Engineer the ability to achieve the desired surface without tearing or snagging the pavement .
Before a travel lane with milledin rumble strips is reopened to traffic the pavement shall be cleaned by sweeping flushing or with a stream of compressed air .
The Contractor shall either completely remove raised rumble strips from the pavement or fill in the depressions from sawcut or milledin rumble strips prior to the start of the winter plowing season prior to the placement of successive pavement courses or as directed by the Engineer .
Any damage to the pavement surface resulting from the removal of raised rumble strips shall be repaired at no additional cost to the State .
The rumble strips shall be overfilled slightly and compacted using a plate tamper or static roller so that the final compacted surface is flush with the existing pavement. . Interim Tubular Markers .
The Contractor shall attach interim tubular markers to the pavement in a manner that prevents them from being moved or dislodged by traffic .
Interim tubular markers shall be installed on pavement that has been cleaned to remove pavement markings oil dirt or other debris or substances that may interfere with a proper bond .
Attachment to the pavement shall be by mechanical fastener or by adhesive in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
Bonding agents shall be of sufficient amount or size to ensure proper bonding of the base to the pavement .
PVMS shall be placed so that the base of the message panel is at least feet above the adjacent pavement surface and aligned to provide optimum viewing by approaching motorists .
Holes in flexible pavement or unpaved areas shall be filled with material consistent with the subbase base and surface material .
Holes in portland cement concrete pavement or structural decks shall be filled with material meeting the requirements of Concrete Grout Material or Epoxy Polysulfide Grout .
Vehicles operating on the pavement of a closed roadway or travel lane shall display fourway flashers or rotating amber beacons at all times .
Level I illumination shall be provided for all areas of general construction operations to include all work operations by Contractors personnel including work zone traffic control setup and operations staging excavation cleaning and sweeping pavement marking spoil disposal landscaping planting and seeding layout and measurements ahead of the actual work borrow areas spoil areas and truck cleanout areas .
Level I illumination shall be provided a minimum of feet ahead and feet behind a paving or milling machine or for the entire area of concrete placement or pavement work if less than this distance .
Level III illumination shall be provided for pavement or structural crack filling joint repair pavement patching and repairs installation of signal equipment or other electricalmechanical equipment and other tasks involving fine details or intricate parts and equipment. . Glare Control .
The Contractor shall place paving materials suitable to provide temporary pavement patches on paved surfaces where vehicular bicycle or pedestrian traffic is to be maintained including the traveled way shoulders sidewalks and other paved surfaces damaged by traffic or environmental factors and not by Contractor operations .
During periods of winter shutdown the Contractor shall inspect the contract on a regular basis and pavement patches shall be installed as needed .
The Contractor shall place pavement patches to provide a relatively smooth uniform driving surface suitable for safe travel at the posted speed limit .
The quantity to be measured for payment will be in feet to the nearest whole foot along the centerline of the pavement stripes covered or removed .
The quantity to be measured for payment will be in feet to the nearest whole foot along the centerline of the pavement stripes installed and will be based on a inch wide stripe .
The quantity to be measured for payment will be in feet to the nearest whole foot along the centerline of the pavement stripes installed and will be based on a inch wide stripe .
cubic yard of pavement patching installed. . Mailboxes .
The unit price bid for the covering or removal of pavement markings shall include the cost of all labor materials and equipment necessary to complete the work including the costs of any repairs or replacement of damaged pavement or existing pavement markings resulting from pavement marking removal operations . .
The unit price bid for temporary pavement markings shall include the cost of furnishing all labor materials and equipment necessary to complete the work .
Payment shall be provided each time temporary pavement markings are first applied on a pavement course in accordance with the contract requirements .
No additional payment shall be provided for the installation of construction signs temporary delineators and channelizing devices necessitated by the Contractors failure to place temporary pavement markings before the pavement is opened to traffic or for temporary roadside pavement channelization until edge lines are placed .
No additional payment shall be provided for markings required because the Contractor failed to place the next pavement course or the final pavement markings within calendar days. . Interim Pavement Markings .
The unit price bid for interim pavement markings shall include the cost of furnishing all labor materials and equipment necessary to complete the work .
Payment will include the cost of pavement cleaning asphalt concrete and other materials used to form or fill in the rumble strips and tack coat .
The unit price bid for temporary concrete barrier shall include all labor materials and equipment necessary to satisfactorily complete the work including any required connection devices end treatments end section pinning temporary delineation and repair of pavement after removal of temporary concrete barrier .
No payment will be made for temporary concrete barrier installed at the Contractors option required solely due to a delay caused by the Contractors operations or installed to protect pavement edge dropoffs unless required in the contract documents . .
The unit price bid for pavement patching shall include the cost of furnishing all labor materials and equipment necessary to patch pavement during periods of winter shutdown when work on the contract is inactive or when hot mix asphalt material is not available including mobilization of work crews and work zone traffic control .
The cost of all work associated with providing and installing suitable pavement patching materials to maintain pavements open to traffic in acceptable condition when work on the contract is active or when hot mix asphalt material is available will be paid under a hot mix asphalt sidewalk item if that item is in the contract or alternatively under a top course paving item regardless of the material actually used. . Mailboxes .
Cleaning sealing and filling joints and cracks in the existing pavement removal and repair of deteriorated pavement sections stressrelieving pavement repairs and cleaning the existing pavement and shoulders prior to the application of a new HMA course .
Clean existing pavement and shoulder surfaces to be overlaid including ruts and depressions by the use of mechanical sweepers hand brooms or other means until the surfaces are free of all material which might interfere with the bond between the overlay material and the existing surfaces .
Remove all debris from the pavement and shoulders surfaces and dispose of in an appropriate manner .
Keep the pavement and shoulders clean until the overlay operations are completed .
If the existing pavement requires stress relieving repairs complete these repairs in accordance with .
Clean all joints and cracks in the pavement of all dirt and loose material to a depth equal to a minimum of twice the crack or joint width by holding the cleaning jet inch above the pavement surface .
Seal joints and cracks in the existing pavement from to inch wide with an asphalt filler .
Blot with fine aggregate if required to prevent tracking the bituminous material over the pavement surface .
Remove and dispose of deteriorated HMA pavements to sound material such that all excavated sides are vertical .
If a chipping hammer is used first sawcut the pavement around the perimeter of the designated repair area to the anticipated repair depth .
Remove loose broken or spalled PCC pavements to sound material but not exceeding a depth of inches .
If a chipping hammer is used first sawcut the pavement around the perimeter of the designated repair area to the anticipated repair depth not to exceed inches .
Unless indicated otherwise in the contract documents the pressure relief joint shall be a minimum of feet longitudinally and the full width of the pavement including the curb and gutter if any .
Remove the PCC pavements with minimum disturbance to the subbase .
The quantity measured will be the number of square yards of existing pavement andor shoulder surfaces cleaned . .
The quantity measured will be the number of square yards of existing pavement surface removed and repaired . .
The quantity measured will be the number of square yards of existing pavement surface removed and repaired . .
The quantity measured will be the number of square yards of existing pavement surface removed and repaired .
This work shall consist of cleaning and preparing portland cement and bituminous pavement surfaces for the application of reflectorized pavement marking materials .
Examples of pavement markings requiring this item include but are not limited to reflectorized thermoplastic preformed and epoxy type marking materials .
Materials and equipment for cleaning and preparing pavement surfaces may be selected by the Contractor except that they will be approved by the Engineer and shall conform to all applicable Local State or Federal law regulation or codes .
The work required to clean and prepare pavement surfaces shall be performed in accordance with these specifications the contract documents and to the satisfaction of the Engineer .
Whenever grinding waterblasting dry sandblasting or other operations are performed the work shall be conducted in such a manner that the finished pavement surface is not damaged or left in a pattern that will mislead or misdirect the motorist .
When these operations are completed the pavement surface shall first be power broomed and then blown off with compressed air to remove residue and debris resulting from the cleaning work .
Cleaning and surface preparation work shall be confined to the surface area specified for the application of pavement marking materials or the surface area of existing pavement markings that are specified for removal on the plans or as directed by the Engineer .
When lines are cleaned the area of preparation will be the width of the new pavement marking or existing line plus inch on each side .
On new portland cement concrete pavements cleaning operations shall not begin until a minimum of days after the placement of concrete .
All new concrete pavements shall be cleaned by either sandblasting or water blasting .
When water blasting is performed pavement markings shall be applied no sooner than hours after the blasting has been completed .
D. The peaks of the textured pavement surface are rounded in profile and free of sharp edges and irregularities . .
Existing pavement markings shall be cleaned for the purpose of NEW YORK STATE DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS USC May A .
Preparing the pavement surface for the application of new pavement markings in the same location as the existing markings .
It is not intended that all deteriorated existing pavement markings be removed .
Removal operations shall be conducted in such a manner that no more than moderate color andor surface texture change results on the surrounding pavement surface .
When waterblasting is performed pavement markings shall be applied no sooner than hours after the blasting has been completed .
The Contractor shall not remove existing pavement markings and leave the highway unmarked overnight .
Surface cleaning and preparation of pavement surfaces for lines will be measured in feet along the centerline of the prepared surface and will be based on a nominal inches wide line .
Cleaning and preparation of letters and symbols on pavement surfaces will be measured by each unit cleaned .
The accepted quantities of cleaned pavement surface will be paid for at the contract unit price which shall include the cost of furnishing all labor materials and equipment to satisfactorily complete the work .
No payment will be made under this item for the removal of pavement markings required under .. Payment will be made under Item No .
This work shall consist of the construction of white synthetic resin binder concrete pavement in accordance with these specifications and in reasonably close conformity with lines and grades shown on the plans or established by the Engineer .
All surfaces to be paved shall be thoroughly cleaned of all foreign material including membrane curing compound of Portland Cement concrete pavement prior to the placing of the pavement .
The tack coat shall not be poured onto the pavement surface for application .
Under this work the Contractor shall furnish and apply painted reflectorized pavement marking paint at the locations and in accordance with the patterns indicated on the plans or as directed by the Engineer and in accordance with the MUTCD and these specifications .
Reflectorized pavement marking paints shall be selected from the Departments Approved List of White and Yellow Reflectorized Pavement Marking Paints .
All pavement markings and patterns shall be placed as shown in the contract documents and in accordance with the MUTCD .
Before any pavement marking work is begun a schedule of operations shall be submitted to and approved by the Engineer .
When pavement markings are applied under traffic the Contractor shall provide all the necessary flags signs cones shadow vehicles flashing arrow boards etc .
to maintain and protect traffic to protect the work operation and to protect the painted pavement markings until thoroughly dry and serviceable .
The application of pavement markings shall be done in the general direction of traffic .
The Contractor shall be responsible for cleaning the pavement to the satisfaction of the Engineer of dust dirt and other foreign material which may be detrimental to the adhesion of the paint film .
When necessary the Contractor shall establish marking line points at feet intervals throughout the length of the pavement or as directed by the Engineer .
At the time of paint application the pavement surface and ambient temperature shall not be less than F the relative humidity shall not exceed and the pavement surface shall be dry .
In no case shall the paint be heated above F. The painted pavement markings shall be uniformly applied to the pavement surface at the minimum specified wet film thickness .
The applied pavement markings shall have cleancut edges and true and smooth alignment .
On pavements where traffic is to be maintained and the final marking pattern is known traffic paint shall be applied before the end of the work shift .
If the Contractor is unable to apply final pavement markings and traffic is to be maintained then removable pavement markings offset from the final pavement markings shall be installed in accordance with Section Work Zone Traffic Control at no additional cost to the State .
Pavement striping will be measured in feet along the centerline of the pavement stripe and shall be based on a inches wide stripe .
The accepted quantities of pavement markings will be paid for at the contract unit price bid which shall include the cost of furnishing all labor materials and equipment to satisfactorily complete the work .
All surplus excavated material shall be removed and disposed of by the Contractor as specified in Section Disposal of Surplus Excavated Material Excavation shall be backfilled as specified in Section Select Structure Fill The outline of all areas to be removed in sidewalks driveways and pavement shall be saw cut to a depth of at least inches prior to removal .
The pavement shall be cleaned by sweeping and the work area shall be reopened to traffic .
Because of the need to promptly replace pavement markings and reopen the highway to traffic milling of CARDs shall not be conducted when conditions would not allow pavement markings to be placed soon after .
To facilitate prompt placement of pavement markings by either the Departments pavement marking crews or the Contractor as indicated in the contract documents all work shall be done between April and November Downstate in the counties of Dutchess Orange Rockland Putnam Westchester Nassau Suffolk and the City of New York and between May and October Upstate all other counties .
If the contract documents indicate that pavement markings will be installed by the Department the Contractor shall inform the Engineer of the planned work schedule and the Engineer will coordinate with the Departments pavement marking crew chief .
If the contract documents indicate that pavement markings will be installed by the Contractor pavement NEW YORK STATE DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS USC May markings shall be installed within three calendar days measuring from the date on which the markings at that point were first removed .
New asphalt pavement should be allowed to harden for at least hours before CARDs are milled in so that the milling machine does not tear the asphalt and so that asphalt does not build up on the cutters .
After the CARDs have been milled and the millings have been removed the permanent pavement markings can be installed .
The cutting head shall be on its own suspension system independent from that of the power unit to allow the head to align itself with the slope of the pavement andor any irregularities in the surface .
The pavement shall be cleaned by sweeping and the work area shall be reopened to traffic .
Prior to beginning full production work involving asphalt pavement the Contractor shall demonstrate to the Engineer the ability to achieve the desired surface without tearing or snagging the asphalt .
The cutting head shall be on its own suspension system independent from that of the power unit to allow the head to align itself with the slope of the pavement andor any irregularities in the shoulder surface .
SHARDs shall not be milled in over deteriorating pavement .
As the work progresses any portions of the shoulder or pavement that will accommodate traffic during the construction effort shall be cleaned by sweeping or flushing and the work area shall be reopened to traffic .
The minimum separation between the final ground surface and the top of pipe outside the pavement area shall be feet .
Where the perimeter of the foundation slab will not be adjacent to pavement the limit of excavation shall be feet outside of the slab and forming shall be used .
Where the perimeter of the foundation slab will be adjacent to pavement that is to remain in place the limits of excavation shall be the limits of the foundation slab and the existing pavement shall be saw cut full NEW YORK STATE DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS USC May depth prior to removal of the pavement and performance of the excavation work .
When the existing concrete pavement is not sufficient to meet the anchorage requirements or there is not an adequate existing foundation the Contractor shall remove the NEW YORK STATE DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS USC May existing pavement and construct a reinforced concrete foundation slab and backup structure to the dimensions indicated in the working drawings .
The excavated section of pavement between the new foundation slab and the limits of excavation shall be restored to the full height of the surrounding sound pavement . .
If there are no contract pay items for Truing and Leveling then pavement restoration will be paid under the contract pay item for the top course of hot mix asphalt .
If no contract pay items exist in the contract for paving items then no separate payment for pavement restoration will be made .
The adjustment ring or frame shall be placed so the valve box cover will not protrude above the finished surface of the pavement and is no more than inche below finished grade .
If the Contractor elects to reset the existing valve box the costs of the work involved in the removal and replacement of existing disturbed pavement shall be included in the bid price for adjustment of the valve box .
The mounting height shall be measured from the center of the light source to the pavement .
Conduit shall be placed under existing pavement by approved jacking or boring methods and as directed by the Engineer .
The outline of all areas to be removed in sidewalks driveways and pavement shall be saw cut to a depth of at least inches prior to removing the sidewalk driveway or pavement .
Conduit may be placed under pavement by jacking or boring methods approved by the Engineer .
In the event obstructions are encountered small test holes may be cut in the pavement upon approval of the Engineer .
Jacking or boring pits shall be kept feet clear of the edge of pavement and shoulder whenever possible .
The loop shall be outlined on the pavement to conform to the specified configuration .
A power saw and wet cutting techniques shall be used to cut a slot in the pavement .
Immediately after sawing by either wet or dry methods the slot and pavement shall be flushed with pressurized clean water to remove the saw slurry dust or other cutting debris .
At the edge of pavement or curb a inch minimum diameter Metal Steel Conduit Zinc Coated Flexible LiquidTight Steel Conduit or Rigid Plastic Conduit shall be installed between the pavement and pullbox in accordance with details specified on the standard sheets .
The curb or pavement shall be cut or scored to leave a permanent mark to show where the conduit runs under the curb or pavement .
The pair of loop wires between the edge of pavement and the splice to the shielded leadin cable in the pullbox shall be twisted together with at least five turns per foot .
This resistance shall be tested before the loop is sealed in the pavement and after the splice is made between the loop wires twisted pair and shielded lead in .
The pavement temperature shall be at least F and rising before the sealer is placed .
Measurement of inductance loop installation shall be the number of feet of pavement sawcut . .
The unit price bid per linear foot shall include the cost of all pavement sawing and drilling loop embedding sealer and pavement cutouts .
Under this work the Contractor shall furnish and apply epoxy reflectorized pavement markings at the location and in accordance with patterns indicated on the plans or as ordered by the Engineer and in conformance with the MUTCD and these specifications .
The epoxy marking material should be hotapplied by spray methods onto bituminous and portland cement concrete pavement surfaces at the thickness and width shown on the Contract Documents .
All pavement markings and patterns shall be placed as shown on the Contract Documents and in accordance with the MUTCD .
Before any pavement marking work is begun a schedule of operations shall be submitted for the approval of the Regional Director and hisher authorized representative .
When pavement markings are applied under traffic the Contractor shall provide all necessary flags markers signs etc .
NEW YORK STATE DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS USC May The application of pavement markings shall be done in the general direction of traffic .
When necessary the Contractor shall establish marking line points at feet intervals throughout the length of the pavement or as directed by the Engineer. . Atmospheric Conditions .
Epoxy pavement markings shall only be applied during conditions of dry weather and on substantially dry pavement surfaces .
At the time of installation the pavement surface temperature shall be minimum of F and the ambient temperature shall be a minimum of F and rising .
The Engineer shall be the sole determiner as to when atmospheric conditions and pavement surface conditions are such to produce satisfactory results . .
The Contractor shall clean the pavement and existing durable markings to the satisfaction of the Engineer .
At the time of application all pavement surfaces and existing durable markings shall be free of oil dirt dust grease and similar foreign materials .
In addition concrete curing compounds on new portland cement concrete surfaces and existing painted pavement markings on both concrete and bituminous pavement surfaces shall be cleaned and paid for in accordance with Section Cleaning and Preparation of Pavement Surfaces for Pavement Markings. . Epoxy Applicating Equipment .
Mobile applicating equipment for the placement of epoxy reflectorized pavement markings shall be approved by the Director Materials Bureau prior to the start of work .
In general a mobile applicator shall be a truck mounted selfcontained pavement marking machine specifically designed to apply epoxy resin materials and reflective glass spheres in continuous and skip line patterns .
The applicating equipment shall be capable of installing a minimum of feet of epoxy reflectorized pavement markings in an eight hour day and shall include the following features .
All necessary spray equipment mixers compressors and other appurtenances for the placement of epoxy reflectorized pavement markings in a simultaneous sequence of operations as described in .
Epoxy reflectorized pavement markings shall be placed at the width thickness and pattern designated by the Contract Documents .
Marking operations shall not begin until applicable surface preparation work is completed and approved by the Engineer and the atmospheric conditions and pavement surface temperature are acceptable to the Engineer .
The pavement surface is airblasted to remove dirt and residues . .
The epoxy resin mixed and heated in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations is uniformly hotsprayed onto the pavement surface at the minimum specified thickness. . Reflective glass spheres are injected into or dropped onto the liquid epoxy marking at a minimum rate of lbgal of epoxy resin . .
Epoxy reflectorized pavement markings which after application and curing are determined by the Engineer to be defective and not in conformance with this specification shall be repaired .
Repair shall be made by restriping over the cleaned surface in accordance with the requirements of this specification and at the full thickness indicated on the Contract Documents. . Uncured or discolored epoxy insufficient bond to pavement surface or existing durable marking .
The defective epoxy marking shall be completely removed and cleaned to the underlying pavement surface in accordance with the requirements of Section Cleaning and Preparation of Pavement Surfaces at the Contractors expense .
The extent of removal shall be the defective area plus any adjacent epoxy pavement marking material extending three feet in any direction .
After surface preparation work is complete repair shall be made by reapplying epoxy over the cleaned pavement surface in accordance with the requirements of this specification .
All work in conjunction with the repair or replacement of defective epoxy reflectorized pavement markings shall be performed by the Contractor at no additional cost to the State .
Pavement striping will be measured in feet along the centerline of the pavement stripe and will be based on a inch wide stripe .
The cost of removal of concrete curing compounds and existing pavement markings will be paid under separate items and are not included in this item .
No payment will be made for the repair or replacement of defective epoxy reflectorized pavement markings .
Under this work the Contractor shall furnish and apply thermoplastic reflectorized pavement markings at the location and in accordance with patterns indicated on the plans or as ordered by the Engineer and in conformance with the MUTCD and these specifications .
The thermoplastic pavement marking compound shall be extruded in a molten state onto the pavement surface .
Following surface application of glass beads and upon cooling to normal pavement temperatures the resultant marking shall be an adherent reflectorized stripe of the specified thickness and width that is capable of resisting deformation by traffic .
all projects specifying quantities greater than feet of longitudinal pavement marking lines will be striped using only mobile applicating equipment for the longitudinal lines .
Longitudinal pavement marking lines are Broken Lines skipline Edge Lines Barrier Lines and Solid Lines as defined by the MUTCD Portable applicating equipment will be acceptable for placing all other markings on these projects .
Thermoplastic material shall be applied to the pavement surface by the extrusion method wherein one side of the shaping die is the pavement and the other three sides are contained by or are part of suitable equipment for maintaining the temperature and controlling the flow of material Note .
The equipment used for the placement of thermoplastic pavement markings shall be two general types mobile applicator and portable applicator . .
The mobile applicator shall be defined as a truck mounted selfcontained pavement marking machine that is capable of hot applying thermoplastic by the extrusion method .
The portable applicator shall be capable of applying thermoplastic pavement markings by the extrusion method .
All pavement markings shall be placed as shown on the plans and in accordance with the MUTCD .
Before any pavement marking work is begun a schedule of operations shall be submitted for the approval of the Regional Director or his authorized representative .
When pavement markings are applied under traffic the Contractor shall provide all necessary flags markers signs etc .
The application of pavement markings shall be done in the general direction of traffic .
When necessary the Contractor shall establish marking line points at feet intervals throughout the length of pavement or as directed by the Engineer. . Atmospheric Conditions .
Thermoplastic pavement markings shall be placed upon dry pavement surfaces .
At the time of installation the pavement surface temperature shall be a minimum of F and the ambient temperatures shall be a minimum of F and rising .
To comply with the F pavement surface temperature requirement it will benefit the Contractor to schedule striping work for seasons of warm weather when possible .
All pavement surfaces shall be primed except that on new bituminous pavements when the thermoplastic pavement markings are applied within the same calendar year as the completion of paving operations primer shall not be required .
The primer shall be either a onecomponent or a twocomponent cold or hot applied material of the type recommended by the manufacturer of the thermoplastic pavement marking material .
The Contractor shall be responsible for cleaning the pavement surface to the satisfaction of the Engineer .
At the time of application all pavement surfaces shall be free of oil dirt dust grease and similar foreign materials .
In addition concrete curing compounds on new Portland Cement concrete surfaces and existing pavement markings on both concrete and bituminous pavement surfaces shall be cleaned and paid for under separate items . .
When the surface preparation work has been completed if applicable the bituminous andor concrete pavement surface shall be primed according to the manufacturers written instructions .
Primer shall not be required on new bituminous pavement surfaces that are completed within the same calendar year as the thermoplastic marking application .
The primer shall be spray applied onto the pavement surface and allowed to dry according to the manufacturers written instructions .
Pavement striping will be measured by linear foot along the centerline of the pavement stripe and will be based on a inch wide stripe .
The cost of removal of concrete curing compounds and existing pavement markings will be paid under separate items and are not included in this item .
Under this work the Contractor shall furnish and apply preformed reflectorized pavement markings at the location and in accordance with patterns indicated on the plans or as ordered by the Engineer and in conformance with the MUTCD and these specifications .
The preformed reflectorized pavement marking shall be applied on new and existing bituminous and portland cement concrete surfaces by hand and mechanical methods .
The resultant marking shall be an adherent reflectorized stripe that is capable of molding itself to the contours of the pavement surface and of resisting deformation by traffic .
All pavement markings and patterns shall be placed as shown on the plans and in accordance with the MUTCD .
Before any pavement marking work is begun a schedule of operations shall be submitted for the approval of the Regional Director or his authorized representative .
When pavement markings are applied under traffic the Contractor shall supply all necessary flags markers signs and other devices to maintain traffic and to protect the markings until set .
NEW YORK STATE DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS USC May The application of pavement markings shall be done in the general direction of traffic .
When required by the Engineer the Contractor shall establish marking line points at feet intervals throughout the length of the pavement or as directed by the Engineer . .
Preformed pavement markings shall be applied by the following methods .
Preformed markings shall be applied on new and existing bituminous and portland cement concrete pavement surfaces as prescribed in .
The Engineer shall determine as to when temperature and pavement surface conditions are such as to produce satisfactory results .
Preformed pavement markings shall be placed upon dry pavement surfaces pavements exposed to rain or wet conditions shall be allowed to thoroughly dry before marking application .
The bituminous pavement surface temperature shall at all times be the controlling temperature at which preformed markings are placed and shall be between F and F. Preformed markings applied in conjunction with .B on completed pavements shall be applied within the seasonal limitations of Table Temperature and Seasonal Requirements .
The pavement surface and ambient air temperatures in Table shall in all cases be the controlling temperatures at which preformed markings are placed .
Surface temperatures shall be measured on the pavement surface where the preformed markings are to be placed .
Mechanical applicating equipment for the placement of preformed pavement marking stripes shall be of the type recommended by the manufacturer of the preformed material .
Pneumatic rubbertired rollers shall exert a minimum tire compression on the pavement of psi .
The Contractor shall be responsible for cleaning the pavement surface to the satisfaction of the Engineer .
At the time of application all pavement surfaces shall be free of oil dirt dust grease and similar foreign materials .
In addition concrete curing compounds on new portland cement concrete surfaces and existing pavement markings on both concrete and bituminous pavement surfaces shall be removed and paid for under separate items . .
Preformed marking operations shall not begin until after the pavement surface has been cleaned and prepared .
Preformed stripes shall not be applied over longitudinal paving joints or over the point of transition between the pavement surface and adjoining shoulder .
The placement of stripes in the area of transition shall be either on the pavement or on the shoulder as directed by the Engineer .
The application of preformed markings shall not begin until finish rolling of the new bituminous pavement is complete .
At the time of marking application the surface temperature of the new bituminous pavement shall be between F and F. The Contractor shall coordinate paving and preformed marking operations to conform with surface temperature requirements .
Immediately after its placement the preformed marking shall be adhered to the warm pavement surface by rolling .
The preformed marking shall be placed on the pavement surface and adhered by rolling .
Pavement striping will be measured by feet along the centerline of the pavement stripe and will be based on a inch wide stripe .
The preformed pavement markings will be inspected during and following installation to determine conformance with this specification .
percent measured longitudinally of the total length of all broken lines in any feet long pavement section .
percent measured longitudinally of the total length of all dotted lines in any feet long pavement section .
percent measured longitudinally of the total length of solid line or edge line in any feet long pavement section .
If of the edgeline striping is intact in a feet pavement section the edgeline will be measured as the full feet of applied marking .
The cost of cleaning pavement surfaces of oil dirt dust grease and similar foreign materials shall be included in the price bid .
The cost of removal of concrete curing compounds and existing pavement markings will be paid under separate items and are not included in this item .
The resulting mixture is generally used in repair of portland cement concrete pavement .
material requirements apply only to aggregate for use in portland cement concrete chip seal cold mix bituminous pavements and underdrain filter material ..
This specification covers material and fabrication requirements for precast concrete pavement slab systems .
If the precast slab system requires a backfill material around pavement hardware use DBR Retrofit Mortar HD Five Star Highway Patch or an alternate prepackaged material submitted as an approved equal .
Use these drawings in conjunction with approved Fabricator Standard Drawings to manufacture the pavement slabs .
The Engineer will identify pavement areas if any represented by failing samples according to the procedures of Materials Method Friction Aggregate Control and Test Procedures .
This specification covers the material requirements for silicone joint sealants for pavements .
This specification covers the material requirements for preformed elastic joint seal for use in longitudinal concrete pavement joints .
This specification covers the material requirements for preformed elastic joint seal for use in transverse contraction joints and transverse expansion joints in concrete pavement .
The lubricant shall meet the following physical requirements For use with concrete pavement sealers the lubricant shall conform to the requirements of ASTM D. For use with bridge sealers the lubricant shall conform to the requirements of ASTM D. PACKAGING .
This specification details the requirements for longitudinal joint ties LJTs and their support assemblies used at longitudinal joints in portland cement concrete PCC pavement .
For longitudinal joints between lanes placed simultaneously onepiece LJTs must be supported by an assembly that secures them in position when the assembly is affixed to the underlying pavement layer .
Entire longitudinal axis of each bar is located at the middepth of the pavement slab inch .
Longitudinal axes of the bars are aligned perpendicular to the pavement centerline and parallel with the pavement surface such that the maximum misalignment of bar end relative to the other is inch .
A detail of the stakes used to hold the supports to the underlying pavement layers during construction .
The positioning and number of stakes required to hold the supports to the underlying pavement layers during construction .
This specification details the requirements for load transfer devices LTDs and their support assemblies used at transverse joints in portland cement concrete PCC pavement .
Dowel diameters vary with pavement thickness as detailed in the Section Standard Sheets .
Unless otherwise indicated in the contract documents fabricate the support assemblies such that the Entire longitudinal axis of each dowel is located at the middepth of the pavement inch .
Longitudinal axes of the dowels are aligned parallel with the pavement centerline and pavement surface such that the maximum misalignment of one dowel end relative to the other is inch .
Unless otherwise indicated in the contract documents fabricate the support assemblies such that the Entire longitudinal axis of each deformed bar is located at the middepth of the pavement slab inch .
Longitudinal axes of the deformed bars are aligned parallel with the pavement centerline and pavement surface such that the maximum misalignment of one bar end relative to the other is inch .
A detail of the stakes used to hold the supports to the underlying pavement layers during construction .
The positioning and number of stakes required to hold the supports to the underlying pavement layers during construction .
If the field test is at a test site arranged by the suppliermanufacturer install the joint support assemblies in a foot long minimum pavement constructed in accordance with Section Portland Cement Concrete Pavement .
Failing assemblies and the pavement they are constructed into if part of a Department contract will be rejected and removed and replaced at no cost to the State .
GENERAL The Joint Adhesive is a hotapplied modified asphalt product used to adhere and seal all pavement joints during the placement of HMA .
Type N Masonry Mortar for tuck pointing repair of structures made with fired clay bricks Type S Masonry Mortar for new structures made with all types of masonry including brick Type S Masonry Mortar for tuck pointing repair of structures made with masonry other than clay brick Type M Masonry Mortar for new and tuck pointing repair of rigid masonry riding surfaces such as bridge decks pavements sidewalks and other roadway areas subject to severe weathering and abrasion conditions MATERIAL REQUIREMENTS Portland Cement Type II or VI Masonry or Mortar Cement Type N S or M Blended Portland Cement Mortar Sand Concrete Sand Water Proportion the N S or M mortar type by loose volume parts as follows PORTLAND OR BLENDED PORTLAND CEMENT MASONRY OR MORTAR CEMENT SAND Type N Mortar make with Type N Masonry or Mortar Cement Type N to Type S Mortar make with Type S or N Masonry or Mortar Cement Type S Type N to to Type M Mortar make with Type M or N Masonry or Mortar Cement Type M Type N to to NEW YORK STATE DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS USC May After adding all ingredients including water to a mechanical mixer mix for to minutes to entrain air and produce a workable and uniform consistency .
Fill heights shall be measured from the top of pavement to the top of the culvert roof slab .
This specification covers the material requirements for wire fabric reinforcement used in portland cement concrete pavement precast concrete products and other concrete construction .
This specification covers the material requirements for colddrawn wire for concrete reinforcement used in portland cement concrete pavement precast concrete products and other concrete construction .
These specifications cover cotton mats to be used for curing Portland Cement concrete pavements and bases and concrete structures .
The length of the mats shall be feet inches greater than the width of pavement slab to be cured .
No projection on the exposed face of Type C curb shall extend over inch beyond a vertical plane extending from the intersection of the pavement grade line and the curb face .
The curb ends below the pavement surface or shoulder shall break not over inches from the joint plane on curb types A B C D E and T curbs and not more than inches on types G R and T. Ends of types F G M R R S and T curbs shall be sawed at locations called for on the contract plans .
Upon approval by the Materials Bureau the name of the product will be placed on an approved list of Roadway Loop Embedding Sealers for use on asphalt andor concrete pavements based on the compatibility of the sealer with the pavement material .
This specification covers the material requirements for thermoplastic that is extruded in a molten state onto a pavement surface .
Specifically designed to enhance the bond of thermoplastic pavement markings to HMA andor PCC pavements .
This specification covers the material requirements for removable raised pavement markers for use as interim and temporary pavement markings .
Removable raised pavement markers shall be Designed as single units consisting of an acrylic plastic or another type of durable casing containing one or two reflective faces .
NEW YORK STATE DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS USC May Removable from HMA and PCC pavements intact or in substantially large pieces without the use of heat solvents grinding or blasting .
This specification covers the material requirements for epoxy pavement marking paint that is applied onto pavement followed by a surface application of retroreflective beads for use as interim and permanent pavement markings .
Epoxy paint shall be Formulated for use as a pavement marking material and for hotspray application at elevated temperatures .
The material shall be capable of being placed using standard epoxy pavement marking equipment and have a maximum field no track time of minutes when installed at F. PACKAGING AND SHIPPING .
This specification covers the material requirements for preformed pavement marking tape that is applied to the pavement for use as permanent pavement markings .
Permanent pavement tape shall be Designed to provide immediate and continuous retroreflection .
Preformed pavement marking tape shall be Uniform Cross Section mils minimum thickness .
Specifically designed to enhance the bond of the permanent tape to HMA andor PCC pavements .
This specification covers the material requirements for retroreflective beads applied on top of thermoplastic epoxy or traffic paint for use as pavement markings .
Glass beads for pavement markings shall meet the requirements of AASHTO M and shall be Composed of glass that is highly resistant to traffic wear and to the effects of weathering .
TABLE GLASS SPHERE COATINGS Marking Type Coating Type Epoxy WetNight Reflective Silane Type adherence coating designed to interact with and adhere to epoxy pavement markings .
This specification covers the material requirements for removable pavement marking tape and masking tape for use as interim and temporary pavement markings .
Removable pavement tape shall be Composed of a mixture of plastics or polymeric materials resins pigments .
Removable from HMA and PCC pavements intact or in substantially large pieces without the use of heat solvents grinding or blasting and leaving minimal permanent marks scars or damage to the pavement surface after removal .
Masking tape shall be Specifically designed for use to temporarily cover existing pavement markings .
Consist of durable nonreflective pliant polymer tape on a reinforced conformable backing pre coated with a pressuresensitive adhesive Capable of adhering to existing pavement markings asphalt pavement and Portland cement concrete pavement without the use of heat solvents additional adhesives or other means .
Be substantially similar in color to the pavement surface with a flat matte finish and textured skid resistant surface .
This specification covers the material requirements for removable wetnight reflective tape for use as interim and temporary pavement markings .
Capable of adhering to existing pavement markings asphalt pavement and Portland cement concrete pavement without the use of heat solvents additional adhesives or other means .
Removable from HMA and PCC pavements intact or in substantially large pieces without the use of heat solvents grinding or blasting and leaving minimal permanent marks scars or damage to the pavement surface after removal .
This specification covers the material requirements for permanent wetnight pavement marking tape for use as permanent pavement markings .
Primer shall be Be recommended by the manufacturer of the preformed pavement marking and be compatible with the marking and surface the marking is being applied to .
Specifically designed to enhance the bond of the preformed pavement markings to HMA andor PCC pavements .
This specification covers the material requirements for waterborne and solventborne paints that are applied onto pavement followed by a surface application of retroreflective beads for use as temporary interim and permanent pavement markings .
Traffic paint shall be Formulated for use as a pavement marking material .
The base andor any nonflexible portion of the drum shall not extend more than inches above the pavement surface .
For tubular markers fastened to pavement the bonding system used to shall be a fastsetting chemical compound mastictype material or mechanical fastener capable of fixing the tubular marker to either concrete or asphalt pavement .
The bonding system shall not present a hazard to traffic if the tubular marker or base unit becomes unfixed from the pavement .
Temporary overlay markers are flexible polymer L shaped road reflectors with an adhesive on its base to adhere to the pavement surface .
This specification covers the material requirements and methods of testing subbase material generally used in the construction of a pavement structure .
If the flow channel is separated into two or more parts only the flow rate of the section facing the pavement will be considered. . Cover Geotextile Wrapping NEW YORK STATE DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS USC May a .
