The graded portion of a highway prepared as a foundation for the pavement structure and shoulders .
The top surface of a roadbed upon which the pavement structure and shoulders are constructed .
The savings generated by the VECP must be sufficient to warrant review and processing. . A VECP changing the type or thickness or both type and thickness of the pavement structure will not be considered .
Without written authorization from the Engineer heavy offroad hauling equipment shall not be allowed on pavement that is or will be subject to use as a public highway .
Hauling of materials over the pavement base course or surface course under construction shall be subject to approval by the Engineer .
Once the work involves the placement of material on or the use of a previously constructed subgrade base course pavement or structure the Contractor shall maintain the previously constructed work .
When a portion of the Project such as a structure interchange or section of road or pavement is substantially completed the Contractor may request final inspection of that portion .
Determine the location from the edge of the pavement by using the second random number which is then multiplied by ft .
Therefore the sample should be taken at tons from the beginning of the sublot and ft. from the designated right or left edge of the pavement .
Certificates will also be required for temporary safetyrelated items such as guardrail impact attenuators traffic control devices and pavement markings .
Existing pavement removed will be paid for under the pertinent excavation items .
.. Sawcutting pavement for removal shall be subsidiary . .
When the Contract requires the removal of existing pavement but does not require recycling the Contractor is encouraged to save this bituminous material for future reuse .
Therefore no existing bituminous pavement removed shall be incorporated in the embankment .
This work shall also include raising the grade of the edge of the roadway shoulders with crushed aggregate as shown on the plans or as ordered to match the grade of the pavement course placed on the shoulders or to provide a base for shoulder pavement .
Screening will only be allowed if the source of the RAP is pavement millings from cold planning bituminous surfaces .
d The material shall be placed directly under the proposed pavement .
Reclaimed asphalt pavement blended with granular material shall be tested in accordance with NHDOT test method S. Reclaimed concrete aggregate shall also meet the requirements of AASHTO M except for the gradation requirements .
The material shall contain no more than percent reclaimed asphalt pavement .
When the base course is to be surfacetreated and no pavement is to be placed upon it stones having any dimension greater than shall be removed from the upper of the top layer .
Crushed gravel for shoulder leveling shall be spread uniformly along the area adjoining the edge of the pavement .
.. Sampling procedure shall conform to AASHTO T . Testing procedures shall be in accordance with AASHTO T . When reclaimed asphalt pavement is blended with granular material to be used in lieu of crushed gravel or crushed stone base course fine gradation the method used to determine the amount of coarse material shall be determined according to NHDOT S. ..
When reclaimed asphalt pavement is blended with granular material to be used in lieu of crushed gravel or crushed stone base course fine gradation the method used to determine the amount of material finer than the No .
This work shall consist of scarifying if necessary and pulverizing the existing pavement together with a base course material .
The material shall consist of the existing pavement blended with the underlying gravel andor additional stone as required .
The existing pavement shall be pulverized together with the underlying base course material .
The pulverizing operation shall blend the existing pavement and base course into a homogeneous mass using the bitumen contained in the pavement as a stabilizer .
The quantity of additional stone mixed with the reclaimed existing pavement shall be adjusted as necessary to meet the material specification of .
Excess material unless specified otherwise shall become the property of the Contractor. . Care shall be exercised to save all pavement for reclaiming if trenches are constructed prior to processing . .
These specifications include general requirements that are applicable to all types of plant mix asphalt pavements irrespective of the gradation of aggregate kind and amount of asphalt binder or pavement use .
These specifications provide for the use of reclaimed asphalt pavement material in certain specified mixtures . .
This work shall consist of the construction of one or more courses of asphalt pavement constructed on a prepared foundation in accordance with these specifications and the specific requirements of the type under Contract .
b The QCQA Tier item is to be used on specified projects that are inlay type projects full depth reconstruction projects with maintenance of traffic phasing projects with intersecting streets projects with pavement tapers bridge projects with short approach paving projects where there are many manholedrainage structures or driveways generally in urban and suburban areas .
In order to obtain uniformity of color and appearance of the pavement throughout the project the aggregate for all the wearing courses shall be obtained from the same material source .
SECTION NHDOT Go To TOC Division Division Division Division Standard Division Division Division Specifications The unit bid price for hot bituminous pavement containing failing asphalt binder shall be assessed a reduction for one temperature grade below the specified high temperature grade or one temperature grade above the specified low temperature grade .
The Contractor shall have the option of utilizing asphalt pavement removed under the Contract if any or old asphalt pavement from an existing stockpile or supplying all new materials for the production of asphalt pavement or any combination of the foregoing .
The job mix formula shall lie within the target value ranges indicated for the particular type of hot asphalt mix. . General Bridge pavement base course shall be wearing course. . General Nonmodified asphalt binder shall contain silicone additive with the concentration being parts per million plus or minus part per million of silicone to asphalt binder unless otherwise directed .
.. Reclaimed asphalt pavement RAP may be used in the production of hot mix asphalt .
RAP shall consist of recycled asphalt pavement and shall be processed by crushing cold milling or other approved sizing techniques approved by the Bureau of Materials and Research to meet the required gradation specifications .
When reclaimed pavement is used an additional bin designed for this purpose will be required .
Equipment that leaks oil diesel fuel gasoline or any other substance detrimental to the pavement will not be allowed on the project .
Crack sealing material to be covered by a or less overlay shall cure a minimum of days prior to the placement of bituminous pavement .
.. Base course pavement lifts shall not exceed the maximum compacted thickness of inches .
.. At the beginning and end of the project or project section the existing pavement shall be removed to a sufficient depth to allow the placing of the new pavement and construction of a transverse joint which shall be painted with a suitable bituminous material .
Existing pavement or previously laid courses shall be thoroughly dry and free from all dust dirt and loose material .
Surfaces of any pavement course shall have a tack coat of emulsified asphalt applied in accordance with the requirements of Tack will be sampled daily and tested by NHDOT for conformance with Section .
Any pavement that has been placed over tack that is found to be out of specification but is deemed suitable to remain in place by the Engineer will be subject to a price reduction .
The price reduction will be applied only to the pavement placed on the date that the tack is SECTION NHDOT Go To TOC Division Division Division Division Standard Division Division Division Specifications sampled .
This price reduction will not relieve the Contractor of responsibility for latent defects andor gross mistakes as outlined in section .. .. General Drainage and utility structures within the limits of the pavement shall be set and raised in accordance with the provisions of Contact surfaces of the drainage and utility castings as ordered shall be painted with a thin coating of suitable bituminous material. . Pavers .
When patching existing pavement the material shall be placed on the prepared clean underlying surface at the locations designated and shall be spread to produce a smooth and uniform patch .
The patch material shall be thoroughly compacted and shall match the line and grade of the adjacent pavement .
When hot bituminous bridge pavement is to be placed over barrier membrane the placing temperature shall be as specified in A paver mounted on rubber tracks or tires shall be used to place the base course unless this procedure is found to cause damage to the membrane .
Where pavement is placed adjacent to structural members such as expansion joints the material in the top course shall be placed so that the compacted grade of the pavement is to above the grade of the structural member .
When paving on aggregate base courses andor base course pavement the first pass paved shall be on the travel way and on the shoulders .
Unless the Engineer determines that for the weight and placement conditions a lesser number will be satisfactory to obtain the desired pavement densities the following is the list of required compaction equipment .
Any asphalt pavement that becomes loose broken contaminated shows an excess or deficiency of asphalt binder or is in any way defective shall be removed and replaced at no additional cost with fresh hot asphalt mix which shall be immediately compacted to conform with the surrounding area .
Unless otherwise shown on the plans the longitudinal wearing course joints shall be at the edge of lane placed where the edge line lane line and centerline pavement markings will be applied and joints of other courses shall be offset approximately .
The paver shall be positioned so that during spreading the material will overlap the edge of the first lane by to and shall be left sufficiently high such that finish pavement of the lane being placed is approximately higher than the previously paved lane after compaction .
Tubular markers shall be secured to the pavement .
When specified a bituminous pavement joint adhesive Item .
Joint adhesive Bridge Base shall be applied to curbs concrete armoring and pavement matches so that the entire joint is covered with a minimum thick layer of material .
The finished surface of the pavement shall be uniform in appearance shall be free from irregularities in contour and shall present a smoothriding surface .
Asphalt pavement shall be sampled tested evaluated and recorded by the Contractor in accordance with the minimum process control guidelines in Table .
Cross slope shall be measured on every pavement lift using the method described in prior to placement of subsequent lifts .
Particular emphasis on the first pavement lift shall be required when correcting existing substandard cross slopes .
No wearing course pavement shall be removed or repaired without prior approval of the Engineer .
Asphalt pavement designated for acceptance under Quality Assurance QA provisions will be sampled once per sublot on a statistically random basis tested and evaluated by the Department in accordance with .. and the acceptance testing schedule in Table .
lane mile Cross Slope Completion of wearing surface Total project per full stations Thickness Compacted roadway core Total project tons NHDOT B ASTM D . Excluding bridge pavements. . Measurements taken from full depth cores obtained for in place air voids determination. . For leveling course samples to be taken at the plant. . Sampling and testing will not be done for leveling course. . Not Including leveling course . .
Samples for gradation and asphalt binder content shall be obtained from behind the paver in conformance with NHDOT procedure B see appendix A and taken from each pavement layer by the Contractor in the presence of the Engineer .
Sample locations center of sample will not be within foot from an edge of pavement or within feet from any structure .
In place air voids shall be determined in accordance with AASHTO T using diameter cores taken from each pavement layer by the Contractor in the presence of the Engineer .
Full depth cores containing all new pavement layers shall be required .
Cores will not be located in the following areas a Within foot from an edge of pavement .
Cores shall be taken before opening pavement to traffic except when location of core is within the last hour of that days placement .
The thickness requirements contained herein shall apply only when each pavement layer is specified to be a uniform thickness greater than The thickness of each layer of hot asphalt mix will be measured in conformance to ASTM D to determine compliance with the acceptance tolerance .
Measurements shall be obtained from cores taken for determining in place air voids of each pavement layer .
The finished surface of the pavement shall be uniform in appearance free from irregularities in contour and shall present a smoothriding surface. . A GM type profilometer will be furnished by the Department for determination of pavement smoothness .
The surface will be tested within days after the wearing surface and pavement markings for each discrete section of the project are complete .
The pavement will not be evaluated over bridge expansion joints tapers raised pavement markings and sections less than .
If three or more consecutive cross slope sublot measurements on the pavement lift used to calculate the pay factor deviate more than .
Asphalt pavement mixture will be measured by the ton to the nearest .
The quantity will be the weight used in the accepted pavement and no deduction will be made for the weight of asphalt binder or additives in the mixture .
Hot bituminous pavement machine or hand method night will be measured in the same manner as .. No separate measurement will be made for lighting necessary or overtime required due to night operations at the plant or at the site .
.. Due to possible variations in the specific gravity of the aggregates and to possible field changes in areas to be paved the quantity used may vary from the proposal quantities and no adjustment in Contract unit price will be made because of such variations. . Asphalt pavement removed because of faulty workmanship or contamination by foreign materials will not be included in the pay quantity. . Blank. . Joint adhesive will be measured by the linear foot for each lift of pavement to be placed to the nearest foot of adhesive applied .
Tack coat material ordered under .. will be paid as provided for in Section . . Blank. . Plant or project site lighting for hot bituminous pavement machine or hand method night or overtime required due to night operations will be subsidiary to the paving items. . Asphalt cement additives will be subsidiary to the paving items . .
If the Contractor chooses to pave in echelon in lieu of pavement joint adhesive and the item is not in the contract echelon paving will be paid as stated in ..
Required Sample Size Base Courses grams Binder Courses grams Surface Courses grams Sand Courses grams When sampling over an existing pavement the plate is not required .
This work shall consist of constructing one or more courses of bituminous pavement on a prepared base as shown on the plans or as ordered .
.. Hand method shall include only the paving of raised islands slopes cattle passes areas between rails at railroad crossings existing sidewalks drives drive aprons curb patch between concrete barrier and pavement curb patch between granite curb and pavement and paving of tons or less added after the completion of paving operations .
When specified this work shall consist of constructing one or more courses of hot bituminous pavement using modifier to create higher strength . .
This work shall consist of constructing bituminous pavement under nighttime operation and will be indicated in the item description .
Temporary bituminous pavement shall conform to Table .
Construction requirements shall be as prescribed in .. . For temporary pavement only amend portions of .. as follows ..
For temporary bituminous pavement only delete .
Temporary bituminous pavement shall be removed when no longer needed .
Hot bituminous pavement will be measured as prescribed in .. ..
Hot bituminous pavement machine or hand method night will be measured in the same manner as .. No separate measurement will be made for lighting necessary at the plant or at the site Hot Bituminous pavement transferred by the Material Transfer Vehicle MTV will be measured as prescribed in ..
The accepted quantities of hot bituminous pavement will be paid for at the Item Bid Price per ton for the bituminous mixture complete in place .
The accepted quantity of hot bituminous pavement machine or hand method night will be paid for at the Contract unit price per ton complete in place .
The accepted quantity of temporary bituminous pavement will be paid for at the Contract unit price per ton complete .
Removal of the temporary pavement will not be paid for under other items of the Contract but will be subsidiary .
The spray bar shall contain spray nozzles providing a fanshaped spray pattern adjusted so the vertical axis is perpendicular to the pavement surface .
The distributor shall be equipped with a mechanical device to adjust the spray height as material is discharged to keep a uniform height above the pavement for full coverage without overlapping .
SECTION NHDOT Go To TOC Division Division Division Division Standard Division Division Division Specifications The edges of existing pavements that are to be adjacent to new pavement shall be cleaned to permit the adhesion of bituminous materials . .
A tack coat shall be applied immediately prior to placement of pavement .
The Engineer may further modify the rate depending on the relative absorbance and texture of the pavement surface .
.. Emulsified asphalt for tack coat required under will not be subject to price adjustment. . Payment for patching existing pavements under .. will be made at the contract unit price for Item .
This work shall consist of a leveling course when ordered and one or more courses of bituminous mixture constructed on an existing pavement . .
This work when specified shall consist of a dual purpose single course bituminous mixture which acts as a shim course and a wearing course constructed on an existing pavement .
The existing pavement shall be thoroughly dry and free from all dust dirt and loose material .
Existing pavement shall be treated with tack coat as prescribed in When ordered the existing pavement shall be treated as prescribed in .. A leveling course of hot bituminous concrete may be ordered to prepare the pavement for the finish course .
In those areas where the edges of the pavement are adjacent to paved or bituminous treated shoulders the asphalt paving machine shall be equipped to produce a feathered edge parallel to the direction of traffic and a uniform longitudinal line shall be maintained at the outer edge of the applied pavement .
When Spot Drag Shims are specified the intent is to fill and level localized ruts and deformations in the pavement .
It is expected that in most cases the pavement marking stripes will not be covered .
Excess blotter material remaining on the pavement and on paved shoulders shall be removed prior to acceptance of the project .
.. After rolling has been completed the edges of the pavement shall be trimmed as directed to secure a uniform line . .
The finished surface of the pavement shall be uniform in appearance shall be free from irregularities in contour and shall present a smoothriding surface .
.. Emulsified asphalt for tack coat required under will not be subject to price adjustment. . Payment for patching existing pavements under .. will be made at the contract unit price for Item .
This work shall consist of filling the major cracks in the pavement with an approved sealant material .
.. Material not covered by an asphalt pavement overlay shall meet the requirements of ASTM D Type II .
.. Material covered by an asphalt pavement overlay shall be low modulus conforming to ASTM D Type IV except cone penetration shall be . . Equipment shall meet the approval of the Engineer and shall be maintained in good working condition at all times .
The kettle shall be mounted on rubber tires and shall be equipped with a metal shield beneath the firebox to protect the pavement .
e Hotair lances for blowing clean and drying cracks shall be an approved propane gas burner and compressed air device that does not allow the flame to touch the pavement .
Only wand applicators shall be used for crack filling when cracks are not covered by an asphalt pavement overlay. . All cracks to be treated shall be filled to to below the pavement surface with hotpoured sealant with the sealant left slightly concave .
Sealant shall tightly bond to the pavement .
The sealant bond to the pavement shall be checked after it has sufficiently cooled .
If the sealant does not bond to the pavement sealant shall be removed and crack sealing operations discontinued until debonding problem is corrected. . No hotair lance cleaning or crack sealing shall be performed when the pavement and cracks are wet or the ambient temperature is below F. . All work shall be performed in a neat manner .
The sealant shall be allowed to cool sufficiently to prevent lifting sticking and tracking prior to returning the pavement segment to traffic . .
This work shall consist of the removal of existing bituminous pavement by planing or milling type equipment to the depth and grade shown on the plans or ordered . .
This work shall consist of constructing Rumble Strips by making depressions into bituminous pavement to the depth and dimensions shown on the plans and as specified below .
This work shall also consist of removing existing rumble strips and inlaying pavement in the removed area .
Equipment that tears distorts or otherwise damages the pavement adjacent to the milled depression will not be allowed .
The equipment shall be capable of accurately establishing profile grades by an automatic grade control system referencing from either the existing pavement or from an established independent grade line .
.. Rumble strips shall not be constructed until days after placement of new hot bituminous pavement unless authorized by the Engineer .
Existing centerline and shoulder rumble strips scheduled for overlay shall be removed to eliminate their effects on the new pavement surface .
Prior to reopening the area to traffic all equipment shall be removed to a location where it does not present a hazard to traffic and the pavement shall be cleaned by sweeping or flushing .
The milled area of removed rumbles shall be inlayed to match the existing pavement surface with hot bituminous pavement placed by machine .
The equipment used for pavement and concrete removal shall be subject to approval of the Engineer and shall comply with the following .. Bituminous pavement removal .
The pavement removal may be performed with planers backhoes loaders or other approved mechanical equipment .
Concrete and pavement shall be removed from each area as shown on the plans or required .
When preparation for bridge deck concrete overlay is not specified the concrete bridge deck pavement removal shall be accomplished with equipment capable of removing the existing bituminous pavement and membrane waterproofing without damaging the top surface of the deck concrete .
Concrete bridge deck pavement removal and preparation for concrete bridge deck overlay will not be measured but shall be the square yard final pay quantity in accordance with .
Concrete bridge deck pavement removal and preparation for concrete bridge deck overlay are final pay quantity items and will be paid for at the Contract unit price per square yard in accordance with .. ..
Flowable fill will not be allowed in lieu of pavement .
Flowable fill will not be allowed in lieu of pavement .
The Representative shall also be present for placement of the hot bituminous pavement overlay .
The system shall include a primer that enhances the adhesive bond between the concrete deck and the membrane and a tack coat that enhances the bond between the membrane and the hot bituminous pavement overlay all as included on the Qualified Products List .
The required laydown temperature of pavement overlays used in connection with heat welded barrier membrane shall be between F and F. It should be noted that the laydown temperatures are extremely critical in order to preserve membrane integrity .
A similar treatment may be necessary if bubbles appear after application of the pavement base course .
A physical separation of the asphaltic expansion joint from the adjacent vertical face of the pavement or bridge deck .
Sawed pavement common structure excavation to the depth specified in .. secondary excavation required in the imperfect trench method bedding shaping of bedding and backfill shall be included in this work .
.. Sawed pavement shall conform to .
When the sleeve is to be installed by boring or drilling the pavement shall not be disturbed .
Such pits shall be kept at least ft. clear of the edge of the pavement and necessary precautions taken to prevent caving .
The accepted quantities of pipe will be paid for at the Contract unit price per linear foot of the kind type and size specified complete in place including sawed pavement common structure excavation up to the depth specified in .. secondary excavation required in the imperfect trench method bedding preshaping of bedding and backfill with the following stipulations .. All rock structure excavation any common structure excavation below the depth specified in .. and excavation of unsuitable material required below the bottom of the pipe will be paid as provided in Section .
Sawed pavement common structure excavation to the depth specified in .. bedding if required and backfill shall be included in this work . .
Structures within the limits of bituminous concrete pavement shall be temporarily set at the elevation of the bottom of the binder course or as ordered .
Upon completion each structure shall be cleaned of silt debris or other matter of any kind and shall be kept clean until Acceptance of the Work. . Excavation and backfill shall conform to .. Sawed pavement shall conform to .
The accepted quantities of catch basins drop inlets and manholes which includes the necessary frames and grates or covers of the type and diameter specified will be paid for at the Contract unit price per unit complete in place including sawed pavement common structure excavation and setting to final grade to the depth specified in .. bedding if required and backfill with the following stipulations .. For catch basins and manholes other than special catch basins and manholes up to the first ft. will be paid for as one unit .
Type IV retroreflective sheeting shall be applied to the approach nose after fabrication and assembly but prior to the installation of bolts if terminal units are installed less than ft. from the edge of pavement as follows OneWay Roadways Retroreflective yellow with black stripes sloping downward at an angle of degrees toward the roadway on both sides of the roadway .
Concrete Class F in accordance with Section may be substituted for aggregate base course and hot bituminous pavement in the patching on the roadway side of concrete barrier .
Concrete thickness shall be not less than that of the adjacent pavement .
Contraction joints shall be formed or saw cut normal to the pavement .
Expansion joints shall be formed normal to the pavement with Preformed Expansion Joint Filler and shall provide for expansion of ½ .
Hot bituminous pavement placed adjacent to the concrete barrier for a maximum width of ft. will be paid for as Item ..
Concrete Class A substituted for aggregate base course and hot bituminous pavement will be paid for as Item .
This work shall consist of constructing sidewalks of either hot bituminous pavement or Portland cement concrete reinforced when specified .
Hot bituminous pavement shall meet the material requirements of Section except that the composition of mixtures shall conform to the limits of Table .
The bituminous pavement shall be spread uniformly in two courses as specified above .
Concrete thickness shall be not less than that of the adjacent pavement .
Prior to placing the curbing the surface of the pavement shall be cleaned as directed and painted with a tack coat of bituminous material when ordered .
Sawed pavement common structure excavation to the depth specified in .. bedding if required and backfill shall be included in this work .
.. Sawed pavement shall conform to .
.. All conduit lines located under pavement shall be installed in a straight line .
When ordered conduit shall be placed under existing pavement by approved jacking or drilling methods which do not disturb the pavement .
Jacking and drilling pits shall be kept ft. clear of the edge of pavement .
Backfill within the pavement structure shall be of the same type material and match the depths encountered .
.. Bituminous or Portland cement concrete pavement removed to excavate the trench shall be replaced with hot bituminous pavement conforming to the requirements of Section unless otherwise directed .
Pavement shall be placed in thoroughly compacted layers of not more than to give a total thickness equal to that of the existing pavement .
.. After the trench has been backfilled excluding pavement if applicable the Contractor in the presence of the Engineer shall test the installation by pushing through the entire length of the conduit line a device with a diameter not smaller than less than the inside diameter of the conduit .
Pull boxes within the limits of the traveled way shoulders whether paved or unpaved parking lots adjacent to slope curb and within ft. of the edge of pavement shall be concrete and installed as shown on the plans and specified herein .
The accepted quantities of conduit will be paid for at the Contract unit price per linear foot of the type size and number of ducts specified complete in place including bracketsspacers sawed pavement common structure excavation to the depth specified in .. bedding if required and backfill with the following exceptions .. All rock structure excavation any common structure excavation below the depth specified in .. and any excavation of unsuitable material required below the conduit will be paid for under Section .
Hot bituminous pavement required in .. will be paid under Section .
Overhead signs shall provide a vertical clearance of not less than ft. over the entire width of the pavement and shoulders .
The saw cut shall be a clean welldefined wide cut and done without damaging the adjacent pavement .
Where the loop wire crosses cracks or joints in the pavement plastic sleeving shall be used to insulate the wire to a minimum of on either side of the crack or joint .
This work shall consist of providing and maintaining safe and passable traffic accommodations for public travel preventing dust nuisance and furnishing erecting and maintaining necessary traffic signs barricades lights signals delineators concrete barriers pavement markings and other traffic control warning devices and shall include pilot car operations and other means of guidance of traffic through the work zone .
Pavement authorized for removal for trenching purposes within the traveled way shall be replaced with temporary bituminous material cold patch or reclaimed asphalt pavement before the roadway is open to traffic and shall be replaced with applicable hot bituminous pavement conforming to Division within hours of completed backfill operations .
The intended vehicle path shall be clearly defined by pavement markings or channelizing devices or both at the end of the work period .
At the end of each days paving operation on a traveled roadway pavement markings for centerlines and lanelines shall be applied in accordance with the MUTCD and the Contract requirements .
Temporary pavement markings may be used according to the NHDOT Work Zone Traffic Control Standard Plans and MUTCD after which pavement markings that meet full MUTCD Standards shall be in place .
All Temporary pavement markings shall remain in place while in service and if dislodged or rendered ineffective the temporary markings shall be replaced .
Temporary raised pavement markings may be used according to the MUTCD or as amended by the Work Zone Traffic Control Standard Plans in the same color as specified for the markings and installed according to manufacturer recommendations .
Temporary raised pavement markers shall not be used to supplement or substitute for edge lines .
Temporary raised pavement markers shall be a product listed on the Qualified Products List under the items .
Flexible raised pavement markers will not be permitted for use on Interstate or high speed multi lane highways .
The application of pavement markings andor removal of existing markings may not be required during daytime construction operations when traffic is controlled by flaggers or uniformed officers and channelizing devices are in place .
In the event that pavement markings are to be applied by the Department the Contractor shall provide a clean surface and vehicle path free of obstructions .
.. Removable pavement marking tape shall be removed prior to placing subsequent pavement courses but not until immediately prior to beginning paving operations .
Unless otherwise provided for in the Contract the material cost and placement of temporary bituminous pavement for trench patching will be paid as specified in Section under Item .
Unless otherwise provided for in the Contract the material cost and placement of permanent hot bituminous pavement for trench patching will be paid as specified in Section under hand method .
When no Contract items for pavement are specified payment will be as provided in .. .. Work ordered under for snow removal related work will be paid for under Item Alterations and Additions as Needed Winter Maintenance when included in the Contract .
.. All winter maintenance related work will be paid for under respective Contract items or be subsidiary to Section . . Pavement markings including temporary retroreflective paint pavement markings will be paid for as provided in .. ..
Temporary raised pavement markings or temporary removable pavement marking tape required per including maintenance removal and disposal will be subsidiary. . Obliteration of pavement markings will be paid for as provided in .. . Work ordered under .. that resulted from Department or Municipal maintenance operations will be paid for as provided in .. .
Bounds set in pavement areas shall be recessed approximately from the pavement surface .
This work shall consist of sawing concrete pavement bituminous pavement or both as shown on the plans or as ordered . .
Concrete pavement or bituminous pavement to be sawed shall be accurately marked before sawing .
.. Sawed bituminous pavement for bridge points shall be marked on curbs at the end of the concrete bridge deck to aid in locating the end of the deck after pavement placement . .
The equipment used to saw concrete or bituminous pavement shall be capable of sawing the pavement as shown on the plans or as ordered and shall produce a substantially vertical and sound face without deformation of the adjacent pavement .
cutting wheels pavement breakers which deform the pavement or leave an unsound face will not be permitted. . Contraction joints to be cut in concrete pavement shall be cut to the width and depth as shown on the plans and filled with the type of filler shown on the plans .
Grooves to be cut in bridge pavement shall be cut and routed to the width and depth as shown on the plans and filled with the type of filler shown on the plans . .
Concrete pavement or bituminous pavement to be sawed in connection with laying pipes roadway excavation constructing curb and the like shall be sawed to a sufficient depth to permit breaking the pavement at the cut .
.. Where the pavement is found to consist of an overlay of bituminous pavement above a concrete slab the cut shall be increased enough to score the underlying concrete so that the concrete can be broken in a reasonably uniform manner .
Sawed pavement of the type specified will be measured by the linear foot. . Sawed pavement for the purpose of installing culverts storm drains catch basins drop inlets manholes and conduit will not be measured for payment .
The accepted quantity of sawed pavement will be paid for at the Contract unit price per linear foot .
.. No separate payment will be made for filler. . Sawed pavement for the purpose of installing culverts storm drains catch basins drop inlets manholes and conduit shall be subsidiary to their respective items. . Payment will be made under Item .
only when bituminous concrete pavement and concrete pavement are sawed one above the other .
This work shall consist of furnishing placing and removing white or yellow retroreflective paint pavement markings preformed retroreflective tape pavement markings retroreflective thermoplastic pavement markings at locations shown on the plans or as ordered .
.. Preformed retroreflective pavement marking tape for extended service life shall conform to ASTM D Retroreflectivity Level I or II Adhesive Class or Skid Resistance Level A or B .
.. Retroreflective preformed pavement marking tape for limited service life shall conform to ASTM D Type I Removable or Type II Nonremovable .
Type I tapes should be used in areas that require the tape to be removed in the future and Type II tapes should be used when the required service life of the tape is less than three months and can be left in place due to pavement overlay or other similar activity .
Type II Tape shall be approved by the Engineer .. Blackout pavement marking tape shall conform to ASTM D Type I Removable except that the material shall be matte black and not be retroreflective .
The material shall also not deteriorate because of the oil content of pavement materials or from oil droppings or other effects of traffic .
.. Material when formed into pavement markings shall be readily renewable by placing an overlay of the same material directly over the old markings .
Recessed pavement markings shall be installed as specified for permanent markings .
.. All pavement markings of the type specified shall be applied at the locations shown on the plans or as ordered and shall be in accordance with the MUTCD and the NHDOT Standard Plans .
The Contractor shall establish the base line points at ft. intervals on curves and ft. intervals on tangent sections throughout the length of pavement to be marked under this section from the Department provided control points .
All other pavement markings shall be applied according to the physical pavement layout provided .
The Contractor shall provide the pavement marking layout on the final wearing course pavement to the Engineer at least working days prior to installation of the permanent pavement markings unless otherwise permitted .
Whenever existing pavement marking patterns are to be obscured and later restored the Contractor shall take detailed measurements of all existing pavement markings to permit the Contractor to accurately prepare drawings to reproduce those patterns .
The Contractor shall also perform a good quality videotape survey showing all pavement markings in each direction of travel with appropriate audio description of location and direction .
The drawings and videotape shall be submitted to the Engineer prior to obscuring any pavement markings on the project .
The Contract Administrator shall be notified of the day and time of the pavement markings application a minimum of hours prior to the application unless otherwise approved .
In the event the Contractor can not place pavement markings per .. and NHDOT Work Zone Traffic Control Standard Plans the Bureau of Traffic shall be notified a minimum of hours before the end of this period in order to apply applicable pavement markings .
In case of cancellation or the Contractor placing the pavement markings after notification the callout charge will apply unless the Bureau of Traffic is notified by telephone at least hours prior to the event .
All pavement markings placed shall meet the tolerance limits shown on the plans .
.. Reflectorized paint and thermoplastic pavement markings shall be applied in one pass at the width specified preformed retroreflective pavement marking tape and thermoplastic shall be applied at the full width specified .
Unless otherwise specified widths of pavement marking lines shall be as follows Line Type Width inch Interstate Applications All Other Applications Centerlines NA Edgelines Lane Lines Gore Markings Crosswalk Lines NA Parking Space Markings NA Stop Lines NA Interstate criteria may be used on other divided highway facilities where shown on the plans or ordered .
Newly applied pavement markings shall be protected from traffic until the material has cured .
As a minimum when striping twoway roadways an escort vehicle shall precede and another shall follow the pavement marking truck .
On oneway divided roadways at least two escort vehicles shall follow the truck to protect pavement markings from traffic .
The use of pavement markings other than in their final location on wearing course will only be permitted if the marking material is designed to be removed without the use of heat solvent grinding or blast treatment and leaves no visible scar on the surface .
The Contractor shall furnish and have available for the Engineers use a pavement temperature gauge .
Immediately before applying the pavement marking paint to the pavement the Contractor shall ensure the surface is dry and entirely free from dirt sand grease oil or other matter which would prevent effective adhesion of the paint to the pavement .
The surface temperature of the pavement shall be a minimum of ºF .
When paint must be applied between the dates of October through April inclusive or on pavement with a surface temperature below ºF cold weather paint can be used which does not exceed EPAs Federal RegisterRules and Regulations CFR Part ADFRL RIN AE as amended for VOC content limit and shall meet the AASHTO M F and requirements noted below .
Project Mileage Retro Tests Required Retro Tests to Fail Failure miles miles miles miles miles miles .. All painted pavement markings including cold weather paint shall receive a second application within seven to ten days after the first application if it is anticipated that the markings will be in place for the winter maintenance season .
.. Preformed pavement marking tape shall be applied at locations shown on the plans by mechanical or manual methods .
.. Preformed pavement marking tape shall be stored and applied as directed by the manufacturer .
For the inlay method the pavement markings shall be embedded in the pavement surface with a conventional steel wheel roller .
The surface temperature of the pavement shall be within the range specified by the manufacturer and shall not deform or discolor the markings .
When applying pavement markings by the overlay method the pavement surface shall be clean dry and above the minimum temperature as specified by the manufacturer .
The required quantity of preformed pavement marking tape shall be available at the project prior to the start of applicable paving operations .
.. Thermoplastic pavement markings shall be applied to the road surface in a molten state by screedextrusion method with a surface application of glass beads .
All equipment used to apply thermoplastic pavement markings shall be constructed to provide continuous uniform heating at temperatures exceeding ºF during mixing and agitation of the material .
Immediately before applying the thermoplastic to the pavement the Contractor shall ensure the surface is dry and entirely free from dirt sand grease oil or other matter which would prevent effective adhesion of the thermoplastic material to the pavement .
When recommended by the manufacturer of the thermoplastic material a primersealer shall be applied to the pavement surface prior to the application of the thermoplastic material .
.. Thermoplastic pavement marking materials shall not be applied when air andor pavement surface temperatures are below ºF or when the surface of the pavement contains any evidence of moisture .
.. Thermoplastic material shall be applied to the pavement at a thickness of mils .
Preformed thermoplastic pavement markings shall be a resilient white thermoplastic product with uniformly distributed glass beads throughout the entire cross sectional area .
The markings can be used for stop lines legends symbols and crosswalks and shall be capable of being affixed to bituminous concrete pavements by the use of the normal heat of a propane torch .
The markings shall be capable of conforming to pavement contours breaks and faults through the action of traffic at normal pavement temperatures .
The marking must be able to be applied on pavement with a surface temperature down to ºF without any preheating of the pavement to a specific temperature. . Obliteration of Pavement Markings .
.. Pavement marking obliteration shall result in a minimum of pavement scar and shall obliterate all evidence of the existing pavement marking material .
Removal may be performed by grinding sand or water blasting blackout tape or other methods approved by the Engineer that do not materially damage the pavement surface .
.. Painting over pavement markings with paint asphalt mixtures or any other material is prohibited .
Removal and disposal of pavement markings including but not limited to retroreflectorized paint retroreflective thermoplastic preformed retroreflective tape and raised pavement markers shall be the responsibility of the Contractor in accordance with all applicable federal state and local regulations .
Retroreflective pavement marking lines of the type and width specified including the second paint application stated in will be measured by the linear foot to the nearest foot of length of marking applied .
Double lines and combination solidbroken lines will be measured as separate lines according to the length of each individual marking applied. . Retroreflective pavement marking symbols or words of the type specified will be measured by the square foot to the nearest .
of a square foot of area applied based on established areas as shown on the Standard Sheets Plans. . Repair work ordered under .. will not be measured. . Raised pavement markers will be measured by each for each marker installed . .
Obliterate pavement marking lines of the type specified will be measured by the linear foot to the nearest foot of length of marking with no adjustment for width . .
Obliterate pavement marking symbols or words of the type specified will be measured by the square foot to the nearest .
The accepted quantities of retroreflective pavement marking lines of the type and width specified will be paid for at the Contract unit price per linear foot complete in place .
The accepted quantities of retroreflective pavement marking symbol or words of the type specified will be paid at the Contract unit price per square foot complete in place. . Additional equipment or labor necessary to apply preformed retroreflective pavement marking tape by the inlay method will be subsidiary . .
The accepted quantities of obliterate pavement marking lines will be paid for at the Contract unit price per linear foot .
Payment will not be made for the removal of removable pavement marking tape . .
The accepted quantities of obliterate pavement marking symbols or words of the type specified will be paid for at the Contract unit price per square foot .
Payment will not be made for the removal of removable pavement marking tape .
The no tracking condition shall be determined by actual application on the pavement at a wet film thickness of mils with white or yellow paint covered with glass beads at a rate of pounds per gallon .
This maximum tracking time shall not be exceeded when the pavement temperature varies from º F to º F and under humidity conditions of or less providing that the pavement is SECTION NHDOT Go To TOC Division Division Division Division Standard Division Division Division Specifications dry .
A line showing no visual deposition of the paint to the pavement surface when viewed from a distance of approximately feet from the point where the test vehicle has crossed the line shall be considered as showing no tracking and conforming to the requirement for field drying conditions .
