MANUAL OF CONTRACT DOCUMENTS FOR HIGHWAY WORKS VOLUME SPECIFICATION FOR HIGHWAY WORKS Amendment February SERIES SITE CLEARANCE Contents Clause Title Page General Clearing Existing Trees Bushes and Hedges F Explosives and Blasting F Hazardous Materials F Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Site Clearance Amendment February SITE CLEARANCE General This Series is part of the Specification for Highway Works .
Whilst this Series is particularly relevant to the subject matter in its title it must be read in conjunction with the general requirements in Series and and with all other Series relevant to the specification for the particular works to be undertaken .
Clearing The Contractor shall demolish break up and remove buildings and structures as described in contract specific Appendix and superficial obstructions on the site in the way of or otherwise affected by the permanent works .
The extent of any partial demolition of structures shall be as described in contract specific Appendix .
The Contractor shall clear each part of the site at times and to the extent indicated on the drawings .
The Contractor shall comply with the requirements of contract specific Appendix with respect to ecological or other environmental site clearance measures or restrictions .
The Contractor shall ensure that individual trees shrubs and other features and areas stated on the drawings to be preserved are suitably identified and protected .
The Contractor shall prepare a method statement describing the approach for such works and their operation .
This shall be submitted to the Overseeing Organisation for acceptance prior to the commencement of site clearance works .
Should any trees shrubs and other planting features and planting areas which it is intended to preserve be killed removed or damaged by the Contractor during the course of the works they shall be replaced by the Contractor with plants of the same species and equal in size to those killed removed or damaged all in accordance with Series or made good by arboricultural work in accordance with Clause or as directed by the Overseeing Organisation or replaced or made good to the satisfaction of the Overseeing Organisation .
Such work shall be carried out at the Contractors own expense .
Where the line of an existing fence hedge or wall is cut by the site boundary the severance shall be made good unless otherwise described in contract specific Appendix either by the continuation of the fence hedge or wall in a different direction or by its termination .
In the case of a strained wire or chain link fence a straining post shall be installed and the fence restrained .
Underground structures chambers and foundations described in contract specific Appendix shall be demolished to the depths prescribed properly cleaned out and filled .
To permit free drainage holes shall be made at mm centres over the whole area of slabs basements etc which are not removed and which are liable to form a barrier to water .
Disused soil and surface water drains sewers cables and ducts together with any bed or haunch or surround within m of formation level shall be removed and over m below formation shall be left unless otherwise described in contract specific Appendix .
The ends of existing drains and sewers no longer required because of alterations to the drainage layout shall be sealed in accordance with Clause .
All trenches shall be backfilled in accordance with Clause unless otherwise described in contract specific Appendix .
The Contractor subject to any instructions or contrary directions in accordance with the contract shall take all measures required by any Statutory Undertaker the management of other publicly owned services or owners of privately owned services or supplies for disconnection and proper sealing off of all redundant drains services and supplies .
All materials arising from site clearance which are not required or unacceptable for use in the permanent works and not included in contract specific Appendix shall become the property of the Contractor and shall be disposed of by him .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Site Clearance Amendment February F Materials included in contract specific Appendix shall be carefully dismantled taken up or taken down cleaned and retained for reuse stacked labeled and protected or loaded and transported to store as described in contract specific Appendix and items damaged in this operation shall be replaced .
All replacements shall be of equivalent quality to the original materials .
When required in contract specific Appendix voids left by items that have been removed shall be backfilled immediately in accordance with the appropriate Clauses in Series .
Topsoil excavated to enable parapet or boundary walls to be set back to new lines or to be erected on the boundaries of the site shall be reserved for reuse .
After erection of the walls the topsoil shall be spread over the disturbed ground any surplus being disposed of as described in Clause .
All existing road markings and road studs on carriageways open to traffic shall be removed as soon as they become superfluous or a hazard to traffic and the carriageway reinstated in accordance with the requirements of contract specific Appendix .
Road markings shall be removed in accordance with Clause .
Existing tensioned safety barriers shall be detensioned to ensure safe removal .
Existing Trees Bushes and Hedges Unless otherwise required in contract specific Appendix trees bushes and hedges shall be uprooted or cut down as near to ground level as possible .
All felled timber shall be disposed of by the Contractor unless otherwise described in contract specific Appendix .
Stumps and roots from trees bushes and hedges shall be grubbed up or blasted in accordance with Clause and disposed of by the Contractor .
Holes left by removal of the stumps or roots shall within one week be filled with acceptable material as defined in Clause and Table and be compacted in compliance with Clause and Table .
Unless otherwise required in contract specific Appendix where shown on the drawings existing trees bushes and hedges shall be cut back to the lines shown on the drawings in accordance with Clause .
For the purposes of this subClause trees shall be defined as a woody plant greater than m in height and a bush shall be defined as a woody plant of m height or less .
Explosives and Blasting Blasting for site clearance shall comply with Clause except that references in that Clause to contract specific Appendix shall be deleted and replaced by reference to contract specific Appendix and such blasting shall be confined to the locations and be within the limits stated therein .
Hazardous Materials The treatment of hazardous materials encountered in site clearance shall comply with any specific requirements stated in contract specific Appendix as well as relevant legislation and any other health and safety measures .
MANUAL OF CONTRACT DOCUMENTS FOR HIGHWAY WORKS VOLUME SPECIFICATION FOR HIGHWAY WORKS Amendment May SERIES FENCING Contents Clause Title Page General Requirements for Temporary and Permanent Fences Temporary Fencing Timber Quality Fittings Permanent Fencing Permanent Fencing for Accommodation Works Gates and Stiles Removing and Reerecting Existing Fences and Gates Not used Preservation of Timber Painting of Timber Fences Gates Stiles and Posts Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Fencing FENCING General Temporary and permanent fences shall comply with this Series and the quality management schemes detailed in Appendix A. Organisations involved in fencing works for highway schemes shall comply with this Series and the associated quality management schemes detailed in Appendix A .
Requirements for Temporary and Permanent Fences As soon as the Contractor is placed in possession of any part of the Site he shall immediately erect fencing on the boundaries of the land as shown on the Drawings .
In places where permanent fencing can not be erected immediately or where none is required the Contractor shall erect and when and where necessary reerect and maintain temporary fencing and subsequently take down and remove as necessary .
The type of temporary fencing shall be chosen by the Contractor unless otherwise described in Appendix and may be selected from the four standard types for highway works described in Clause taking into account the usage of the adjoining land .
Unless otherwise described in Appendix the Contractor shall not use barbed wire in areas accessible to the general public .
Access shall be made in temporary fencing as necessary for the use of the occupiers of adjacent lands .
Temporary fencing shall remain in position either until it is replaced by permanent fencing or until its removal on completion of the Works unless otherwise described in Appendix .
When concrete for post footings is required it shall comply with Clause .
Temporary Fencing Temporary fencing shall be appropriate to the usage of the adjoining land and unless otherwise described in Appendix may be selected from the following types i Post and wire fencing type SW complying with BS Part in accordance with HCD Drawing Number H with at least two of the wires being barbed .
ii Post and wire fencing as subClause i above but with no barbed wires .
iii Cleft chestnut pale fencing type CW complying with BS Part in accordance with HCD Drawing Number H. iv Wooden post and wire fence type C complying with BS Part in accordance with HCD Drawing Number H. If temporary fencing is removed temporarily for the execution of any part of the Works it shall be reinstated as soon as possible and in the meantime the gap in the fencing shall be patrolled so that no unauthorised entry on to adjoining land takes place and no stock escapes from the adjoining land .
Unless otherwise described in Appendix timber for temporary fencing need not have preservation treatment .
Timber Quality Timber for use in permanent works shall be either of appropriate natural durability or be treated with wood preservatives in compliance with Clause .
Where natural durability is used as the criterion the timber shall be of class if used in ground contact e.g .
fence posts and of class or better if used out of ground contact e.g .
fence rails according to the classification given in BS EN .
If any sapwood is present in the timber irrespective of the natural durability of the heartwood the timber shall be treated with preservative Unless otherwise described in this specification and in Appendix timber for permanent fencing shall comply with BS timber for field gates and posts shall comply with BS and timber for stiles bridle gates and kissing gates shall comply with BS .
All timber for permanent fencing field gates and posts stiles bridle gates and kissing gates shall be of sawn timber conforming to BS Annex A .
Non structural timber in environmental barriers shall comply with the requirements of subClause ..
Structural timber in environmental barriers shall be stress graded and marked to comply with BS EN and where appropriate BS BS or BS EN or other grading rules accepted in BS and BS EN .
Amendment May Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Fencing For checking compliance with strength requirements samples shall be taken by the manufacturer or supplier in accordance with the suggested sampling plan in Annex B of BS .
All timber and wood contained in products supplied or used for fences including field gates and posts stiles bridle gates kissing gates and environmental barriers shall comply with sustainability criteria described in Clause .
Fittings Bolts screws and nuts shall comply with BS EN ISO BS EN ISO and BS EN ISO for BS EN ISO property class .
or .
unless otherwise described in Appendix .
Washers shall comply with BS .
Nails shall comply with BS .
Bolts washers and nails shall be galvanised to comply with BS EN ISO unless they are stainless steel .
Permanent Fencing Permanent fencing shall comply with this Clause and the additional requirements described in Appendix .
All permanent fencing unless otherwise described in Appendix shall be erected to present a flowing alignment both in plan and elevation following approximately the level of the ground and the Contractor shall trim the ground along the line of the fence when required in Appendix .
Where the ground is uneven or undulating the Contractor shall provide extra posts stakes and ground anchors as necessary to ensure that the bottom line wire in planting works fencing does not rise more than mm above ground level .
The fencing shall be neatly and effectively joined to existing hedges fences and to other structures to comply with HCD Drawing Number H and Chapter of TD DMRB .. unless otherwise described in Appendix .
Planting works fencing shall be joined to existing boundaries providing a secure joint capable of withstanding entry by rabbits or larger animals .
Timber fencing for motorways shall be wooden post and rail fence with four rails type SPR complying with BS Part to dimensions shown on HCD Drawing Number H. Both ends of posts and rails shall be cross cut at right angles to the length of the piece .
The timber species and preservation treatment shall comply with Clause and any additional stockproofing required shall be as described in Appendix .
Painting if required in Appendix shall comply with Clause and concrete surround to posts if required in Appendix shall comply with subClause .. Amendment May Wire dropper fences for motorways shall be as shown on HCD Drawing Numbers H H H and H. They shall comply with BS Part Sections and with the following Clauses amended as below and with any additional requirements described in Appendix .
On completion of the tensioning of the line wires all fittings droppers and connections shall be painted with plastic paint of the same colour as the fence posts and wire within hours of erection when required in Appendix .
Clause .. Delete text and insert High tensile wire zinc and plastic coated complying with Clause shall be used unless otherwise stated in Appendix .
Appendix B Clause B. Delete text and insert Steel posts and struts shall be galvanized and plastic coated to comply with Clause .
Clause .. Add Only dowelled ends to straining and intermediate posts and struts shall be used .
Turning posts shall be provided and fitted with mm x mm x mm thrust plates complying with Clause As an alternative to being holed a steel fillet may be welded to the straining post to allow for bolting the strut and post together .
Clause .. Add Fence post rivets and wire vices shall be as described in Appendix .
Clause .
Delete text and insert Concrete for surrounding the base of posts and struts shall comply with Clause .
Table .
Add Turning Posts Length m Section CHS mm x mm . . x . . . x . . . x .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Fencing Clause .. Delete paragraphs to and insert All posts and struts shall be set in concrete and the concrete surround shall be filled to within mm of the ground level .
Clause .. Add Turning posts and fittings shall be provided as described in Appendix .
Clause ..
Amend nd sentence to read The interval between a dropper and a post or between adjacent droppers shall be as shown on HCD Drawing Numbers H H and H. Planting Works Fencing Fencing for the protection of planted areas shall be one of the following types required as described in Appendix i Hexagonal wire netting fencing complying with BS Part Section and in accordance with HCD Drawing Number H. ii Rectangular wire mesh and hexagonal wire netting fencing complying with BS Part Section and in accordance with HCD Drawing Number H. iii Wooden post and four rail fencing type SPR complying with BS Part and in accordance with HCD Drawing Number H. iv Wooden driven post fencing in accordance with HCD Drawing Number H. The turned out portion of the hexagonal wire netting of rabbitproof fencing shall be treated in accordance with one of the methods given below as described in Appendix i mm of netting buried vertically into the ground beneath the fence with a further mm turned out towards the rabbit harbourage .
The excavation shall be backfilled and rammed .
ii mm of netting turned out towards the rabbit harbourage laid flat to the ground contours and pegged at mm centres with mm long x mm diameter galvanised wire pins bent hairpin pattern .
iii mm of netting buried vertically into the ground beneath the fence with a further mm of netting turned out towards the rabbit harbourage and covered with turves .
The Contractor shall cut and lift sections of turf at least mm thick from the inside of the planting area and transfer them to cover the whole of the turned out portion of the netting .
iv The netting shall be buried vertically to a depth of mm below existing ground level .
The excavation shall be backfilled and rammed .
Wire Mesh to Permanent or Existing Fencing Where required in Appendix wire mesh shall be attached to permanent or existing fencing in accordance with HCD Drawing Numbers H H and H. The Contractor shall check the condition of the lengths of existing fencing to which mesh is to be attached before commencing work .
Where there is damage to the existing fencing the Contractor shall report this to the Overseeing Organisation before commencing attachment of the mesh .
Fenced Tree Guards Where required in Appendix fenced tree guards shall be provided in accordance with HCD Drawing Number H. Permanent Fencing for Accommodation Works Permanent fencing shall be provided for accommodation works and shall comply with this Series and the particular requirements described in Appendix .
Gates and Stiles Field gates and posts shall comply with BS and Clauses and .
They shall be provided to the dimensions shown on HCD Drawing Numbers H to H. Painting if required in Appendix shall comply with Clause .
Fittings for field gates shall be as shown on HCD Drawing Numbers HH .
Stiles bridle gates kissing gates and gates in planting works fencing shall comply with BS and Clauses and .
They shall be provided to the dimensions shown on HCD Drawing Numbers H H H H H H and H. Concrete for post foundations shall comply with Clause .
Any additional stockproofing required to gates and stiles shall be as described in Appendix .
Amendment November Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Fencing Where access gates are to be provided in a length of fencing that incorporates wildlife mesh the underside of the gate shall include the measures described in Appendix .
Badger Gates Where required in Appendix badger gates shall be provided in accordance with HCD Drawing Number H. Marine ply timber shall comply with BS and BS .
Removing and Reerecting Existing Fences and Gates Where required in Appendix existing fences gates and stiles with posts shall be carefully taken down laid aside removed or later reerected in compliance with Clauses and as specified in subClause ..
Fences gates stiles and posts which are to be reerected shall have any existing paint removed and shall be prepared and treated to comply with Clause .
If any posts rails or lengths of fencing are removed to facilitate repairs or renewal of existing fences the gap in the fencing shall be patrolled or closed with appropriate temporary fencing in accordance with Clause together with any existing wildlife mesh attachments .
Not Used Preservation of Timber Prior to preservation treatment and when the moisture content is or below determined in accordance with BS EN or BS EN the timber quality shall comply with Clause .
Defects unaffected by moisture content shall not be accepted at any time .
The preservation of timber shall be specified in accordance with the system described in BS EN and shall comply with National Highways Sector Schemes for Quality Management in Highway Works Sector Scheme preservative treatment of timber .
i Unless otherwise specified in Appendix the preservative used shall be one which can be used in accordance with BS for use classes and for a desired service life of years as described in ii iii and iv below .
ii For timber used out of ground contact the retention and penetration requirements of the preservative shall be in accordance with the relevant provisions of BS year specification .
Assessment for compliance with these requirements shall be carried out using the scheme described in v and vi below .
iii For timber used in ground contact where the preservative is a creosote preservative complying with BS EN the penetration and retention requirements shall be in accordance with the relevant provisions in BS year specification with the exception of Douglas fir .
Douglas fir treated with creosote shall comply with penetration class P of BS EN i.e .
complete sapwood penetration and the preservative retention in the analytical zone shall be not less than kgm .
Assessment for compliance with these requirements shall be carried out using the scheme described in v and vi below .
iv For timber used in ground contact where the preservative is any other acceptable type of formulation the penetration requirements for all timber species shall be in accordance with the relevant provisions in BS year specification .
The preservative retention shall be derived from BS years specification and years ground contact field test data for example BS interpreted according to the principles in BS EN .
Assessment for compliance with these requirements shall be carried out using the scheme described in v and vi below .
v To demonstrate that the required penetration has been achieved the sampling scheme recommended in BS EN for direct testing shall be followed .
The number of units to be sampled at random from the treated batch shall be determined using general inspection level II as defined in ISO .
Penetration shall be determined for each selected unit from sub samples e.g .
core borings taken as recommended in BS EN .
To determine whether the treated batch has achieved the required penetration an acceptable quality level AQL of for permeable timbers e.g .
Scots pine and an AQL of for resistant timbers e.g .
Douglas fir shall be used to establish passfail criteria from ISO .
Amendment May Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Fencing A Certificate of Treatment showing the basis of compliance with the specification shall accompany each batch or part batch delivered to site .
vi Compliance with the retention requirement within a batch of treated timber shall be calculated from the chemical analysis of the combined analytical zones of the sub samples taken to determine penetration .
The retention shall be equal to or greater than the appropriate value derived as described in ii iii and iv above .
Painting of Timber Fences Gates Stiles and Posts General Painting shall be carried out in accordance with the recommendations in the Code of Practice BS .
All timber fabricated into units before delivery to the Site and which is required to be painted shall be primed at the works .
Priming Surfaces of wood shall be clean and dry before being primed .
Priming paint shall comply with either Type C primer to BS or ready mixed aluminium priming paint complying with BS .
Undercoats and Finishing Coats After erection all exposed primed surfaces shall be painted with one coat of undercoat as described in Appendix .
Two finishing coats of the colour and type described in Appendix shall be applied .
Coloured WoodStain Coloured woodstains shall be applied as described in Appendix .
Amendment May F MANUAL OF CONTRACT DOCUMENTS FOR HIGHWAY WORKS VOLUME SPECIFICATION FOR HIGHWAY WORKS Amendment May SERIES ROAD RESTRAINT SYSTEMS VEHICLE AND PEDESTRIAN Contents Clause Title Page Road Restraint Systems General VEHICLE RESTRAINT SYSTEMS General Requirements Vehicle Restraint Systems General Components for Maintenance and Repair of Legacy Vehicle Restraint Systems Safety Barriers Terminals Transitions Removable Barrier Sections and Crash Cushions Installation of Safety Barriers except vehicle parapets Terminals Transitions Removable Barrier Sections and Crash Cushions Overall Requirements Site Testing Temporary Safety Barriers Vehicle Parapets General Anchorages and Attachment Systems for Vehicle Parapets Amendments and Additions to BS Inspection and Testing of Vehicle Parapet Posts Site Tests on Anchorages in Drilled Holes for Vehicle Parapets PEDESTRIAN RESTRAINT SYSTEMS Pedestrian Parapets and Pedestrian Guardrails ANTIGLARE SCREENS Antiglare Screens MANUAL OF CONTRACT DOCUMENTS FOR HIGHWAY WORKS VOLUME SPECIFICATION FOR HIGHWAY WORKS Amendment May Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Restraint Systems Vehicle and Pedestrian Amendment May ROAD RESTRAINT SYSTEMS VEHICLE AND PEDESTRIAN Road Restraint Systems General This Series is part of the Specification for Highway Works .
Whilst this Series is particularly relevant to the subject matter in its title it must be read in conjunction with the general requirements in Series and and with all other Series relevant to the specification for the particular works to be undertaken .
Road restraint systems RRS shall be able to achieve the specified performance at the temperatures described in the National Annex NA to BS EN figures NA .
and NA .
and determined in accordance with Figure .
of BS EN and the NA .
Additionally the recommended differences in the note to clause .. of BS EN shall be taken into account to determine the most severe temperature effect assuming the rail of a parapet to be equivalent to a structural element in ..
NOTE .
VEHICLE RESTRAINT SYSTEMS General Requirements Vehicle Restraint Systems General Vehicle restraint systems VRS shall conform to this Series and the requirements stated in contract specific Appendix .
VRS other than the following shall conform to BS EN and be CE marked Maintenance of legacy systems as described in subClause .
Transitions Terminals Barrier gates Removable Barrier Sections and Vehicle parapets and combined vehiclepedestrian parapets constructed as bespoke .
These systems shall conform to the requirements stated in paragraphs i to iv below .
i Maintenance of legacy systems as described in subClause .
shall conform to Clauses and .
ii Transitions to and between safety barriers including vehicle parapets shall conform to the requirements of DD ENV .
iii Terminals shall conform to the requirements of DD ENV .
iv Barrier gates Removable Barrier Sections shall conform to the requirements of DD ENV .
v Vehicle parapets and combined vehicle pedestrian parapets constructed as bespoke shall conform to Clause .
The minimum Performance Class Requirements Containment Level Impact Severity Level ISL Working Width Class W Vehicle Intrusion VI Performance Level Redirection Zone Class Z Permanent Lateral Displacement Zone Class D Performance Class P Permanent Lateral Displacement Zone D. y. x .
Exit Box ClassZ and other requirements such as the Length of Need as defined in TD DMRB .. the Setback as defined in TD the minimum height of parapets requirement for pedestrian provision and the maximum height of the road restraint that allows the required visibility shall be as described in contract specific Appendix .
Acceptance of Proposals Details of the vehicle restraint systems proposed by the Contractor for both new installations or for maintenance of existing systems shall be submitted to the Overseeing Organisation at least four weeks before Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Restraint Systems Vehicle and Pedestrian Amendment May the commencement of vehicle restraint system work for acceptance with the following supporting information demonstrating compliance with this specification and the requirements set out in contract specific Appendix .
Where a Declaration of Performance is required to be submitted this is as required by the Construction Products Regulation EU No .
CPR and the relevant harmonised standard .
i For Safety Barriers excluding vehicle parapets a A Declaration of Performance demonstrating compliance with the contract requirements for the essential characteristics plus additional information as necessary to demonstrate that the chosen systems meets the location specific design criteria as stated in the contract specific specification .
ii For Vehicle Parapets a A Declaration of Performance demonstrating compliance with the contract requirements for the essential characteristics plus additional information as necessary to demonstrate that the chosen systems meets the location specific design criteria as stated in the contract specific specification .
b When required in contract specific Appendix the Contractor shall provide evidence that demonstrates the following that the declared performance was achieved in testing in accordance with BS EN Parts and and that the test vehicle did not in any way touch or take advantage of structures which will not be present on the final bridge installation that is if the vehicle dropped down behind the bridge installation it did not touch soil or other supporting devices or any other feature .
iii For Crash Cushions a Declaration of Performance demonstrating compliance with the contract requirements for the essential characteristics plus additional information as necessary to demonstrate that the chosen systems meets the location specific design criteria as stated in the contract specific specification .
iv For the maintenance and repair of Legacy Safety Barriers as described in subClause .
a Documentation showing compliance with and operation of the Quality Management requirements of Clause and associated quality management schemes listed in Appendix A .
This shall include the quality plans required in subClause .
which shall make specific reference to the management of the vehicle restraint operations and all associated operations .
The documentation shall identify quality management procedures for each vehicle restraint activity for each system included in the works .
b For legacy systems documentation showing compliance with the Safety Barrier Systems Drawings such as those detailed in the Non Proprietary Safety Barrier Systems Rev drawings or outwith the Highways England network guidance should be sort from the appropriate Overseeing Organisation .
v For Vehicle Parapets and Combined Vehicle Pedestrian Parapets constructed as bespoke .
a Documentation showing compliance with BS as amended by this Series and TD DMRB vi For Combined VehiclePedestrian Parapets a Declaration of Performance demonstrating vehicle containment achieves compliance with the contract requirements for the essential characteristics plus additional information as necessary to demonstrate that the chosen systems meets the location specific design criteria as stated in the contract specific specification .
b For maintenance of legacy systems as described in subClause .
documentation showing compliance with BS as amended by this Series and TD DMRB .. for pedestrian containment .
c For the pedestrian containment aspects documentation as per the requirements of subClause .. Where such documentation has previously been submitted to the Overseeing Organisation and the Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Restraint Systems Vehicle and Pedestrian Amendment May system has been listed as described in subClause .
further submission of this documentation may not be necessary .
Where the Contractor proposes to use such systems the Contractor shall confirm the relaxation of these documentation requirements with the Overseeing Organisation .
d When required in contract specific Appendix the Contractor shall provide evidence that demonstrates the following that the declared performance was achieved in testing in accordance with BS EN Parts and and that the test vehicle did not in any way touch or take advantage of structures which will not be present on the final bridge installation that is if the vehicle dropped down behind the bridge installation it did not touch soil or other supporting devices or any other feature .
vii For Transitions between vehicle restraint systems a Documentation showing compliance with and operation of the Quality Management requirements of Clause and associated quality management schemes listed in Appendix A as required in subClause .
paragraph iva .
b Documentation demonstrating compliance with DD ENV and the contract performance requirements .
c Documentation as per the requirements of subClause .. Where such documentation has previously been submitted to the Overseeing Organisation and the system has been listed as described in subClause .
further submission of this documentation may not be necessary .
Where the Contractor proposes to use such systems the Contractor shall confirm the relaxation of these documentation requirements with the Overseeing Organisation .
viii For Terminals to vehicle restraint systems a Documentation showing compliance with and operation of the Quality Management requirements of Clause and associated quality management schemes listed in Appendix A as required in subClause .
paragraph iva .
b Documentation demonstrating compliance with DD ENV and the contract performance requirements .
c Documentation as per the requirements of subClause .. Where such documentation has previously been submitted to the Overseeing Organisation and the system has been listed as described in subClause .
further submission of this documentation may not be necessary .
Where the Contractor proposes to use such systems the Contractor shall confirm the relaxation of these documentation requirements with the Overseeing Organisation .
Where specified in subClause .
the following information shall be provided to the Overseeing Organisation .
Where required the Contractor shall complete the proforma included in contract specific Appendix .
i Test report in accordance with either BS EN Annex A or BS EN Annex A or DD ENV clause .. ii Videohigh speed film of test annotated showing date test number and performance class .
iii Still photographs of complete installation including anchorage points .
iv Still photographs of vehicle before and after impact .
v Full drawings of tested items .
vi Certification from the manufacturer that the item tested complies with the drawings supplied .
vii Certificate from a test house accredited in accordance with the requirements of subClause .. Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Restraint Systems Vehicle and Pedestrian Amendment May Durability Safety barriers vehicle parapets terminals transitions removable barrier sections and crash cushions shall conform to the following .
i All components shall be designed to achieve a serviceable life of not less than a years for metal safety barriers terminals transitions removable barrier sections and crash cushions b years for concrete safety barrier systems except for temporary safety barriers where the serviceable life shall be not less than years c years for metal vehicle parapets and metal components of combined metal and concrete vehicle parapets and d years for concrete vehicle parapets and concrete components of combined metal and concrete vehicle parapets and ii For metal vehicle parapets and metal components of combined metal and concrete parapets the serviceable life shall except where stated in contract specific Appendix be obtained without the requirement for any maintenance other than that resulting from accidental damage .
In addition metal components of combined metal and concrete parapets shall be capable of replacement without damage to the concrete components .
Information Required to be Provided by the Contractor Prior to Installation The following information shall be provided by the Contractor to the Overseeing Organisation all documentation shall be in English .
For all proposed road restraint systems i Information as required in subClause .. ii Installation drawings .
iii Manufacturers installation instructions or installation manual including foundation requirements and test methods to verify their performance .
iv Manufacturers repair and maintenance manual .
v For each organisation undertaking vehicle restraint system work certificates of registration to the relevant National Highways Sector Schemes listed in Appendix A .
The certificates of registration shall include in the scope of registration installation of the vehicle restraint systems being installed .
vi Where contract specific Appendix specifies requirements for loads imposed by road restraint systems on foundations or structures the nominal loads direct forces moments and coexistent shears that will be transferred from the barrier or parapet to the structure or foundation shall be provided .
Information Required to be Provided by the Contractor After Installation The Contractor shall provide to the Overseeing Organisation asbuilt drawings which shall include plans and details of the constructed system .
The Contractor shall also provide to the Overseeing Organisation for each proprietary system installed a certificate certifying that it has been installed fully in accordance with the manufacturers instructions .
Marking All components of systems that fall within the scope of the Construction Products Regulation EU No .
CPR shall be marked in accordance with the requirements of the CPR and the relevant harmonised standard .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Restraint Systems Vehicle and Pedestrian Amendment May Handling and Storage All components shall be protected from damage and handled and stacked in such a way that permanent damage is not caused particularly to threaded components .
Means shall be provided to avoid damage to galvanized coatings and any damage that does occur shall be repaired in accordance with BS EN ISO .
Installation Instructions The Contractor shall ensure that the installation instructions or installation manual as required by BS EN for a proposed system includes all the information necessary to install the road restraint system in the locations shown on the drawings such that the system will meet its declared performance .
Installation instructions shall be appropriate to the road restraint system being installed and its location .
The use of the system relative to different ground and other conditions of installation and use including limitations e.g .
permitted temperature range shall be defined in the installation manual .
The installation manual shall also include the following information and any additional information appropriate to the system proposed and its proposed location .
i Erection a assembly drawings of the product tested including tolerances anchorages end parts where relevant installation height above pavement andor ground levels other installation details appropriate to the installation for the specific locations including changes relevant to different set backs from the edge of carriageway etc .
b description of the installation works including equipment and specific details for installation on a curve with minimum allowed radius on a convex curve and concave curve c procedures for installation erection assembly foundations anchorages and bolt torques when relevant etc .
d all tools required to perform a proper installation of the system e ambient temperature and humidity at time of installation if relevant and how installation should be adjusted for the ambient conditions at the time of installation f details of tensioning if relevant g particular conditions applicable to the use of the product e.g .
provisions for use under certain conditions h description of the soil pavement andor foundations characteristics and conditions suitable for the system and information about conditions which can influence the behaviour of the product i details of any testing of the installation or other on installation specific testing e.g .
post push tests to prove the proposed foundation system j any other relevant recycling information details of toxic or dangerous materials present in the works .
ii Maintenance and inspection a provisions for repair inspection and maintenance including indications for disassembling and reassembling or reconstruction of damaged system b in service tolerances including for installation height .
iii The following information is applicable specifically to safety barriers a recommended range of length of the safety barrier minimum maximum curve radius etc .
b provisions for installing lengths above the minimum Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Restraint Systems Vehicle and Pedestrian Amendment May c recommended arrangements for dealing with exposed rail ends e.g .
flaring terminals etc .
d recommended soils slopes possibility of plinth installation and specific instructions e recommended arrangements for drainage through andor in front of the safety barrier f other safety barrier types which can easily be connected with the product .
iv The following information is applicable specifically to terminals safety barrier types which can be connected to the product .
Further installation requirements All VRS shall be installed refurbished repaired and maintained by operatives that have been trained under the relevant National Highway Sector Schemes listed in Appendix A or equivalent as stated in sub Clause ..
The Contractor shall in accordance with subClause .
provide evidence to the Overseeing Organisation to demonstrate that the operatives accreditation to the relevant schemes is current and valid .
Any nonconformances with the relevant sector scheme shall be notified to the sector scheme Advisory Committee Secretary .
A copy of this shall be submitted to the Overseeing Organisation .
Components for Maintenance and Repair of Legacy Vehicle Restraint Systems Legacy systems are VRS that are currently on the road network that are not CE marked .
The requirements given in this Series with respect to legacy systems are for the maintenance and repair of such systems .
All new VRS shall comply with the requirements of Clause .
For the purpose of vehicle parapet requirements this Clause shall also be read in conjunction with Clause .
Materials Materials and fabrication of components and fittings shall be as described and detailed on the drawings submitted by the Contractor in compliance with Clause subClause .
and other requirements of this Series .
It shall be demonstrated that the materials are within the limits of statistical variation for the specified material and for the material of the prototype tested system .
Materials significantly exceeding the original specified strength shall not be accepted .
Structural concrete reinforcement workmanship and other requirements shall conform to the relevant requirements of Series and Appendices to .
Standardised prescribed concrete shall conform to Clause and contract specific Appendix .
Protection Against Corrosion Protection against corrosion shall be as described in the manufacturers specification and the following i all steel components except stainless steel items concrete foundation reinforcing rings and reinforcing bars that will be permanently embedded in concrete shall be galvanized after shop fabrication as described in Clause and ii where required in contract specific Appendix the surface preparation and protection against corrosion of all steel vehicle parapets and steel components of combined metal and concrete vehicle parapets shall comply with Series .
Tolerances Fabrication tolerances including tolerance on hole diameters shall be as shown and described on the drawings submitted by the Contractor in accordance with subClauses .iv and ..
Components which are to be galvanized or metal coated shall be measured before galvanizing or metal coating .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Restraint Systems Vehicle and Pedestrian Amendment May Welding i General Arc welding of ferritic steels shall conform to BS EN and BS EN .
Weld symbols shown on the drawings submitted by the Contractor in accordance with subClause .
and .
shall be as described in BS EN .
Welding shall not be used except as where detailed on the drawings submitted by the Contractor in accordance with subClause .
and .. Arc welding of stainless steels shall conform to BS EN .
Arc welding of aluminium alloys shall conform to BS EN and BS EN .
ii Procedures Written welding procedures shall be used with testing to BS EN ISO BS EN ISO and BS EN ISO for steel and BS EN ISO BS EN ISO and BS EN ISO for aluminium alloys and shall apply to all production and repair procedures .
These shall be subject to reapproval after a period of seven years .
When applying BS EN ISO BS EN ISO and BS EN ISO the welding consumables and procedures used shall be such that the mechanical properties of deposited weld metal shall not be less than the respective minimum specified values of the parent metal being welded .
Weld testing shall be undertaken by an appropriate organisation accredited in accordance with subClause .. Approval shall be by an Independent Inspecting Authority using Registered Welding Engineers or Registered Welding Quality Engineers or equivalent .
Welding procedures shall be approved in accordance with BS EN ISO .
Preproduction test pieces shall represent the main assembly types .
iii Welder Qualification All welders shall hold certificates of approval to BS EN and BS EN for steel and BS EN ISO for aluminium alloys .
The tests shall include in addition an application test on transverse butt welds in beams .
Welders carrying out fillet welds only may be approved to BS .
Certificates of approval shall be by an Independent Inspecting Authority using Registered Welding Engineers Registered Welding Quality Engineers or Welding Inspectors certified by the Certification Scheme for Weldment Inspection Personnel CSWIP or equivalent .
Weld testing shall be undertaken by an appropriate organisation accredited in accordance with subClause .. iv Production Inspection and Testing The manufacturer shall provide suitable personnel to carry out inspection of production welds in a to c below .
Personnel conducting visual inspection shall be certified by the Certification Scheme for Weldment Inspection Personnel CSWIP or equivalent at a competency level appropriate to the type of weld inspected .
Personnel conducting nondestructive testing NDT shall be certified by the Certification Scheme for Weldment Inspection Personnel CSWIP or equivalent appropriate to the equipment used and the weld groups inspected all in accordance with BS EN ISO .
Evidence of training and qualification shall be retained and made available for examination when required .
The results of all weld inspections shall be recorded .
a Visual Inspection All welded joints shall be subject to visual inspection in accordance with BS EN ISO prior to any NDT and galvanizing .
Weld surfaces shall be free of slag residues and sharp edges .
All surfaces shall be free of traces of weld splatter arc strikes and contaminants .
The apparent throat dimensions of butt welds and the apparent leg length and apparent throat dimensions of fillet welds as measured by a welding gauge taking into account any known lack of fit shall not be less than those specified except that local shortfalls up to mm may be accepted provided the average over any mm length is not less than the specified dimension .
All welds to be free of cold lap .
The surface of all welds shall be free from cracks lack of fusion including overlap and slag .
Isolated discontinuous porosity may be accepted provided it is not detrimental to the galvanising process .
Undercut shall not result in a section loss of more than over any mm length of joint nor shall its depth exceed .
mm or of the thickness whichever is the less .
b Magnetic Particle Inspection MPI and Liquid Penetrant Inspection LPI MPI shall be applied in accordance with BS EN ISO to joints selected in accordance with d below where any of the material thickness exceeds mm .
Notwithstanding the requirements of d below MPI or LPI in accordance with BS EN shall be applied as appropriate where on visual inspection Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Restraint Systems Vehicle and Pedestrian Amendment May the presence of cracking or lack of fusion may be suspected .
To aid inspection the profile of the weld may be dressed by burr grinding provided that the specified throat size and leg length is still maintained .
The surface of the weld shall be free of cracks lack of fusion and slag .
c Ultrasonic Testing All butt joints in material mm thick or greater selected in accordance with d below shall be ultrasonically tested in accordance with BS EN ISO .
The weld shall be free of cracks .
The height of buried slag lack of fusion or lack of penetration shall not exceed mm and within mm of the outer surface their individual lengths shall not exceed mm .
The resulting net throat area loss over any mm length of weld shall not exceed of the specified throat area .
d Frequency of NDT Joints shall be selected as follows All joints of each type up to a batch size of components and of additional components thereafter .
If non conformances are found the scope of NDT shall be doubled .
If further non conformances are found the whole batch shall be tested .
e Reporting Inspection records for production welds shall be retained by the manufacturer for three years and those covering the production periods relating to the components supplied shall be made available for examination .
v Destructive Testing Copies of certified reports of destructive tests on components supplied under earlier contracts with the Overseeing Organisation shall be provided .
vi Frequency of Destructive Testing The Contractor shall supply components or sample joints cut from components for destructive testing as selected on behalf of the Overseeing Organisation .
The basis of selection shall be as follows a For batches of less than beam assemblies with transverse butt welds sample joint shall be supplied unless an identical sample joint from the same works has been destructively tested within the previous four weeks .
For batches exceeding or more sample joint shall be supplied for each subsequent sampling lot not exceeding .
b Welded adjuster brackets shall be supplied at a rate of for each sampling lot not exceeding .
c Each type of post shall be supplied at a rate of post for each sampling lot not exceeding .
d Each type of surface mounted post shall be supplied at the rate of post for each sampling lot not exceeding .
e For batches of up to vehicle parapet posts No test required provided that records certified by a representative of the Overseeing Organisation are produced of successful testing carried out on posts of the same weld group within the previous months .
If no satisfactory record is available one post to be tested .
For batches of to vehicle parapet posts One post to be tested .
For batches exceeding vehicle parapet posts Two posts to be tested .
f Each type of anchor frame vehicle parapet connection and connection piece shall be supplied at an interval not exceeding months for each manufacturers works .
g For batches of up to welded vehicle parapet splices one splice shall be supplied for testing unless successful testing has been carried out within the previous months on a similar splices where the splice to be tested was selected by the Overseeing Organisations representative and the welding is to be carried out by the same personnel .
For batches greater than welded vehicle parapet splices two splices shall be tested .
h Other welded components shall be supplied at an interval not exceeding months for each manufacturers works .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Restraint Systems Vehicle and Pedestrian Amendment May vii Acceptance Criteria The acceptance criteria shall be as specified in subClause .iv except that in subClause .iva the throat and leg dimension of the weld shall apply to the true rather than apparent dimension .
viii Nonconformance In the event that there is a nonconformance arising from a deviation in materials preparation assembly or welding procedure the batch concerned shall be rejected and further production of the components affected stopped until such time as the fault has been corrected .
A minor noncompliance shall only be accepted on the basis that further sampling and testing shows that the fault is not repetitive and will not in that instance impair structural integrity .
If the problem can be traced to a particular manufacturing period operator piece of equipment or batch of material and if proper traceability to individual batches of components can be assured only those batches affected may be subjected to rejection .
ix Test Report The destruction test reports shall be retained by the Contractor and recorded in a register for a period of three years .
The destructive test samples shall be retained for a period of months .
These shall be made available for examination on future contracts with the Overseeing Organisation .
x Remedial Work Welds which do not conform to the Specification may be repaired to an approved procedure as described in subClause .ii .
Welds in aluminium alloys shall not be repaired more than once .
Marking All components excluding fasteners reinforcing rings and bars shall be clearly and durably marked with the manufacturers identification mark and digits indicating month and year of manufacture .
In addition to the marking requirements of BS EN ISO fasteners shall be clearly marked with the following i safety barrier terminal transition crash cushion manufacturers identification mark and ii fastener number as referenced on the manufacturers construction drawings .
Workmanship and Testing All components shall be manufactured so as to permit the construction of the accepted systems within the tolerances described in subClauses .
and .
and in accordance with the accepted drawings submitted by the Contractor .
Changes in material properties outside those used in the type tests of the systems shall not be permitted .
Unless otherwise indicated on the accepted drawings submitted by the Contractor to the Overseeing Organisation all fabrication of components shall be completed before the surface protection is applied .
The Contractor shall provide the Overseeing Organisation with evidence that the manufacturer has arranged for tensile tests to destruction to be carried out by a testing laboratory accredited in accordance with sub Clause .
annually and whenever the production technique is changed .
Quality Management Parapet legacy system components used for repair and maintenance shall be manufactured by an organisation registered to National Highways Sector Scheme A for the Manufacture of Parapets for Road Restraint Systems .
The Contractor shall submit a certificate of registration to the Overseeing Organisation .
The scope of registration shall include the components being installed .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Restraint Systems Vehicle and Pedestrian Amendment May Safety Barriers Terminals Transitions Removable Barrier Sections and Crash Cushions Installation of Safety Barriers except vehicle parapets Terminals Transitions Removable Barrier Sections and Crash Cushions Overall Requirements Layout The overall layout and location of safety barriers terminals transitions removable barrier sections RBS and crash cushions shall be as indicated on the contract drawings and described in contract specific Appendix .
All safety barriers terminals transitions and RBS shall be erected to present a flowing alignment .
Unless a requirement is given in the manufacturers installation instructions or installation manual all safety barriers terminals and transitions shall be erected in accordance with the following i The overall alignment on plan shall not depart from the prescribed alignment by the more onerous requirements of either a the manufacturers drawings or b more than mm nor deviate in any m length from the straight or required radius by more than mm .
ii Vertical alignment this shall be in accordance with the manufacturers installation instructions or installation manual except for works in relation to existing legacy safety barrier systems where the installation heights shall be as given on the installation drawings for those products .
Excavation for Concrete Foundations and Anchor Blocks Excavations for concrete foundations and anchor blocks shall be in accordance with the manufacturers instructions or installation manual or for legacy systems to the detailed drawings submitted by the Contractor to the Overseeing Organisation .
Where the sides of the excavations can not be maintained vertical until concrete is placed suitable permanent or temporary formwork shall be used .
The formwork shall be installed immediately after excavation and any lateral overbreak of the excavation shall be filled with concrete conforming to BS or the accepted manufacturers instructions or installation manual submitted by the Contractor to the Overseeing Organisation as appropriate .
Impermeable plastic sheeting gauge thick shall be laid at the base of an insitu concrete foundation located in filter drains .
Concrete in Foundations and Anchor Blocks Concrete in foundations and anchor blocks shall be in accordance with the relevant Clauses of this Series and the manufacturers instructions or for maintenance and repair works related to existing legacy systems to the NonProprietary Safety Barrier System Drawings Rev submitted by the Contractor to the Overseeing Organisation .
The Contractor shall ensure that any concrete which constitutes part of the road restraint system has reached the specified strength stated on the accepted drawings prior to any tensioning of the road restraint system taking place .
Beams Notwithstanding the manufacturing tolerances permitted for individual beams the cumulative length tolerance shall be such that beams and posts can be positioned in their prescribed location and the requirements of subClauses .
and .
can be met .
With the exception of any special closure pieces necessary to complete lengths of safety barriers terminals transitions or RBS beam lengths shall not differ from those described on the accepted drawings submitted by the Contractor in accordance with subClause .
and .. Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Restraint Systems Vehicle and Pedestrian Amendment May Posts Where applicable posts foundations and post sockets shall be in accordance with the manufacturers instructions or for legacy systems to the detailed drawings submitted by the Contractor in accordance with sub Clause .
and .. Where posts are mounted in cast in post sockets these shall be protected to prevent the collection of detritus in the socket voids .
When steel posts are driven into the ground this shall be carried out without damage to the post and the protective coating .
Any superficial damage to the galvanising shall be treated in accordance with BS EN ISO unless the manufacturers instructions require more comprehensive repairs .
Cutting of components No drilling cutting including flame cutting or welding of beams and posts shall be permitted after the corrosion protection to the system has been applied .
Special closure pieces shall be fabricated before corrosion protection is applied .
Assembly Direct contact between dissimilar metals shall be avoided .
Where necessary to prevent direct contact this shall be achieved by interposing a dielectric separator in accordance with the manufacturers instructions or for legacy systems to the detailed drawings submitted by the Contractor .
Anchorages and Attachment Systems for Surface Mounted Posts Unless otherwise described in contract specific Appendix the Contractor shall submit to the Overseeing Organisation at least weeks before installation well attested and documented evidence that proposed anchorages and attachment systems in drilled holes are capable of resisting the ultimate tensile loads resulting from failure of the proposed safety barrier terminal transition RBS or crash cushion system .
Where the ultimate capacity of a safety barrier terminal transition RBS or crash cushion system is governed by the failure of the attachment system the evidence shall demonstrate that the anchorages in drilled holes are capable of resisting the ultimate tensile loads resulting from failure of the attached system .
Anchorages of an expanding type other than undercut anchorages shall not be permitted .
Unless otherwise specifically indicated on the accepted manufacturers instructions or installation manual submitted by the Contractor to the Overseeing Organisation steel anchorages and attachment systems shall be used for securing surface mounted posts to a concrete or steel base .
Unless otherwise specifically indicated on the accepted manufacturers instructions or installation manual submitted by the Contractor to the Overseeing Organisation where surface mounted posts are to be installed on a highway structure the anchorages shall include an internally threaded component to receive the attachment system .
All parts of anchorages on bridge decks and other structures where the anchorage is within mm of the upper surface of the supporting concrete or where the anchorage parts are threaded to receive the holding down bolt shall be of stainless steel designation .
. . or .
to BS EN .
Holding down bolts studs and nuts on bridge decks and other structures shall be stainless steel grade A to BS EN ISO and BS EN ISO .
Washers on bridge decks and other structures shall conform to BS and be made from stainless steel strip designation .
or .
to BS EN BS EN BS EN and BS EN ISO .
Unless specifically indicated on the accepted manufacturers instructions submitted by the Contractor to the Overseeing Organisation direct metal to metal contact between dissimilar materials within the attachment system and anchorage shall be prevented by the use of non conductive sleeves washers or coatings to prevent bimetallic corrosion .
Unless specifically indicated on the accepted manufacturers instructions or installation manual submitted by the Contractor to the Overseeing Organisation or where surface mounted posts are attached to a steel base the base plate shall be bedded on mortar conforming with Clause and contract specific Appendix .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Restraint Systems Vehicle and Pedestrian Amendment May The bedding mortar shall have a minimum thickness of mm and a maximum thickness of mm .
An additional allowance may be made for longitudinal falls .
For anchorages in drilled holes each hole location shall be checked to ensure that the hole will be clear of reinforcement before drilling is carried out .
Where it is not possible to locate drilled holes without encountering reinforcement the Contractor shall provide a specialists report to the Overseeing Organisation on the consequences of drilling through or cutting the reinforcement .
No drilling or cutting shall take place without the prior written acceptance of the Overseeing Organisation .
Before installation of anchorages in drilled holes each hole shall be sound clean and dry and the tolerance of the hole shall be within the values given by the anchorage manufacturer .
Attachment systems shall be tightened to the specified torque and have not less than the minimum thread engagement specified by the manufacturer of the system .
Stainless steel bolts screws and nuts shall conform to BS EN ISO and BS EN ISO Grade A .
The dimensions and tolerances of the bolts screws and nuts shall conform to BS EN ISO BS EN ISO and BS EN ISO .
Stainless steel washers shall conform to BS and be made from stainless steel strip designation .
or .
to BS EN BS EN BS EN and BS EN ISO .
Unless expressly prohibited by the manufacturers instructions or installation manual the threads of steel anchorages shall be lined with grease having a high resistance to creep and being suitable for hot or cold smearing .
Voids shall be sealed with a durable nonstructural and impermeable filler to prevent ingress of moisture and deleterious substances .
Sealing of voids in anchorages attachment systems and base plates with a nonstructural impermeable durable filler is important to prevent water ingress and to avoid corrosion and damage .
Fillers may be derived from polymers or elastomers but shall exclude acrylic or polyester based materials .
Site Testing for Contract Compliance Anchorages in Drilled Holes for Safety Barriers Terminals Transitions and Crash Cushions The Contractor shall carry out onsite tensile load tests on anchorages in drilled holes .
For the purpose of this subClause the types of fixing referred to in clause of BS shall include anchorages .
Unless more onerous or alternative testing is proposed in the manufacturers installation manual accepted by the Overseeing Organisation the following testing methodology shall be applied .
i Where anchorages are tested they shall be loaded incrementally in tension in accordance with BS except that they shall be capable of resisting a test load equal to per cent above the nominal tensile load applied to the anchorage at failure of the safety barrier terminal transition or crash cushion system in lieu of testing to failure .
ii The nominal tensile load shall be determined by the manufacturer of the safety barrier terminal transition RBS or crash cushion system .
Where the failure of the attachment system e.g .
the holding down bolt is the prescribed failure mode of the safety barrier terminal transition RBS or crash cushion system the test load shall be per cent of the yield load of the attachment system .
Incremental loads shall be held for not less than half a minute and the test load for not less than five minutes .
Readings shall be taken immediately after applying load and at the end of the interval stated above .
iii The total movement of the anchorage shall not exceed .
mm during the test .
Any evidence of slip during loading as demonstrated by a significant change in the slope of the loadextension curve shall constitute failure .
iv The testing frequency shall be in accordance with contract specific Appendix .
In addition testing shall comply with any special requirements given in contract specific Appendix .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Restraint Systems Vehicle and Pedestrian Amendment May Post Foundations The Contractor shall provide the test equipment and carry out loading tests on post foundations to ascertain compliance with the manufacturers specification or installation manual for the proposed safety barrier terminal transition RBS and crash cushion system .
The tests shall be carried out and the results submitted to the Overseeing Organisation at least one week prior to installation of the relevant lengths of safety barrier terminal transition RBS and crash cushion system .
The testing frequency shall be in accordance with contract specific Appendix or the manufacturers installation manual if this stipulates a more onerous testing regime .
Where stated in contract specific Appendix the Overseeing Organisation shall provide the test equipment and carry out loading tests on post foundations installed by the Contractor for that purpose .
The Contractor shall make available a vehicle of not less than tonnes for the Overseeing Organisations use while carrying out the tests .
The Contractor shall install test posts and foundations after completion of the finished ground .
On completion of loading tests the Contractor shall remove the test posts and foundations and reinstate the finished ground to meet the requirements of the Contract .
Temporary Safety Barriers Where required in contract specific Appendix the Contractor shall provide install and maintain temporary safety barriers terminals and transitions and on completion of the works remove them to the locations stated in contract specific Appendix .
Where temporary safety barriers terminals and transitions are to be provided by the Overseeing Organisation the Contractor shall remove them from the location stated in contract specific Appendix and install and maintain them .
On completion of the works the Contractor shall remove the temporary safety barriers terminals and transitions to the locations stated in contract specific Appendix .
Vehicle Parapets including Vehicle Pedestrian Parapets General Unless otherwise described in contract specific Appendix vehicle parapets shall be in accordance with the following requirements except where these conflict with BS EN in which event BS EN shall take precedence i TD DMRB .. ii Clause contract specific Appendix and contract specific Appendix iii Clauses to .
Legacy systems as described in subClause .
shall be in accordance with Clause and BS .
Vehicle parapets and combined vehicle pedestrian parapets constructed as bespoke in concrete shall be in accordance with BS .
Aesthetic Requirements Vehicle parapets shall comply with the aesthetic requirements given in contract specific Appendix .
Layout The overall layout and location of vehicle parapets shall be as indicated on the contract drawings and described in contract specific Appendix .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Restraint Systems Vehicle and Pedestrian Amendment May Maintenance and Repair Components used for maintenance and repair of parapets shall match the performance characteristics of the existing parapet and shall comply with the requirements stated in contract specific Appendix .Components are to be of identical design detail specification and geometry to the parapet components originally installed and are to be installed such that the completed repair is like for like .
Except that in addition the requirements and standards current at the time of manufacture of the original parapet shall apply subject to such revisions and modifications applicable to the parapet type during the period of original manufacture the capacity of the components shall be comparable to that of the original components as tested .
The maintenance andor repair of CE marked parapets shall be undertaken in accordance with the manufacturers installation manual and requirements for the parapet using components which are identical in design specification and geometry to the parapet components originally installed .
Steel parapets shall be galvanised but not painted unless required for aesthetic reasons .
Anchorages and Attachment Systems for Vehicle Parapets Unless otherwise described in contract specific Appendix the design fabrication and installation of the anchorage and attachment system shall conform to the manufacturers drawings and specifications the requirements of BS EN this Series and TD DMRB Unless otherwise covered under the CE marked systems Declaration of Performance and its supporting documentation or described in contract specific Appendix the Contractor shall submit to the Overseeing Organisation at least weeks before installation well attested and documented evidence that the proposed fixings including all cradles anchorages and attachment systems are capable of resisting the applied load effects resulting from collision with the proposed vehicle parapet system .
Where the ultimate capacity of a vehicle parapet system is governed by the failure of the attachment system the evidence shall demonstrate that anchorages in drilled holes are capable of resisting the ultimate tensile loads resulting from the failure of the attachment system so that an anchorage is able to be reused in the event of the need to replace a parapet that has suffered collision damage .
Anchorages of an expanding type shall not be permitted .
Unless otherwise specifically indicated on the accepted manufacturers drawings submitted by the Contractor to the Overseeing Organisation anchorages shall include an internally threaded component to receive the attachment system .
Where the anchorage is within mm of the upper surface of the supporting concrete or where the anchorage part is threaded to receive the holding down bolt all parts of the anchorage shall be of stainless steel designation .
. . or .
to BS EN .
Holding down bolts studs and nuts shall be in stainless steel grade A to BS EN ISO and BS EN ISO .
Unless specifically indicated on the accepted manufacturers drawings submitted by the Contractor to the Overseeing Organisation direct metal to metal contact between dissimilar materials within the attachment system and anchorage shall be prevented by the use of nonconducting sleeves washers or coatings to prevent bimetallic corrosion .
Unless specifically indicated in the manufacturers installation manual submitted by the Contractor and accepted by the Overseeing Organisation or where the vehicle parapet posts are attached to a steel base the posts shall be bedded on mortar complying with Clause and contract specific Appendix .
The bedding mortar shall have a minimum thickness of mm and a maximum thickness of mm .
An additional allowance may be made for longitudinal falls .
For anchorages in drilled holes each hole location shall be checked to ensure that the hole will be clear of reinforcement before drilling is carried out .
Where it is not possible to locate drilled holes without encountering reinforcement the Contractor shall provide a specialists report to the Overseeing Organisation on the Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Restraint Systems Vehicle and Pedestrian Amendment May consequences of drilling through or cutting the reinforcement .
No drilling or cutting shall take place without the prior written acceptance of the Overseeing Organisation .
Before installation of anchorages in drilled holes each hole shall be sound clean and dry and the tolerance of the hole shall be within the values given by the anchorage manufacturer .
Attachment systems shall be tightened to the torque given in the manufacturers installation manual and have not less than the minimum thread engagement specified by the manufacturer of the system .
Stainless steel bolts screws and nuts shall comply with BS EN ISO and BS EN ISO Grade A .
The dimensions and tolerances of the bolts screws and nuts shall comply with BS EN ISO BS EN ISO and BS EN ISO .
Stainless steel washers shall comply with BS and be made from stainless steel strip designation .
or .
to BS EN BS EN BS EN and BS EN ISO .
Unless expressly prohibited by the manufacturers drawings and to facilitate removal of holding down bolts for maintenance or repair the threads of steel anchorages shall be coated with antiseize compound having a high resistance to creep intended for use with the materials that form both component thread faces and being suitable for hot or cold smearing .
All voids in anchorages attachment systems and base plates shall be filled with a nonsetting passive filler to prevent the ingress of moisture .
Amendments and Additions to BS BS Amd .
No .
March i Clause a clause .
first paragraph third line delete and replace with .
ii Clause a Table Designation of vehicle parapets Item a delete the existing text under Designation and Clause and insert As prescribed in BS EN BS EN and DD ENV .
iii Clause a clause .
Levels of containment delete clause .. to clause .. and insert As prescribed in BS EN BS EN and DD ENV b clause .. delete the NOTE and following text c clause .. delete paragraphs d and e d clause delete last paragraph of NOTE i.e .
Details of approved connections .. proved in service e clause .. Main structure Replace Department of Transport Standard BD with BS EN clause .. and the National Annex to BS EN and f clause .. End of Note insert The tensile strength of concrete shall be ignored in the calculation .
iv Clause a clause ..
Notch toughness Replace Department of Transport Standard BD with BD DMRB .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Restraint Systems Vehicle and Pedestrian Amendment May b Table Materials of construction for steel parapets Delete and insert as follows Delete Insert BS BS EN BS BS EN BS BS EN BS BS EN BS EN BS EN BS EN and BS EN BS BS .
BS BS EN BS EN BS EN BS EN ISO BS BS EN BS BS EN to BS EN inclusive and BS EN BS EN BS EN ISO BS EN BS EN ISO BS EN BS EN ISO BS EN BS EN ISO BS EN BS EN ISO BS EN BS EN ISO BS EN BS EN ISO BS EN BS EN ISO BS EN BS EN ISO BS BS EN ISO and BS EN ISO BS BS EN c Table Materials of construction for aluminium alloy parapets Delete and insert as follows Delete Insert BS alloys A and BS EN BS EN BS EN to BS EN inclusive BS EN and BS EN alloys EN AW EN AW EN AW EN AWA and EN AW BS alloys and BS EN BS EN BS EN BS EN BS EN and BS EN alloys EN AW EN AW and EN AW BS alloy BS EN to BS EN inclusive alloy EN AW BS EN BS EN BS alloys LM and LM BS EN BS EN BS EN and BS EN alloys EN AC EN AC and EN AC BS BS .
BS Grades S and S BS EN BS EN BS EN and BS EN ISO designation .
or .
BS EN BS EN ISO BS EN BS EN ISO Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Restraint Systems Vehicle and Pedestrian Amendment May BS EN BS EN ISO BS EN BS EN ISO BS EN BS EN ISO BS EN BS EN ISO BS EN BS EN ISO BS EN BS EN ISO BS EN BS EN ISO BS BS EN ISO and BS EN ISO v Clause a clause ..
NOTE delete last sentence .
vi Clause a clause .. delete last sentence from first paragraph b clause .
Table Values of fk and m delete and insert as follows Delete Insert BS BS EN ISO and BS EN ISO BS BS EN BS EN BS EN and BS EN ISO BS BS EN BS EN BS EN and BS EN c clause delete Laminar defects from title and clause text insert Internal discontinuities d clause .. Welding delete subclauses to inclusive and e clause .. delete whole text .
vii Clause a clause .. delete last sentence as follows Currently approved systems as listed in Annex F are exempt from this requirement .
and b clause .. insert additional paragraph as follows The designer or manufacturer shall arrange for third party certification that the new vehicle parapet design complies with the requirements of BS EN BS EN and Series MCHW ..
The certification shall be undertaken by a body or testing laboratory in any Member State of the European Economic Area offering suitable and satisfactory evidence of technical and professional competence and independence .
The Overseeing Organisation is likely to require to examine the full record of testing .
BS i Clause .
Delete first sentence and replace with The specification requirements are based upon the results of tests on panels of .
m and .
m lengths and it is considered reasonable to extrapolate to include panel lengths from .
m to .
m. ii Clause a clause .
NOTE delete British Rail and insert railway or tramway operator .
iii Clause a clause .
Main structure Replace Department of Transport Standard BD with BS EN clause .. and the National Annex to BS EN .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Restraint Systems Vehicle and Pedestrian Amendment May iv Table Delete title of table and replace with Table Equivalent static nominal loads for in situ and precast concrete parapets applicable to panel lengths L . m to .
m. v Clause a clause delete BS and insert BS EN and BS EN .
vi Clause a clause .
delete initial paragraph and replace with Concrete parapets are likely to be directly affected by deicing salts traffic fumes and other corrosive elements therefore they shall be constructed in accordance with Specification for Highway Works Series .
In particular they shall comply with the following b clause .
a .
Note delete the note in its entirety c clauses .a b and c delete and replace with a Concrete exposure classes shall be in accordance with BS .
The minimum allowable concrete exposure classes shall be XC XD XF .
Exposure classes XS and XA shall be suitable for the site conditions .
b The minimum grade of concrete shall be C as specified in BS .
c The nominal cover to reinforcement shall be as specified in BS see also d clause .
d delete BS and insert BS EN ISO and BS EN ISO delete BS and insert BS EN ISO .
vii Clause a clause .. delete BS and insert BS EN BS EN BS EN BS EN and BS EN b clause .. delete BS and insert BS EN ISO and BS EN ISO delete BS and insert BS EN BS EN BS EN and BS EN ISO .
viii Table Values of fk and m a Anchorage and attachment system rd column delete BS and insert BS EN ISO and BS EN ISO delete BS and insert BS EN BS EN BS EN and BS EN ISO .
ix Clause a Delete and shall not be less than .
m and replace with and shall not be less than .
m. x Clause a clause .. delete NOTE For more information on safety fences see BS and b clause .. delete NOTE and NOTE completely .
xi Figure a top right hand side delete Grade S to BS Part and insert designation .
or .
to BS EN BS EN BS EN and BS EN ISO .
Inspection and Testing of Vehicle Parapet Components Inspection and testing of vehicle parapet posts shall be carried out by the Contractor as per the manufacturers installation manual .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Restraint Systems Vehicle and Pedestrian Amendment May When required in contract specific Appendix components of legacy systems shall comply with the following .
i The components for parapet posts and all completed parapet posts shall conform to the acceptance criteria described in clauses .
and .
of BS .
ii The Contractor shall only supply vehicle parapet posts of a type which have certification for static destructive testing in accordance with clause of BS .
Site Tests on Anchorages in Drilled Holes for Vehicle Parapets for Contract Compliance The Contractor shall carry out onsite tensile load tests on anchorages in drilled holes .
For the purpose of this subClause the types of fixing referred to in clause of BS shall include anchorages .
Where anchorages are tested they shall be loaded incrementally in tension in accordance with BS except that they shall be capable of resisting a test load equal to per cent above the nominal tensile load applied to the anchorage at failure of the vehicle parapet in lieu of testing to failure .
The nominal tensile load shall be determined by the vehicle parapet manufacturer .
Where the failure of the attachment system e.g .
the holding down bolt is the prescribed failure mode of the vehicle parapet the test load shall be per cent of the yield load of the attachment system .
Incremental loads shall be held for not less than half a minute and the test load for not less than five minutes .
Readings shall be taken immediately after applying load and at the end of the time intervals stated above .
Unless specifically indicated on the accepted manufacturers instructions submitted by the Contractor to the Overseeing Organisation the total movement of the anchorage shall not exceed .mm during the test .
Any evidence of slip during loading up to the test load as demonstrated by a significant change in the slope of the load extension curve shall constitute failure .
The Contractor shall test the anchorages at the frequency given in contract specific Appendix and in accordance with any requirements given in contract specific Appendix .
PEDESTRIAN RESTRAINT SYSTEMS Pedestrian Parapets and Pedestrian Guardrails General Pedestrian parapets and pedestrian guardrails shall conform to the requirements of this Clause contract specific Appendix TD DMRB .. and the following .
i Pedestrian parapets or guardrails assembled from factory manufactured parts and assembled on site a BS .
ii Bespoke pedestrian parapets manufactured from concrete on site a In Accordance with the loading described in BS Table Class C x and BS EN .
Durability Pedestrian parapets and pedestrian guardrails shall conform to the following .
i All components of pedestrian parapets and guardrails shall be designed to achieve a serviceable life of not less than a metal pedestrian parapets and metal components of combined metal and concrete pedestrian parapets years b concrete pedestrian parapets and concrete components of combined metal and concrete pedestrian parapets years and Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Restraint Systems Vehicle and Pedestrian Amendment May c pedestrian guardrails years .
ii For metal pedestrian parapets and pedestrian guardrails and metal components of combined metal and concrete pedestrian parapets and pedestrian guardrails the serviceable life shall except where stated in contract specific Appendix be obtained without the requirement for any maintenance other than that resulting from accidental damage .
Protection against corrosion for pedestrian parapets and pedestrian guardrails shall be as described in the manufacturers specification and the following i all components of steel pedestrian parapets and pedestrian guardrails except stainless steel items shall be surface protected after shop fabrication as described in Clause and ii where required in contract specific Appendix the surface preparation and protection against corrosion of all steel pedestrian parapets and steel components of combined metal and concrete pedestrian parapets shall comply with Series .
Aesthetic Requirements The design of pedestrian parapets shall comply with the aesthetic requirements given in contract specific Appendix .
Information Required to be Provided by the Contractor Prior to Installation The following information shall be provided by the Contactor to the Overseeing Organisation for acceptance .
All documents shall be in English .
i Manufacturers specification .
ii Installation drawings .
iii Manufacturers installation instructions or installation manual including foundation requirements and test methods to verify their performance .
iv Manufacturers repair and maintenance manual .
v A certificate of registration to National Highways Sector Scheme A for the Design andor Supply Installation and Repair of Fences for Infrastructure Works .
Workmanship and Testing All components shall be manufactured so as to permit the construction of the accepted systems within the tolerances described in subClause .
and in accordance with the manufacturers drawings .
Unless otherwise indicated on the manufacturers drawings submitted by the Contractor to the Overseeing Organisation all fabrication of components shall be completed before the surface protection is applied .
The Contractor shall provide the Overseeing Organisation with evidence that the manufacturer has arranged for tensile tests to destruction and analysis of composition to be carried out by a testing laboratory accredited in accordance with subClause .
annually and whenever the source of material or the production technique is changed .
The testing shall include at least the determination of the yieldproof strength of the material ultimate strength and the extension at break .
It shall be demonstrated that the materials are within the limits of statistical variation for the specified material and for the material of the prototype tested system .
Materials significantly exceeding the original specified strength shall not be accepted .
Handling All components shall be protected from damage and handled and stacked in such a way that permanent damage is not caused particularly to threaded components .
Means shall be provided to avoid damage to galvanized coatings and any damage that does occur shall be repaired in accordance with BS EN ISO .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Restraint Systems Vehicle and Pedestrian Amendment May Information Required to be Provided by the Contractor After Installation The Contractor shall provide to the Overseeing Organisation asbuilt drawings which shall include plans and details of the constructed system .
ANTIGLARE SCREENS Antiglare Screens Antiglare screen systems shall conform to BS EN and BS EN and the requirements of contract specific Appendix .
The Contractor shall supply the Declaration of Performance which shall demonstrate that the antiglare screen system meets the performance requirements stated in contract specific Appendix .
The Contractor shall provide information to the Overseeing Organisation in English to demonstrate that the screens are compatible with the vehicle restraint system on which the screens are proposed to be mounted and do not adversely affect the performance of the vehicle restraint system .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Restraint Systems Vehicle and Pedestrian Amendment May F SERIES dRaInagE and SERvIcE ductS contents Clause Title Page PipesforDrainageand ServiceDucts ExcavationforPipesand Chambers BeddingLayingand SurroundingofPipes JointingofPipes BackfillingofTrenchesand FilterDrains ConnectingtoExistingDrains ChambersandChannels Chambers GulliesandPipeJunctions TestingandCleaning SurfaceWaterChannelsand DrainageChannelBlocks LandDrains BackfillingtoPipeBaysand VergesonBridges PermeableBackingtoEarth RetainingStructures FinDrains NarrowFilterDrains CombinedDrainageandKerb Systems LinearDrainageChannelSystems Thermoplastics StructuredWallPipesand Fittings ConcreteBagwork TheCleaningofExisting DrainageSystems LowPressureHighVolume JettingofDrainageSystems ManuaL OF cOntRact dOcuMEntS FOR HIgHWaY WORKS vOLuME SPEcIFIcatIOn FOR HIgHWaY WORKS AmendmentNovember natIOnaL aLtERatIOnS OF tHE OvERSEEIng ORganISatIOnS OF ScOtLand WaLES and nORtHERn IRELand northern Ireland Clause Title Page NI GulliesandPipeJunctions N denotesaClauseorSampleAppendixwhichhasasubstitute NationalClauseorSampleAppendixforoneormoreofthe OverseeingOrganisationsofScotlandWalesorNorthern Ireland .
Volume Series SpecificationforHighwayWorks DrainageandServiceDucts dRaInagE and SERvIcE ductS Pipes for drainage and for Service ducts general WherethetermdrainisusedinthisSeriesit shallbedeemedtoincludethetermssewerandpiped culvert .
TheContractorshalldesignthepipedculvertslistedin Appendixinaccordancewiththerequirementsof Clause .
SeriesMCHW .. appliestotheinstallationby trenchlesstechniquesofhighwaydrainageservice ductssleevesandculvertswithinternaldiametersupto andincludingmmnominalinternaldiameteror width .
Alldrainsconstructedofpipesaswellas pipedculvertsuptoandincludingmminternal diametershallcomplywiththisSeriesandany additionalrequirementsinAppendix.Drains constructedusingpipesexceedingmminternal diameteraswellasboxandpipedculvertsshallcomply withSeries.Unlessotherwisedescribedin Appendixonlyonetypeofpipeshallbeusedwithin anyindividualdrainorserviceductbetween consecutivechambers.TheContractorshallensurethat plasticspipesarenotsubjecttodeteriorationdueto sunlightduringtheperiodbetweenmanufactureand installationintheground .
Pipes for drainage Pipesfordrainageshallbeselectedfromthe alternativesinTableandshallcomplywiththe standardsandparticularrequirementstherein.The Contractorshallshowthatthepipesheselectshave hydraulicflowcapacityequaltothatadoptedinthe hydraulicdesignofthesystemasdescribedin Appendix.Pipesandfittingsotherthanthose includedinTableshallbepermittedprovidedthat theyholdacurrentBritishBoardofAgrmentRoads andBridgesCertificateorequivalentstatingthatthey areasuitablealternativefortheusagespecifiedin Table.Oncompletionofthewholeofthedrainage workstheContractorshallprovidetheOverseeing Organisationwithascheduleshowingdetailsofallpipe typesusedincludingqualityjointsandnameof manufacturer .
corrugated Steel Pipes Corrugatedsteelpipesshallbemanufacturedfrom either i boltedsegmentalplatepipescomplyingwith subClauseofthisClauseandhavingplate thicknessesasdescribedinAppendixor ii galvanizedsteelsheetsuitableforlock seamfabricationcomplyingwith BSENgradeDXDZor aluminiumcoatedsteelsheetcomplyingwith AASHTOspecificationM .
Corrugatedsteelpipescomplyingwithiiaboveshall bemanufacturedfromsteelofminimumthickness .mmunlessotherwisedescribedinAppendix .
WheredescribedinAppendixcorrugated steelpipesshallbeprovidedwithadditionalprotection ofhotappliedbitumencomplyingwithAASHTO specificationMoranequivalentcoating system .
Boltedsegmentalplatepipesshallmeetthe followingrequirements i Steelfortheplatesshallcomplywith BSPart.GradeorGrade ConditionHR .
ii Afterformingthedepthofthecorrugations shallbewithinatoleranceofandthe pitchofthecorrugationswithinatolerance ofofthenominaldimensions.Plates shallhaveaminimumlipofmmbeyond eachendcrest.Cutedgesshallbefreefrom notchesgougesrustorburrs .
iii Boltsandnutsforconnectingplates shallcomplywithBSENISO BSENandBSENISOfor BSENISOandBSEN ISOpropertyclass.nominalsize MorwithBSPartnominalsize MorwithBSENISOand BSENISOpropertyclass .. iv Whenalltheplateshavebeenassembledthe nutsshallbetightenedagainstadomed washer.Thetighteningshallberepeatedif necessarytoachievethetorque recommendedbythemanufacturer .
AmendmentNovember Volume Series SpecificationforHighwayWorks DrainageandServiceDucts v Steelplateshallbegalvanizedincompliance withClause.Platesshallbegalvanized afterformingthecorrugationsand completingallnecessarycuttingpunching anddrilling.Unitsinwhichthezinccoating hasbeenburnedbyweldingorotherwise damagedinfabricationtransportorhandling atSiteshallbemadegoodincompliance withClausesand.Boltsandnuts shallbegalvanizedincompliancewith Clause .
AmendmentMay taBLE Pipes for drainage Material usage Standard Particular Requirements Vitrifiedclay Fouldrains BSor BSEN NormalpipesasdefinedinBS Surfacewaterdrains BSor BSEN Normalorsurfacewaterpipesas definedinBS Filterdrains BS BSEN Unperforatednotexceeding.minlength withspigotandsocketopenjoints OR Perforatedwithflexiblemechanicaljoints ConcreteWithPortlandcement orsulfateresistingcementwhen requiredinAppendix .
Supersulfatedcementshallnot beused Foulsurfacewaterdrains notexceedingmm internaldiameter BSand BSENOrdinary reinforcedor unreinforced BS Surfacewaterdrainsnot exceedingmminternal diameter BS Forusewithjointscomplyingwith subClause .
Filterdrains BSPorous withogeeorrebated joints BS Unperforatednotexceedingminlength withopenjointsorcastellatedrebatedjoints withthetotalslotareabetweencastellations beingatleastmmpermetrelengthof pipe OR Perforatedwithcircularholesnotgreater thanmmnorlessthanmmindiameter GlassreinforcedplasticsGRP Foulsurfacewaterdrains BS ClasstobeasspecifiedinAppendix Iron Foulsurfacewaterdrains BSCastiron BSENDuctile iron Volume Series SpecificationforHighwayWorks DrainageandServiceDucts taBLE Pipes for drainage continued Material usage Standard Particular Requirements Thermoplasticssolidwallpipes andfittingsnotexceeding mmdiameter Unplasticisedpolyvinylchloride PVCU PolypropylenePP PolyethylenePE Foulsurfacewater drains BSorBS orBSEN PVCU BSENPP BSENPE SeetheUKnationalforwardtotherelevantBS EN.Thegradeappropriateforusewithout structuralcalculationsshallbeusedi.e.SNfor PPPEandSNSDRforPVCU Filterdrains BSor BSor BSENPVCU BSENPP BSENPE Perforatedwithnotlessthanmmofholes permetrelengthofpipe.Theperforationsshall notreducethepipestiffnessbymorethan .
Circularperforationsnotgreaterthanmmnor lessthanmmindiameterorrectangularslots notgreaterthanmmnorlessthan.mmin width Thermoplasticsstructuredwall pipeandfittingsnotexceeding mmdiameter Surfacewaterdrains Clause Unperforatedwithwatertightjointsandwitha pipestiffnessclasscreepratioandimpact resistanceasdescribedin Appendix Filterdrains Clause Perforatedwithnotlessthanmmofholes permetrelengthofpipe.Theperforationsshall notreducethepiperingstiffnessbymorethan .Circularperforationsnotgreaterthan mmnorlessthanmmindiameteror rectangularslotsnotgreaterthanmmnorless than.mminwidth Subsoilfielddrains BSor Clause Corrugatedsteel Surfacewaterdrainsfilter drainsnotexceeding mminternaldiameter AASHTO specification MMexceptas otherwiserequiredin subClauses .
and AlldrainsexceedingmminternaldiametershallcomplywithSeries .
Pipes for Service ducts AmendmentNovember Pipesforserviceductsexcludingthosein useinmotorwaycommunicationsinstallationsshallbe selectedfromthealternativesinTableandshall complywiththestandardsandparticularrequirements therein.Pipesforuseinmotorwaycommunications installationsshallcomplywithSeries.Pipesfor otherserviceductsinstalledusingtrenchlessmethods shallconformtoSeriesMCHWPipesfor serviceductsshallhaveasmoothinternalborewithout anysharpedgestotheendsofpipes.Theyshallcomply withanyadditionalrequirementsdescribedin Appendixandbeofmminternaldiameter unlessotherwisedescribedtherein.Theiralignment shallbetestedinaccordancewithsubClause .. Theuseofpipesandfittingsotherthanthoseincluded inTableshallbepermittedprovidedthattheyholda currentBritishBoardofAgrmentRoadsandBridges Certificateorequivalentstatingthattheyareasuitable alternativetothoselistedinTable .
Eachductshallbefittedwithapigmentedstranded polypropyleneorequivalentrotproofmaterialdraw ropeofkNbreakingloadandhavingadesignlifeof notlessthanyearstheendsofwhichshallbeeither madefasttomarkerblocksasshownonHCDDrawing NumberIorsecuredinsidechambers.Theendsofa ductshallbeeithersealedbyremovablestoppers immediatelyithasbeenlaidorterminatedinchambers ofthetypespecifiedinAppendix .
Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Drainage and Service Ducts TABLE Pipes for Ducts Material Standard Particular Requirements Vitrified clay BS or Plainended selfaligning flexible sleeve jointed with internal ends BS EN radiused to mm minimum Iron BS EN Ductile iron Glass reinforced plastics BS Class to be as specified in Appendix Thermoplastics solid wall BS or When pipes BS Class C are used joints shall comply with BS or BS EN to as appropriate Unplasticised polyvinylchloride BS Class C or PVCU BS EN BS EN to as appropriate class PN .
Polypropylene PP BS EN PP Polyethylene PE BS EN PE Thermoplastics single wall BS EN Ducts to BS EN shall be classified as normal duty corrugated have a degree of protection against ingress of foreign objects Restricted to ducts buried a classification rating of or and a degree of protection against minimum of mm below the ingress of water classification rating of .
Appendix shall state surface the resistance to bending requirements .
Thermoplastics structured wall BS EN and Ducts to BS EN shall be classified as normal duty Clause have a degree of protection against ingress of foreign objects classification rating of or and a degree of protection against ingress of water classification rating of .
Appendix shall state the resistance to bending requirements .
Pipes for use in motorway communications installations shall comply with Series Excavation for Pipes and Chambers Excavation shall comply with Clause and with the following i soft spots existing below the bottom of an excavation shall be removed and the resulting voids backfilled with Type unbound mixture for subbase complying with Clause or pipe bedding material complying with Clause both well compacted or ST concrete in compliance to Clause ii any additional excavation below the bottom of an excavation that is required because the Contractor has allowed the bottom to become soft or otherwise unacceptable for the construction of the pipeline or chambers shall be made good as described in subClause i of this Clause iii any excavation greater than the net volume required for the Permanent Works below the level of any pipe surround shall be made good as described in i above .
Unless otherwise described in Appendix all pipes in or under new embankments shall be laid only when the embankment has been formed and compacted to formation level under paved areas to finished earthworks level in other areas or to a level which will give a minimum cover of .
m to the pipes whichever is the lowest .
Bedding Laying and Surrounding of Pipes Immediately following the excavation of the trench the pipes shall be laid and jointed on the pipe bed .
Pipes shall be laid so that each one is in contact with the bed throughout the length of its barrel .
The pipes shall be laid at the level and gradients shown on the Drawings and schedules .
The deviation in level from that specified at any point shall not exceed mm and in addition the algebraic difference of the deviation in level at any two points on each pipe shall not exceed mm .
In the case of socketed or sleeve jointed pipes the bed shall be cut away and removed at each socket or sleeve to give a clearance of at least mm or mm for trenches in material designated as Hard Material so Amendment November Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Drainage and Service Ducts that the socket or sleeve does not bear on the bed .
Pipes shall be laid on setting blocks only where a concrete bed or cradle is used .
Pipes and fittings shall be examined for damage and the joint surfaces and components shall be cleaned immediately before laying .
Measures shall be taken to prevent soil or other material from entering pipes and to anchor each pipe to prevent movement before the work is complete .
Pipes complying with BS which are corrugated coilable perforated pipes shall unless otherwise permitted in Appendix be laid only by automatic single pass drain laying machines .
Drainage pipe and bedding combinations shall be selected from the alternatives described in Appendix .
The granular material shall consist of natural andor recycled coarse aggregate or recycled concrete aggregate complying with BS EN .
Where recycled coarse aggregate or recycled concrete aggregate is used in this Clause it shall have been tested in accordance with Clause and shall not contain more than other materials Class X .
Pipe bedding haunching and surrounding material shall be as shown on HCD Drawing Numbers F and F and shall comply with the following i For pipes on beds shown on HCD Drawing Number F as Types B F and S the aggregate shall have a geometrical requirements in accordance with Table b a resistance to fragmentation in Category LA in accordance with BS EN clause .
and Table c a watersoluble sulfate content of less than .
of sulfate as SO when tested in accordance with BS EN clause d all other requirements in Category NR .
ii For pipes on beds shown on HCD Drawing Number F as Types N and T the aggregate shall comply with the geometrical requirements of either Table or with Table and with the fragmentation water soluble sulfate content and other requirements of i above .
TABLE BS EN Coarse aggregate for pipe bedding haunching and surrounding material BS EN Coarse aggregate clause .. Category for general grading GC requirements Category for tolerances at GTNR no requirements midsize sieves Category for maximum values of Gravel f. fines content Crushed rock recycled aggregate f Aggregate size mm Nominal pipe diameter mm Graded Single sized Not exceeding Exceeding but not or or exceeding Exceeding or or TABLE BS EN Fine and allin aggregated for pipe bedding haunching and surrounding material BS EN Fine and allin aggregate clause .. Fine Allin Category for general grading Category Category GA requirements GF Category for tolerances on GTFNR GTANR manufacturers declared no requirement no requirement typical grading Category for maximum Gravel f values of fines content Crushed rock recycled aggregate f Aggregate size mm Nominal pipe diameter mm Fine Allin Not exceeding Exceeding but not or exceeding or Exceeding or iii For pipes on beds shown on HCD Drawing Number F as Types A and Z concrete shall be ST and ST in compliance to Clause respectively .
Backfilling shall not be carried out until after the concrete has cured .
Amendment November Volume Series SpecificationforHighwayWorks DrainageandServiceDucts iv Exceptforfilterdrainsafurthersurround abovethebedhaunchandsurround describedaboveshallbeprovidedtoaheight ofmmabovethetopofthepipe consistingofClasslowertrenchfill materialasdescribedinTableandin compliancewithSeries .
v UnlessotherwisedescribedinAppendix thematerialsusedforthebeddinghaunching andsurroundingoffilterdrainsshallcomply withtheappropriatebeddinghaunchingand surroundingmaterialsspecifiedinsub Clauses .. ito .. ivandwiththe requirementsforbackfillingspecifiedin subClause .. Materialforbeddinghaunchingand surroundingpipesshallnotbedepositedwithin mmoranyotherdistancesdescribedin Appendixofconcretecementboundmaterials othercementitiousmaterialsorstabilisedcapping formingpartofthePermanentWorksifwhentestedin accordancewithTRLReporteither i thewatersolublesulfateWScontent exceedsmgofsulfateasSOperlitre TestNo.or ii theoxidisablesulfidesOScontent exceeds.ofsulfateasSOTestNo .
andTestNo.or iii thewatertosoilextractprepared forthedeterminationofwatersolublesulfate inihasapHvalueoflessthan.when testedusingtheelectrometricmethodofpH determinationinaccordancewithBS .
Atleastfivesamplesofeachmaterialshallbe testedforWSOSandpHvalue.Themeanofthe highesttwovaluesshallbeusedforcomparisonwith thelimitingvalues.Thisalsoappliesifsixtonine resultsareavailable.Iftenormoreresultsareavailable themeanofthehighestoftheresultsshallbeused forcomparisonwiththelimitingvalues .
Materialforbeddinghaunchingand surroundingpipesshallnotbedepositedwithin mmoranyotherdistancesdescribedin Appendixofmetallicstructuralelementsforming partofthePermanentWorksifwhentestedin accordancewithTRLReporteither i thewatersolublesulfateWScontent exceedsmgofsulfateasSOperlitre TestNo.or ii theoxidisablesulfidesOScontentexceeds .ofsulfateasSOTestNo.andTest No .. Atleastfivesamplesofeachmaterialshallbe testedforWSandOS.Themeanofthehighesttwo valuesshallbeusedforcomparisonwiththelimiting values.Thisalsoappliesifsixtonineresultsare available.Iftenormoreresultsareavailablethemean ofthehighestoftheresultsshallbeusedfor comparisonwiththelimitingvalues .
Therequirementsiniandiiaboveshallnot applytometallicitemsprotectedbyconcreteand ancillarymetallicitemssuchasthetopsofchambers andgullies .
Exceptwherethepipelineistobetestedin compliancewithClausebeforebackfillingthe completionofthebeddinghaunchingandsurrounding ofthepipesistobecarriedoutimmediatelyafter jointing.Thebedhaunchandsurroundshallbebrought upequallyonbothsidesofthepipeensuringthatitisin contactwiththeundersideofthepipebarrelandbe carefullycompactedinlayersnotexceedingmm thicknessensuringfullcompactionnexttothetrench walls.Pipesshallbemaintainedtolineandlevelduring thebeddinghaunchingandsurroundingoperations .
Wherepipelinesaretobetestedbeforebeingcovered thebeddinghaunchingandsurroundingmaterialshall onlybebroughtupsufficientlytosupportthepipeline andthejointsshallbeleftexposeduntilthetestis completedsatisfactorily .
Ductconstructionshallcomplywiththe requirementsofAppendix .
Jointing of Pipes Rigidjointsshallmeanjointsmadesolidby caulkingthesocketsorboltingtogetherflangesintegral withthepipes.Flexiblejointsshallmeanjointsmade withdeformableringsorgasketsheldbetweenpipe spigotsandsocketssleevesorcollars .
Jointsinsurfacewaterdrainsshallbewatertight complyingwithsubClauseofthisClauseorpartly watertightcomplyingwithsubClauseofthisClause asdescribedinAppendix.Fouldrainsshallhave watertightjoints.Filterdrainsshallhavejoints complyingwithsubClauseofthisClause.Ductsneed nothavewatertightjointsunlessotherwisedescribedin Appendix .
Watertightjointsshallcomplywiththe appropriateBritishStandardsthemanufacturers instructionsandthefollowing AmendmentNovember Volume Series SpecificationforHighwayWorks DrainageandServiceDucts i Rigidjointsshallbeusedonlywhere permittedinAppendix.Spigotsand socketsofrigidjointsmaybecaulkedwith tarredropeyarnorequivalentandthesocket completelyfilledwithmortardesignationi complyingwithClauseexcludinglime afilletofmortarbeingworkedaroundthe socketextendingforalengthofnotlessthan mmfromthefaceofthesocket.Ironpipes withopensocketsshallhaverigidjoints caulkedwithleadwoolorequivalent .
ii JointsinPVCUpipesshallnotbemadewith plasticsolvent .
iii Flexiblemechanicaljointsmaybeusedwith surfacewaterpipescomplyingwithBS .
iv JointsforcastironpipestoBS shallcomplywithBSEN .
v Jointsinthermoplasticsstructuredwallpipe shallcomplywithClause .
Partlywatertightjointsforsurfacewater drainsshallbetestedinaccordancewithsubClause .andshallbeBritishStandardjointsornonBritish Standardjoints.Pushfitjointsshallhavearegisterto ensurethatthepipeisfullypushedintothejoint .
Corrugatedsteelpipesoflockseamfabricationnot exceedingmminternaldiametershallbejoinedin accordancewiththemanufacturersinstructions.Bolted segmentalplatepipearchesorcircularpipesnot exceedingmminternaldiametershallbejoinedin accordancewithsubClause.ivandthe manufacturersinstructions .
Whereaconcretebedcradlearchorsurroundis usedwithrigidpipeshavingflexiblejointsjointfiller boardcomplyingwithClauseshallbeplacedin contactwiththeendofthesocketatapipejointand shallextendthroughthefullthicknessoftheconcretein contactwiththepipe.Suchjointsintheconcretebed haunchorsurroundshallbeatintervalsnotexceeding metresexceptwherethespacingofjointsinthepipe exceedsmetreswhentheyshallbeateachpipejoint .
Jointsinpipesforfilterdrainsshallcomply withtheappropriateBritishStandardandwiththe following i Nonporousandunperforatedconcreteand claypipeswithspigotandsocketrebatedor ogeejointsshallbelaidwithunsealedjoints andwithagapofmmbetweentheendof thepipeandtheinnerendofthesocketor rebate.Thepipesshallbesupportedwith tarredropeyarnorequivalentflexible jointingmaterialwithinthesocketsoverthe lowerthirdofthecircumferencesothatthere arenoverticalstepsbetweenonepipeand another.Suchpipesshallonlybeusedwith TypeBfiltermaterialasdescribedin Clause .
ii Theendsofperforatedcastellatedorporous concretepipeswithrebatedjointsand perforatedclaywarepipeswithrebatedor withflexiblesleevejointsshallbepushed tightlytogether.Thewidthofslotsmeasured alongthelengthofthepipelineformedby jointingcastellatedpipesshallnotexceed mm .
iii Perforatedorslottedthermoplasticspipes withspigotsandsocketsorsleevesmaybe dryjointedorjointedasdescribedin subClausesandofthisClause .
iv Otherperforatedpipesshallbejointedas unperforatedpipesofthesamematerial .
Jointsinpipesforserviceductsshallcomplywith theappropriateBritishStandardandwiththefollowing i Pipesforductsshallbejointedsothatnosilt gritgroutorconcretesurroundisableto entertheduct.Pipeswithpushfitjointsshall havearegistertoensurethatthepipeisfully pushedintothejoint .
ii JointsinpipestoBSshall complywithBSENtoas appropriate .
Backfilling of trenches and Filter drains Backfillingshallbeundertakenimmediatelyafter therequiredoperationsprecedingithavebeen completed .
ExceptwhereotherwisedescribedinAppendix trenchesotherthanfilterdraintrenchesshallbe backfilledabovethepipesurroundmaterialdescribedin ClausewithClassorgeneralfillmaterial complyingwithSeries .
Filterdrainsshallbebackfilledasdescribed inAppendixwithTypeATypeBorTypeCfilter materialwhichshallconsistofnaturalorrecycled coarseaggregateorrecycledconcreteaggregate complyingwithBSENandthefollowing i forTypeAandCgradingrequirementsfor unboundmixturesinaccordancewith TableandBSEN ii forTypeBgeometricalrequirementsin accordancewithTableand BSEN AmendmentNovember Volume Series SpecificationforHighwayWorks DrainageandServiceDucts iii aresistancetofragmentationinCategory LAinaccordancewithBSEN clause.andTable iv awatersolublesulfatecontentofless than.ofsulfateasSOwhentestedin accordancewithBSENclause v allotherrequirementsinCategoryNR AmendmentNovember vi benonplasticwhentestedinaccordance withBSPart .
Whererecycledcoarseaggregateorrecycledconcrete aggregateisusedinaccordancewiththisClauseitshall havebeentestedinaccordancewithClauseandshall notcontainmorethanothermaterialsClassX .
table grading and geometrical requirements for filter drain material type a type B type c Standard BSEN BSEN BSEN Sizemm Asdescribedin Appendix Gradingandoversizecategories GFwithan additionalsieve GC Oversizecategory OC Categoryfortolerancesatmidsizesieves GTNR norequirement Categoryformaximumfines UF fNR norequirement Summarygradingrequirements Sievesizemm Percentagebymasspassing Asdescribedin Appendix .
. . insizefraction Filtermaterialswhentestedinaccordancewith subClause.shallhavepermeabilityrequirements asdescribedinAppendix .
WhenTypeAmaterialisusedwithpipesotherthan porouspipesatleastofthematerialshallbelarger thanthediameterofholeorlargerthan.timesthe widthofslotinthepipe .
Materialforbackfillingtrenchesandfilter drainsshallnotbedepositedwithinmmorany otherdistancesdescribedinAppendixofconcrete boundmaterialsothercementitiousmaterialsor stabilisedcappingformingpartofthePermanentWorks ifwhentestedinaccordancewithTRLReport either i thewatersolublesulfateWScontent exceedsmgofsulfateasSOperlitre TestNo.or Volume Series SpecificationforHighwayWorks DrainageandServiceDucts ii theoxidisablesulfidesOScontent exceeds.ofsulfateasSOTestNo .
andTestNo.or iii thewatertosoilextractprepared forthedeterminationofwatersolublesulfate inihasapHvalueoflessthan.when testedusingtheelectrometricmethodofpH determinationinaccordancewithBS .
Atleastfivesamplesofeachmaterialshallbe testedforWSOSandpHvalue.Themeanofthe highesttwovaluesshallbeusedforcomparisonwith thelimitingvalues.Thisalsoappliesifsixtonine resultsareavailable.Iftenormoreresultsareavailable themeanofthehighestoftheresultsshallbeused forcomparisonwiththelimitingvalues .
Materialforbackfillingtrenchesandfilter drainsshallnotbedepositedwithinmmorany otherdistancesdescribedinAppendixofmetallic structuralelementsformingpartofthePermanent WorksifwhentestedinaccordancewithTRLReport either i thewatersolublesulfateWScontent exceedsmgofsulfateasSOperlitre TestNo.or ii theoxidisablesulfidesOScontentexceeds .ofsulfateasSOTestNo.andTest No .. Atleastfivesamplesofeachmaterialshallbe testedforWSandOS.Themeanofthehighesttwo valuesshallbeusedforcomparisonwiththelimiting values.Thisalsoappliesifsixtonineresultsare available.Iftenormoreresultsareavailablethemean ofthehighestoftheresultsshallbeusedfor comparisonwiththelimitingvalues .
Therequirementsiniandiiaboveshallnot applytometallicstructuralelementsprotectedby concreteandancilliaryitemssuchasthetopsof chambersandgullies .
Backfillingshallbedepositedandcompacted incompliancewithClause.Filtermaterialforfilter drainsshallbedepositedinlayersnotexceeding mmloosedeptheachlayerbeingcompactedin compliancewithTableMethod .
Materialshallbedepositedinevenlayers andshallnotbeheapedinthetrenchbeforebeing spread.Spreadingandcompactionshallbecarriedout evenlywithoutdislodgingdistortingordamagingthe pipe.Powerrammersshallnotbeusedwithinmm ofanypartofthepipeorjoint .
Exceptincarriagewaysotherpavedareas andlocationsdescribedinAppendixbackfillof trenchesshallbebroughtuptogroundlevel.Where topsoilisatthesurfaceonthelineofthetrenchthe uppersectionofthebackfillshallbetopsoilofthe thicknessdescribedinAppendixorofthesame thicknessandqualityoftopsoilasthesurrounding groundwherenothicknessisspecified.Fortrenchesin carriagewaysorotherpavedareasthebackfillshallbe broughtuptoformationlevelorsubformationlevel wherecappingisrequiredunlessalowerlevelis describedinAppendix.Sheetingandother excavationsupportsshallberemovedasthefilling proceedsunlessotherwisedescribedinAppendix .
Thepositionofserviceductsshallbemarked whenthetrenchesarebackfilledandpermanentmarker blocksandlocationpostsprovidedasdescribedin Appendix .
connecting to Existing drains chambers and channels WheredescribedinAppendixexistingdrains shallbeextendedconnectedandjointedtonewdrains chambersorchannels.Allsuchconnectionsshallbe madeduringtheconstructionofthenewdrainorother workandtheirpositionsrecordedbytheContractorwho shallhandtotheOverseeingOrganisationacopyofthe recordoftheconnectionsmadethepreviousday.Where pipeconnectionsaremadetoexistingbrickconcreteor stonedrainschambersorchannelsthepipesshallbe wellandtightlybuiltintotheconcretebrickormasonry workandbesoplacedastodischargeatananglenot greaterthantothedirectionofflowofthedrainor channelandwiththeendofthepipecarefullycuttothe necessaryangle.Wheretheconnectionsarebetween pipedrainsspecialconnectingpipesshallbelaidand jointedasdescribedinAppendix .
Beforeenteringorbreakingintoanexistingsewer ordraintheContractorshallgivenoticeofhisintention todosototheauthorityresponsibleforthepipelineto whichtheconnectionistobemade .
Existingdrainsnolongerrequiredshallas requiredbyAppendixbesealedwithSTconcrete incompliancetoClauseorremovedandreplaced withgeneralfillmaterialcomplyingwithClause andTableandcompactedincompliancewith Clauseorgroutedwithacementpfamix .
Thegroutshallusetheminimumquantityofwaterto ensurethefluiditynecessarytorenderitcapableof beingpumpedtotheendsofthepipe.Itshallbeused withinonehourofmixingbutwhenthemixcontainsa retardingadmixturethistimemaybeextendedin accordancewiththemanufacturersinstructions.The cementshallcomplywithBSandthepulverised fuelashpfawithBSPartfinenesstoZoneB andsulfatecontentnotexceeding .. AmendmentNovember Volume Series SpecificationforHighwayWorks DrainageandServiceDucts chambers Chambersotherthanthoseusedin motorwaycommunicationsinstallationsshallinclude manholescatchpitsinspectionchambersdrawpitsand walledsoakaways.Chambersshallbeofthetype specifiedinAppendixconstructedinaccordance withHCDDrawingNumbersFtoFandFtoF asappropriatetothattype.Chambersforusein motorwaycommunicationsinstallationsshallcomply withSeries.AllSTconcretereferredtointhis ClauseshallcomplywithClauseunlessotherwise describedinAppendix .
FoundationstochambersshallbeofST concrete.Channelsforchambersshallbeformedand finishedsmoothinthefoundationconcreteor constructedofpreformedhalfcirclechannelswithsides benchedinSTconcreteormortardesignationi complyingwithClauseexcludinglime .
Alternativelyforinspectionchambersnotexceeding .metresindepthtoinvertcompleteplasticsunitsor otherunitsinequivalentmaterialsurroundedby mmofSTconcretemaybeused .
BrickworkshallcomplywithSeriesandbe builtwithmortardesignationiinEnglishbond.The jointsofbrickworkwhereexposedshallbefinishedas specifiedforunpointedjointsinClause.Theends ofallpipesshallbeneatlybuiltintothebrickworkand finishedflushwithmortardesignationi .
Precastconcretechambersshallcomplywith BSandBSENandtheparticular requirementsdescribedinAppendix.Castinsitu concretechambersshallbeconstructedofSTconcrete complyingwithClauseandtheparticular requirementsdescribedinAppendix .
Corrugatedgalvanizedsteelchambersshall complywithClausewithinsituSTconcrete invertsandprecastconcretecoverslabscomplyingwith BSandBSENandtheparticular requirementsdescribedinAppendix.Theyshallbe surroundedwithwellgradedgranularmaterialClassM asdescribedinTablecompactedinaccordancewith Clause .
Wherethedepthofinvertofchambers excludinginspectionchambersexceedsmmbelow thefinishedsurfaceofthecarriagewayortheadjacent groundmanholestepscomplyingwithBSEN shallbebuiltinaccordancewithrelevantSeriesFHCD Drawings.Steelworkusedforladdershandholdsand otherfittingsshallcomplywithBSPartandbe galvanizedincompliancewithClauseafter fabrication.Threadedcomponentsshallbegalvanizedin compliancewithClause .
Excavationaroundchambersexceptthose describedinsubClauseofthisClauseshallbe backfilledwithgeneralfillmaterialasdescribedin Tableandcompactedincompliancewith Clause.Wheremechanicalcompactionis impracticabletheexcavationshallbebackfilledwith STconcrete.Wherethereareprecastconcreteaccess shaftstoprecastconcretechamberstheshaftsshallbe surroundedbyaminimumthicknessofmmofST concreteandtheremainingexcavationbackfilledwith generalfillmaterialasdescribedinTablecompacted incompliancewithClause .
Chambersforfouldrainsshallbetestedfor watertightnessasandwhererequiredinAppendix .
Chambercoversgratingsandframesshall beasdescribedinAppendixandshallcomplywith BSENandsubClausesandofthisClause .
Thecovershallbeofsuitablematerialdesignand constructiontoachieveaninserviceskidslipresistance potentialsuitablefortheconditionsofuse.Thisshallbe determinedbytheacceleratedpolishtestmethod describedinBS.ThePSRVshallbeasstatedin Appendix .
ClassDunitsandaboveshallincorporatea permanentnonrockfeatureeithertriangularpoint suspensionormachinedfaces .
Boltssuppliedforlooselycouplingseparate sectionsofcoversandgratingsshallbesteelhexagon headedcomplyingwiththerequirementof BSENISOBSENISOand BSENISOandbegalvanizedincompliancewith Clause.TheyshallnotbelessthansizeM completewithhexagonnutandshallbeprovidedwith meanstopreventunduetighteningofunitsections .
UnlessotherwisespecifiedinAppendixall coversgratingsandframesshallbesuppliedinafine castuncoatedcondition.Whereacoatingisspecified inAppendixthecoatingshallonlybeappliedwhen thesurfacesofthecastingarecleanfreefromrustand dry .
Requirementsforspecialdutycoversforusein carriagewaysshallbeasdescribedinAppendix .
Gratingsforcatchpitchambersshallhavea minimumwaterwayareaasdescribedinAppendix .
Twosetsofliftingkeysshallbedeliveredtothe OverseeingOrganisationforeachtypeofcover supplied.AtleasttwokeywaysasdetailedonHCD DrawingNo.Fshallbeprovidedineachcomplete coveroneineachsegmentforsegmentalcovers.A recessforaprisingbarshallbeincorporatedinmanhole coversunlessothermeansoflooseningthecoverfrom theframeareprovided .
AmendmentNovember Volume Series SpecificationforHighwayWorks DrainageandServiceDucts Framesforchambercoversandgratingsshallbeset incementmortardesignationicomplyingwith Clauseoraproprietaryquicksettingmortarof equivalentstrength .
Forallpipelinesexceptthoseconstructedwith corrugatedpipesthenearestjointtoanychambershall benotmorethanmmfromtheinnerfaceofthe wallandshallnotberestrictedbyanyconcrete .
Betweenthisandthenextjointthelengthofthe articulatedpipeshallbeinaccordancewithTable .
taBLE Length of articulated Pipe nominal Pipe diameter mm Length of Pipe mm andless to Greaterthan to Wheretheadjustmentorreplacementofexisting framesandcoversorgratingsisrequiredtheunitsshall betakenupandrefixedorremovedandreplacedwith newunitscomplyingwithsubClausestoofthis ClauseorasdescribedinAppendix.Ontakingup orremovaloftheunitanyconcreteormortarbedding shallbebrokenoutandthesurfaceprepared.Where existingframesandcoversorgratingsaretobe adjustedtheContractorshalltakeuptheunitandclean itforreuse.Theadjustedorreplacedunitsshallbelaid onamortarbedcomplyingwithsubClauseofthis Clause.Thefinishedthicknessofthemortarbedshall bebetweenmmandmm.Whererequiredin Appendixcoversandgratingsshallbebeddedusing aproprietaryquicksettinghighstrengthmortar.Details ofsuchmortarshallbetotheapprovalofthe OverseeingOrganisation.Unlessotherwisedescribedin Appendixadjustedorreplacedframesandcoversor gratingsshallbesetflushwiththenewsurface.Any additionaladjustmentsshallbebymodifyingthe brickworkincompliancewithsubClause.orby usingaframeofasuitabledepth.Oncompletionofthe workseachcovershallbeliftedandtheframeand seatingcleaned .
gullies and Pipe Junctions Gulliesshallbetrappeduntrappedor sumplessasdescribedinAppendixandbein accordancewithHCDDrawingNumbersFandF .
AllSTconcretereferredtointhisClauseshallcomply withClauseunlessotherwisedescribedin Appendix .
Gulliesshallbeconstructedsothatnopartofthe spoutortraphasacrosssectionalarealessthanrd thatoftheoutlet.Thedepthofwatersealintrapped gulliesshallbenotlessthanmm .
Precastconcretegulliesshallcomplywith BSandclaygullieswithBSEN.Insitu concretegulliesshallbeasdescribedinAppendix andconstructedofSTconcreteofmmminimum thicknessusingpermanentorremovableshuttering .
Whereinsituconcretegulliesareformedwith permanentshutteringsuchshutteringshallhavea currentBritishBoardofAgrmentRoadsandBridges Certificate .
Gullygratingskerbtypegullycoversandframes shallcomplywithBSENandthefollowingand shallbeoftheclassesandsizesdescribedin Appendix .
Theuppersurfaceofgullygratingsshallbe flatexceptwhereotherwisedescribedinAppendix .
Slotsingratingsorbetweengratingsandframesshall notbeorientatedparalleltothedirectionoftraffic exceptwheretheslotsarelessthanmmlongorless thanmmwide.Minimumwaterwayareasshallbeas specifiedinAppendix.Unlessotherwisespecifiedin Appendixallgratingsandframesshallbesupplied inafinecastuncoatedcondition.Whereacoatingis specifiedinAppendixthecoatingshallonlybe appliedwhenthesurfacesofthecastingarecleanfree fromrustanddry.Framesshallbebeddedonmortar complyingwithsubClause .. Brickworkshall complywithsubClause .. Backfillingtoprecastgulliesshallbecarried outuptosubformationlevelwithgeneralfillmaterial ClassasdescribedinTablecompactedin compliancewithClause.Wheremechanical compactionisimpracticablethebackfillingshallbein STconcrete.Theremainderofthebackfillingshallbe inappropriatecappingandroadpavementmaterials exceptthatwheremechanicalcompactionofcappingor unboundmixtureforsubbaseisimpracticableST concreteshallbeused .
Gullyconnectionpipesshallbeeither flexibleorrigidnotexceeding.minlengthwith flexiblejointsforadistanceofmfromthegullyand shallbeinaccordancewithsubClause.when enteringchambers.Junctionpipesshallbemanufactured ofthesametypeandclassofmaterialastheremainder ofthepipesintherun.Junctionpipeswhicharelaidbut notimmediatelyconnectedshallbefittedwith temporarystoppersorsealsandthepositionofallsuch junctionsshallbeclearlydefinedbymeansofstakesor tracingwiresproperlymarkedorlabelled.Saddlesmay beusedtoformjunctionsonlywherepermittedin Appendix.Nointernalprojectionsgreaterthan mmwillbepermitted.Saddlesforasbestoscement AmendmentNovember Volume Series SpecificationforHighwayWorks DrainageandServiceDucts andplasticspipesshallbeinstalledinaccordancewith themanufacturersrecommendations.Saddleswithclay pipesshallbejointedwithmortardesignationi complyingwithClauseexcludinglime.Saddles andpipesshallbesurroundedwithSTconcrete .
Wheretheadjustmentorreplacementof existingframesandgratingsisrequiredtheunitsshall betakenupandrefixedorremovedandreplacedwith newunitscomplyingwithsubClausesandofthis ClauseorasdescribedinAppendix.Ontakingup orremovaloftheunitanyconcreteormortarbedding shallbebrokenoutandthesurfaceprepared.Where existingframesandcoversorgratingsaretobe adjustedtheContractorshalltakeuptheunitandclean itforreuse.Theadjustedorreplacedunitsshallbelaid atalevelunlessotherwisedescribedinAppendix mmbelowtheadjoiningroadsurfaceonamortarbed complyingwithsubClause .. Thefinished thicknessofthemortarbedshallbebetweenmmand mm.WhererequiredinAppendixcoversand gratingsshallbebeddedusingaproprietaryquick settinghighstrengthmortar.Detailsofsuchmortarshall betotheapprovaloftheOverseeingOrganisation.Any additionaladjustmentshallbemadebymodifyingthe brickworkincompliancewithsubClause.orby usingaframeofsuitabledepth.Oncompletionofthe workseachgratingshallbeliftedandtheframeand seatingcleaned .
testing and cleaning DrainsrequiredinAppendixtohavewatertight jointsshallbetestedasdescribedinAppendixin sectionseg.betweenchambersbymeansoftheairtest describedinsubClauseofthisClause.Ifapipelineis rejectedbecauseofafailedairtestaspartofthe rectificationworkawatertestasdescribedinsub ClauseofthisClausemaybecarriedoutasan alternativeacceptabilitytest.Beforetestingtheendsof thepipelinetobetestedincludingthoseofshort branchesshallbepluggedandsealed .
Forthepipelineairtestairshallbepumpedinby suitablemeansuntilastablepressureofmmhead ofwaterisindicatedinaUtubeconnectedtothe system.Theairpressureshallnotfalltolessthan mmheadofwaterduringaperiodofminutes withoutfurtherpumpingafteraninitialperiodtoallow stabilization.Drainswithtrapsshallbetestedtomm headofwaterandthepermissiblelossshallthenbeno morethanmmheadofwaterinminuteswithout furtherpumpingaftertheinitialstabilisingperiod .
Forthepipelinewatertestthepipesshallbefilled withwaterunderaheadofnotlessthan.mabovethe crownofthepipeatthehighendandnotmorethanm abovethepipeatthelowend.Steeplygradedpipelines shallbetestedinsectionssothattheabovemaximumis notexceeded.Thetestshallcommencenotlessthantwo hoursafterfillingthetestsectionatwhichtimethelevel ofwaterattheverticalfeedpipeshallbemadeupto producetherequired.mminimumtesthead.Theloss ofwateroveraminuteperiodshallbemeasuredby addingwateratregularminuteintervalstorestore theoriginalwaterlevelandrecordingtheamountsso added.Thedrainwillhavepassedthetestifthevolume ofwateraddeddoesnotexceedonelitreperhourper linearmetreofdrainpermetreofnominalinternal diameter .
Allpipelineslessthanmmdiameter excludingserviceductsshallbecheckedbydrawing througheachcompletedlengthofpipeaspherical mandrelofadiameterlessthanthenominalbore ofthepipesbeingtested .
DuringtheprogressoftheWorksallexisting chambersgulliesandroddingeyesshallbekeptclean andfreefromobstruction.Oncompletionofthewhole oftheWorksallchambersgulliesanddrainsincluding vergesurfacewaterdrainsandfilterdrainsbut excludingallfinandnarrowfilterdrainsshallbe flushedfromendtoendwithwaterandleftfreefrom obstructions.Catchpitchambersshallbeleftcleanand freefromsilt .
UnlessotherwiserequiredinAppendixMCHW .. allcarrierfoulandfilterdrainsbutexcludingall finandnarrowfilterdrainsshallbesurveyedbyClosed CircuitTelevisionCCTVinaccordancewiththe relevantrequirementsofSeriesMCHW.Parts to.Furtherguidanceisprovdedin subClausesNG.andNG .. Thepipesandfiltermaterialoffilterdrainsshallat alltimesbeleftcleanandfreefromsiltandobstruction .
WheredescribedinAppendixsamplesofone ormorepartlywatertightjointsforpipelinesuptoand includingmmdiametershallbetestedwithahead ofwaterkeptlevelwiththecrownofthepipe.Thejoint willnotbeacceptediftheflowthroughthejointinlitres perminuteexceedstimesthesquareofthenominal internaldiameterofthepipeinmetres .
Permeabilitytestsshallbeasdescribedin Appendix .
Serviceductsshallbecheckedbydrawinga woodenmandrelasshownonHCDDrawingNumber Ithroughastheductsarelaidbutwhereasethasto begiventothelineofductsthewoodenmandrelshall bereplacedbyanironmandrelmmlongbutofthe samediameterasthewoodenversion .
AmendmentNovember Volume Series SpecificationforHighwayWorks DrainageandServiceDucts Surface Water channels and drainage channel Blocks Surfacewaterchannelsanddrainagechannel blocksshallbeconstructedasdescribedin Appendix .
Surfacewaterchannelsshallcomplywith Clause .
Drainagechannelblocksshallcomplywith Clause .
Land drains Existinglanddrainswhicharepermanently severedbytheWorksshallbelocatedandconnected intoanewdrainpipeorditchallasdescribedin Appendix.ThelengthsremainingwithintheWorks shallbecleanedoutfromthenewdraintrenchfaceas necessary.AnypipedisturbedbytheWorksshallbe relaidtoensureafreedischargeintothenewdrain .
Disusedendsofinterceptedlanddrainsshallbe adequatelysealedwithSTconcreteincompliancewith Clause .
Whereanexistinglanddrainisexposedand severedbytemporarytrenchexcavationtheContractor shallmarkthepositionofthedrainandrecordit.The drainshallbedivertedintoanexistingdrainor watercourse.Alternativelythenormalfunctioningof thedrainshallbecontinuedbytheconstructionofa pipelineorchanneladequatelysupportedacrossthe excavationuntilpermanentrestorationismadeonthe originalline .
TheContractorshallnotifytheOverseeing Organisationofanylanddrainwhichisblockedoris otherwisedefectivewhenthedrainisfirstexposed .
Severedmoledrainsshallbeledstraightintonew drainsalternativelytheyshallwhererequiredin Appendixbeinterceptedbytheconstructionofa landdrain.Wheretheyhavebeendisturbedmole channelsshallbecleanedoutandfilledlocallywith TypeAfiltermaterialorasotherwisedescribedin Appendix .
Backfilling to Pipe Bays and verges on Bridges UnlessotherwisedescribedinAppendix fillingtopipebaysandvergesonbridgesshallbewell gradedgranularmaterialnotexceedingmmsize containingnotmorethanofmaterialpassingthe .mmsieveandwithauniformitycoefficientof morethan.Itshallbelaidandcompactedin compliancewithsubClause.and.Thematerial shallmeetthesulfaterequirementdescribedin subClausesand .. Permeable Backing to Earth Retaining Structures UnlessotherwisedescribedinAppendix permeablebackingshallconsistofoneofthefollowing materialsexceptwhenthefillingadjacenttothe structureisselectedcohesivematerialClassA selectedconditionedpulverisedfuelashClassBor chalk i Aminimumthicknessofmmofgranular materialcomplyingwiththerequirementsof ClauseforTypeAorTypeCmaterial andinadditionsatisfyingthefollowing criteria Pipingratiodefinedas percentsizeofthedrainagematerial percentsizeofthebackfillmaterial Permeabilityratiodefinedas percentsizeofthedrainagematerial percentsizeofthebackfillmaterial wherethepercentsizeofamaterialisthesizeof particlecorrespondingtothegivenpercentordinateof theparticlesizedistributiongraph .
ii Porousnofinesconcretecastinsitu mmthickcomplyingwiththe requirementsofClause .
iii Precasthollowconcreteblocks complyingwiththeBSENlaidin stretcherbondwithdryjointsinmm thickwallingwithholesvertical .
Whenthefillingadjacenttothestructureis selectedcohesivematerialClassAselected conditionedpulverisedfuelashClassBorchalkthe permeablebackingshallbeaminimumthicknessof mmoforCPorMPsandcomplyingwith BSENunlessotherwisedescribedin Appendix .
Fin drains general FindrainsshallcomplywiththisClauseandthe specialrequirementsdescribedinAppendix .
Thetermsthicknesswidthheightandcoreshallhave themeaningsindicatedonHCDDrawingNumberF unlessotherwisedescribedinAppendix .
AmendmentNovember Volume Series SpecificationforHighwayWorks DrainageandServiceDucts Thetermfindrainshallmeanaplanargeocomposite structuredesignedtoperformthesamefunctionasa narrowfilterdrain .
Wherefindrainsaredesignedforlateralentryof waterfromonesideonlytherequirementsforflowrates insubClausesandofthisClauseshallapplytothe faceorplanedesignedtoadmitortransmitwater .
Thematerialsofwhichthedrainismadeshallbe treatedsothattheyareprotectedfromthedeleterious effectsofshorttermexposuretoultravioletlightand shallberesistanttodegradationbyacidsalkalis commonchemicalsbacteriafungiandmoulds occurringinsoilsandhighwayconstructionmaterials .
AfterexposuretoultravioletlighttheOverseeing Organisationmayrequireevidencethatthematerials stillcomplywiththerequirementsofthisClause.The drainshallbeprotectedfromdamageandultraviolet lightandbelabelledtoidentifythegradeand manufacturerorsupplier.Wherenecessarytheside intendedforentryofwaterandthedirectionofinplane flowshallbeidentified .
geotextile Thegeotextileshall i inbothmachineandcrossmachine directionssustainatensileloadofnotless than.kNmatbreakandhaveaminimum failurestrainofwhendeterminedin accordancewithBSENISO ii haveaminimumpunctureresistance ofNwhendeterminedinaccordance withBSENISO iii haveaminimumtearresistanceof Nwhendeterminedinaccordancewith ASTMStandardD iv haveasizedistributionofporeopenings suchthattheapparentopeningsizeOwhen determinedinaccordancewith BSPartorotherappropriatetestis asstatedinAppendix v allowwatertoflowthroughitineither directionnormaltoitsprincipalplaneata rateofnotlessthanthatstatedin Appendixunderaconstantheadofwater ofmmandamaximumbreakthrough headofmmwhendeterminedin accordancewithBSPart .
composite drain Thecompositedrainshall i haveaflowratethrougheachfaceofthe drainofmorethanofthevalue specifiedinsubClausevofthisClauseon thesideorsideswhereinflowoccurs.This valuemaybefoundbyeither a directmeasurementofthecomposite drainusingamodifiedversionof BSPartor b calculationbasedontheflowrate obtainedbythestandardtestin BSPartandthepercentage contactareaofthedrainagecore obtainedfromsubClauseofthis Clauseorotherappropriatemethod ii havevaluesoflongterminplaneflowrates asstatedinAppendixwhendetermined inaccordancewithsubClausesandof thisClause.Thevaluesofhydraulicgradient andminimumappliedstressesshallbeas giveninTable .
taBLE applied Stresses knm and Hydraulic gradient Hcd drain type SubClause NormalStress ShearStress SubClause NormalStress SubClause Hydraulic Gradient . . . . . .
Joints Findrainsshallbecapableofbeingjointed longitudinallyorlaterallyintopipesystemsorchambers forinflowandoutflowpurposesandbeselfjointing eitherdirectlyorthroughpurposemadeattachment piecesforformingcontinuousdrainlengths.Allsuch jointsshallbeformedsoastopreventtheingressofsoil particlesorotherextraneousmaterialintothedrain .
Findrainjointstransversetothedirectionofflowshall havevaluesofinplaneflowratesnotlessthanthat requiredbysubClauseiiofthisClause .
Findrainjointsparalleltothedirectionofflowandany exposededgesshallbeprotectedfromtheingressofsoil byageotextilewrappingwithaminimumoverlapof mm .
Pipes FordrainTypepipesshallbeperforatedor porousandcomplywithsubClause .. Pipes AmendmentNovember Volume Series SpecificationforHighwayWorks DrainageandServiceDucts complyingwithBSshallhaveaminimum UltimatePipeStiffnessSTESvalueofNm .
FordrainTypepipesshallbeunperforated thermoplasticspipecomplyingwithBSBS BSENBSENorBSENslotted longitudinallyalongthetopsurfaceandstressrelief treatedifrequiredinaccordancewiththesystem manufacturerspublishedspecification .
Pipejointsshallcomplywiththe requirementsoftherelevantBritishStandardforthe pipeusedorClause .
Backfill and Surround Material PipesurroundmaterialfordrainTypesandshall complywithsubClause.ior.iiorTypeA orCmaterialcomplyingwithsubClause .. Wherefindrainsareinstalledinatrenchbackfill materialshallbetheoriginalasdugmaterialfromthe trenchunlessotherwisespecifiedinAppendix .
dimensions UnlessotherwisedescribedinAppendix thedimensionsofthefindrainshallbeasshownon HCDDrawingsFandF.Thepipediametershallbe asstatedinAppendix.Thedrainslopeanglexas shownonDrawingFshallbenotgreaterthan fromtheverticalunlessotherwisestatedin Appendix .
Installation and Handling InstallationoffindrainsshallbeasshownonHCD DrawingNumbersFtoF.Wherefindrainsare assembledonsitetheassemblyareashallbecleanand dryandfreeofwindbornepollutants.Anymaterial whichbecomescontaminatedmustbereplaced.No geotextileorcorematerialshallbeexposedtodaylight oranysourceofultravioletradiationforaperiod exceedingacumulativetotalofhours.Anygeotextile orcorematerialexposedtodaylightoranysourceof ultravioletlightforaperiodexceedingacumulative totalofhoursshallbereplacedunlessitcanbe demonstratedthatthematerialsofthedrainstillcomply withtherequirementsofthisClause .
Wherefindrainsarelaidintrenchthetrenchbottom shallbefreeofirregularitiesandtotherequiredlevels giveninAppendix.Rockandotherhard protuberancesshallberemovedandanyexcesscutin thetrenchbottomfilledandcompactedbacktothe requiredgradewithsuitableexcavatedorimported material .
Thedrainshallbelaidwiththeappropriatefaceagainst thesideofthetrenchadjacenttothecarriagewayandin theappropriatedirection.Thissideofthetrenchshall havewallssufficientlycleantoenablethefindrainto comeintoclosecontactwiththewallwhenthetrenchis backfilledandcompacted.Compactionshallbein accordancewithClause.Findrainsinstalledaspart ofthePermanentWorksshallbeprotectedfromsurface watercontaminationandaccidentaldamageduring construction .
Thefindrainpipesurroundandbackfillshallbe installedsoastocausenodamagetothefindrain .
Whereanydamagedoesoccurthedamagedmaterials shallbereplacedbynewmaterial .
Aftertheinstallationofthefindrainhasbeencompleted amarkertapeshallbelaidapproximatelymmabove thefindraininthepositionshownonHCDDrawing NumbersFandF.Thetapesshallbegreenself colouredPVCorpolytheneplasticnotlessthan.mm thickandmmwide .
Identification TheContractorshallobtainandmakeavailablethe followinginformationforeachseparateconsignmentof findraindeliveredtoSite i geotextileandcorenamegradenumberand massperunitarea ii namesandaddressesofsystemproducerand geotextilecoreandpipemanufacturers iii manufacturingcharacteristicsand constituentsofgeotextileandcore.Thisshall includecompositionandtypeofconstituent filamentsthreadsfibresfilmstapesand othercomponents iv consignmentnumberanddeliverydate v acopyofthesitedeliverynote .
test Method for the Percentage contact area of drainage core i Thetestdeterminestheareaofonefaceofa drainagecorewhichwillbeincontactwitha geotextilefilterasapercentage .
ii Theapparatusrequiredisasfollows a loadingdeviceabletoapplya compressiveloadofatleastkNand havingaflatsteelbase b flatsteelloadingplatemmx mm c printersinkandrollerorpad d sheetofthincompressiblerubber e planimeter .
AmendmentNovember Volume Series SpecificationforHighwayWorks DrainageandServiceDucts iii Thetestprocedureshallbeasfollows.Cut threerepresentativetestspecimensmm xmmmm.Applyinktoone mmxmmfaceofaspecimenand coverwithasheetofplainpaperandathin compressiblerubbersheet.Placethe preparedspecimenintotheloadingdevice andgraduallyapplytheloadofkNand maintainforminutes.Releasetheloadand removethespecimenandseparateitfromthe paper.Usingtheplanimeterfindthetotal areaofthepaperwhichhasreceivedan imprint.Repeatforallspecimens .
iv Thepercentagecontactarea totalareaofimprint areaoftestspecimen v Thereportshallinclude a areferencetothismethod b sampleidentificationdetails c individualandmeanpercentagecontact areas d detailsofanydeviationfromthe specifiedtestprocedure .
vi Alternativemethodsofdeterminingthe percentagecontactareamaybeemployed withthepriorapprovaloftheOverseeing Organisation .
test Method for determining the thickness of Fin drains under Specified normal and Shear Stresses i Thetestdeterminesthethicknessof thefindrainundersustainednormaland shearstresses.Alongtermthicknessat hoursiscalculatedbyextrapolation andashorttermequivalentnormalload whichproducesthelongtermthicknessis determined .
ii Theapparatusrequiredisasfollows a asuitablecompressiontestingmachine whichshallhaveaverticaltravelat leastthenominalthicknessofthe specimen.Itshallbecapableof sustainingthenecessaryloadstowithin accuracyforthedurationofthetest b thecompressiontestingapparatus whichshallincludeafixedbaseplate andparallelmoveabletopplatewithflat steelsurfacewithsufficientfrictionto permitthedevelopmentoftherequired shearforces c ameansofmeasuringthemean thicknessofthespecimentoan accuracyof.mm .
Asanalternativetoaandbanappropriateinclined planeandkentledgesystemmaybeemployedto producethenormalandshearloads .
Thetestprocedureshallbeasfollows iii Cutsixrepresentativespecimensof minimumsizemmxmm symmetricallyaboutthecoredesign.Three specimensshallbetestedinaccordancewith vbelowandthreeinaccordancewithvi below .
iv Thetestspecimenshallbeplaced symmetricallyonthebaseplateandcovered bythetopplate.Themeansofmeasuring thicknessshallbeattachedandtheinitial thicknessmeasured .
v Applytheloadsmoothlyandas quicklyaspossibletothetopplate.Thefull loadnormalandshearshallbeappliedin lessthansecondsandsustainedforatleast hours.Theappliedstressesshallbe thosegiveninTable.Atleastfour measurementsofthicknessshallbemade duringeachunitoflogarithmictimeafterthe firstminute.Determinethelongterm thicknessofthespecimenasthethicknessof thespecimenathoursreducedbyT whereTisthedifferenceinthicknessesof thespecimenthicknessrecordedathours andhours.Repeatthetestonthetwo otherspecimens.Thetestspecimensshallbe maintainedataconstanttemperatureof CCthroughoutthetestperiod .
vi Applyincreasingincrementsofnormalload tothespecimen.Determinetheshortterm equivalentloadwhichshallbetheload whichwhenappliedforaperiodof minutesproducesaspecimenthicknessequal withinanaccuracyof.mmtothelong termthicknessofthespecimenobtainedat vabove.Repeatthetestontheothertwo specimens .
vii Thereportshallinclude a areferencetothismethod b sampleidentificationdetails c theinitialthicknessofthesample d theappliedload AmendmentNovember x Volume Series SpecificationforHighwayWorks DrainageandServiceDucts e thethicknessofeachsampleatand hoursandthemeanofthethree results f aplotofpercentagereductionin thicknessagainstlogarithmictime g themeanlongtermthickness h themeanshorttermequivalentload i anydeviationsfromthespecifiedtest procedure .
determining Inplane Flow under compressive Loading Inplaneflowshallbedeterminedin accordancewithBSPartexceptthatthe followingconditionsshallapply a theappliednormalstressshallbethegreater ofthevaluegiveninTable forsubClauseorthemeanshortterm equivalentstressasdeterminedin subClauseviofthisClause b thesampleshallbetestedsuchthatthe measuredfloworflowsisinthesame directionastheprincipalfloworflows whenthefindrainisinservice c thefoamrubberoptionofthetestprocedure shallbeuseddetailsofthefoamrubberto beusedmaybeobtainedfromthe OverseeingOrganisation d thehydraulictransmissivityshallbereported foreachofthehydraulicgradientsemployed .
test Methods Notwithstandingtherequirementsof subClausesandofthisClausevariationsin thetestmethodsspecifiedthereinshallbemadewhere deemednecessarybytheBritishBoardofAgrment followingconsultationwiththemanufacturer.Allsuch variationsshallberecordedinthereport .
certification Findrainsandconstituentmaterialsshallhavea currentBritishBoardofAgrmentRoadsandBridges Certificatecertifyingtheappropriatephysicalproperties whentestedinaccordancewiththisClause .
narrow Filter drains general NarrowfilterdrainsshallcomplywiththisClause andthespecialrequirementsdescribedinAppendix .
ThetermnarrowfilterdrainreferstodrainTypesor indicatedintheHCDDrawingNumberF.They consistofaporousorperforatedpipelaidinanarrow trenchsurroundedbygranularmaterialwherethe granularmaterialandorthepipeisenclosedbyalayer ofgeotextilefilter.Narrowfilterdrainsandfindrains performthesamefunction .
Materials Thegeotextilematerialsusedinthedrainshallbe storedsothattheyareprotectedfromthedeleterious effectsofshorttermexposuretoultravioletlightand shallberesistanttodegradationbyacidsalkalis commonchemicalsbacteriafungiandmoulds occurringinsoilsandhighwayconstructionmaterials .
AfterexposuretoultravioletlighttheOverseeing Organisationmayrequireevidencethatthematerials stillcomplywiththerequirementsofthisClause.They shallbeprotectedfromdamageandultravioletlightand belabelledtoidentifythegradeandmanufactureror supplier .
Thegeotextileusedinnarrowfilterdrainsshall complywithallrequirementsofsubClause.for geotextilesusedinfindrains .
FordrainTypethegeotextilesurroundtothepipe shallconsistofaprefabricatedcontinuousclosefitting sock.Alternativelythepipeshallbefirmlywrappedina singlelayerofgeotextilewithanoverlapofbetween andmmandsecuredaroundthepipeinamanner soastopreventtheingressofsoilparticlesorother extraneousmaterialandwithoutaffectingthe permeabilityofthewrappedmaterial.Splicesbetween lengthsofsockorlayershallhaveoverlapswithinthese dimensionsandbesecurelytied .
FordrainTypethegeotextilesurroundtothegranular materialshallhaveaminimumoverlapofmm includingmmdowntuck.Splicingoflengthsof geotextileshallconsistofminimummmoverlap securedwithpinsormechanicalties.Whereanoutlet pipepassesthroughthegeotextileaseparatepieceof geotextileshallbewrappedroundtheoutletpipeflared againstthegeotextileinthefilterdrainandsecured .
Wheredrainlengthsareterminatedatchambersthe geotextileshallbesecuredagainstthechamberwallsby suitablemeanssoastopreventtheingressofsoil particlesorotherextraneousmaterialintothedrain .
Pipesandfittingsshallcomplywithsub Clauses.and .. Wherecoilablepipesto BSareusedtheyshallbecapableofbeing straightenedsoastolieflatwithoutrestraintinthe trenchbottombeforebackfilling .
Thegranularmaterialusedfortrenchinfill shallcomplywiththerequirementsfornonplasticity AmendmentNovember Volume Series SpecificationforHighwayWorks DrainageandServiceDucts LAcategoryandsulfatecontentofsubClause .
andhaveagradingwithinthelimitsofTable.The materialwhentestedinaccordancewithsubClause .shallmeetthepermeabilityrequirements describedinAppendix .
taBLE narrow Filter drain trench Infill grading Requirements HCDDrainType MaximumParticleSize mm DSizemm . . DSizemm Asstatedin Appendix DSizemm HoleDiameter or.Times WidthofSlotin Pipe UniformityCoefficient to toorifCu CuDD Dmm DnSievesizepassingnbyweightofmaterial dimensions UnlessotherwisedescribedinAppendixthe dimensionsofthenarrowfilterdrainshallbeasshown onHCDDrawingNo.F.Thepipediametershallbe asstatedinAppendix.Thedrainslopeanglexas shownonDrawingFshallbenotgreaterthan fromtheverticalunlessotherwisestatedin Appendix .
Installation and Handling Narrowfilterdrainsshallbeinstalledasshownon HCDDrawingNumberF.Beforeduringandafter installationthegeotextileshallbeprotectedfrom contaminationdamageandexposuretoultraviolet radiationinaccordancewithsubClause .. Theexcavatedtrenchbottomshallbefreeof irregularitiesandtotherequiredlevelsgivenin Appendix.Rockandotherhardprotuberancesshall beremovedandanyexcesscutinthetrenchbottom filledandcompactedbacktotherequiredgradewith suitableexcavatedorimportedmaterial.DrainType shallhavetrenchwallssufficientlycleantoenablethe geotextiletocomeintoclosecontactwiththewallwhen thegranularmaterialisplacedinsideit.Thedeposition andcompactionofinfillshallbeinaccordancewith subClause.forfilterdrains .
NarrowfilterdrainsinstalledaspartofthePermanent Worksshallnotbeusedforthedisposalofsurfacewater runoffduringconstruction.Narrowfilterdrains exposedtosurfacewateringressshallbetemporarily protected .
Markertapesshallconformandbeinstalledin accordancewithsubClause .. TheContractorshallobtainandmakeavailablethe informationrequiredinsubClause.inrespectof thegeotextileandpipe .
certification ThegeotextileshallhaveacurrentBritishBoardof AgrmentRoadsandBridgesCertificatecertifyingthe appropriatephysicalpropertieswhentestedin accordancewiththisClause .
combined drainage and Kerb Systems general Combineddrainageandkerbsystemslisted inAppendixshallbetreatedasotherfeaturestobe designedbytheContractor.Combineddrainageand kerbsystemsshallconformtoBSENandtothe specialrequirementsinAppendix .
Combineddrainageandkerbsystemsshall besuitablefortheirintendeduseandplaceof installationintheWorksandasstatedinAppendix .
TheContractorshallprovideevidenceofsuch suitabilityforthepurposetotheOverseeing OrganisationinaccordancewithAppendix .
DesignflowsgiveninAppendixshallbe accommodatedwithoutsurchargewithinthemain combineddrainageandkerbsectionandbeneaththe undersideofanyinletslotsections .
Whereapplicablethewidthanddepthof combineddrainageandkerbsystemunitsshallnot exceedthedimensionsgiveninAppendix .
Whenusedadjacenttoporousasphalt surfacingmaterialsunitsshallincorporatesideentry inletstopermitdrainageofwaterheldwithintheproous asphalt.Inletsshallcomplywiththerequirementsof Appendixandshallhavethecapacitytodrain porousasphalt .
classification Combineddrainageandkerbsystems excludinginsitusystemshallbeclassifiedasfollows accordingtotheirintendeduseandshallbeasstatedin Appendix i C ii Dand AmendmentNovember Volume Series SpecificationforHighwayWorks DrainageandServiceDucts iii whereexceptionallycombinedkerband drainageunitshavetobelocatedinareas subjectedtolargenumbersofhighspeed heavygoodsvehiclesClassEcombined kerbanddrainageunitsshallbeconsidered .
Water tightness Jointsbetweenunitscomprisingthesystem andbetweenthechannelandunitsshallbedesignedto avoidleakageofsurfacewater.Jointsbetweenbridge deckwaterproofingandcomponentpartspassing throughthewaterproofingshallbewatertight.Sealants shallbecompatiblewiththewaterproofingsystem .
Installation and Handling Combineddrainageandkerbsystemsshall belaidandjointedinaccordancewiththe manufacturerswritteninstructions .
Adjacentcarriagewayfootwayvergeor centralreservetobeddingbackingsurroundingor jointingofcombineddrainageandkerbunitsshallbein accordancewiththemanufacturerswritteninstructions .
Junctionsconnectingpipesandotherfittings comprisingthecombineddrainageandkerbsystem shallcomplywithsubClause.andshallbeas describedinAppendix.Thecombineddrainageand kerbsystemshallincorporatemeasurestoenable roddingoftheoutfallpipeworkandadequateaccessfor jettingbywaterjettingequipmentintothesystem .
cleaning Combineddrainageandkerbsystemsshall becleanedoutbyappropriatemeansandshallbeleft cleanandfreefromallobstruction.Thecompleted combineddrainageandkerbsystemsshallbesurveyed byClosedCircuitTelevisionCCTVinaccordance withtherelevantrequirementsofSeriesMCHW .Partsto .
Linear drainage channel Systems general Thelineardrainagechannelsystemslistedin Appendixshallbetreatedasotherfeaturestobe designedbytheContractor.Theinsitulineardrainage channelsystemsshallconformwhereapplicableto subClauses.to.andtherequirementsin AppendixandAppendixasappropriate.The prefabricatedlineardrainagechannelsystemswhere applicableshallconformtoBSENandwiththe otherrequirementsinAppendix .
Lineardrainagechannelsystemsshallbe suitablefortheirintendeduseandplaceofinstallation intheWorks.TheContractorshallprovideevidenceof suchsuitabilityforthepurposetotheOverseeing OrganisationinaccordancewithAppendix .
DesignflowsgiveninAppendixshallbe accommodatedwithoutsurchargewithinthemain channelsectionandbeneaththeundersideofanyinlet slotsections .
Whereapplicablethewidthanddepthof lineardrainagechannelsystemunitsshallnotexceed thedimensionsgiveninAppendix .
Dimensionsofinletslotsshallcomplywith thefollowingcriteria i forprefabricatedlineardrainagechannel systemstheyshallconformtoBSEN ii forinsitulineardrainagechannelsystems theyshallconformtoBSEN .
Whenusedadjacenttoporousasphalt surfacingmaterialsunitsshallalsoincorporateside entryinletstopermitdrainageofwaterheldwithinthe porousasphalt.Inletsshallcomplywiththe requirementsofAppendixandshallhavethe capacitytodrainporousasphalt .
Weathering Resistance Markingrelatingtothegradeofweathering resistancefordrainagechannelsmadeofconcreteshall beasstatedinAppendix .
classification lineardrainagechannelsystemsshallbe classifiedasfollowsaccordingtotheirintendeduseand shallbeasstatedinAppendix i C ii Dand iii whereexceptionallylineardrainagechannel systemshavetobelocatedinareassubjected tolargenumbersofhighspeedheavygoods vehiclesClassEcombinedkerband drainageunitsshallbeconsidered .
Water tightness Jointsbetweenunitscomprisingthesystem andbetweenadjacentconstructionandthesystemshall bedesignedtoavoidleakageofsurfacewater.Where applicablejointsbetweenbridgedeckwaterproofing andcomponentpartspassingthroughthewaterproofing shallbewatertight.Sealantsshallalsobecompatible withthewaterproofingsystem .
AmendmentNovember Volume Series SpecificationforHighwayWorks DrainageandServiceDucts Junctionsconnectingpipesandotherfittings comprisingthelineardrainagechannelsystemshall complywithsubClause.andshallbeasdescribed inAppendix.Thelineardrainagechannelsystem shallincorporatemeasurestoenableroddingofthe outfallpipeworkandadequateaccessforjettingby waterjettingequipmentintothesystem .
cleaning Thelineardrainagechannelsystemsshallbe cleanedoutbyappropriatemeansandshallbeleftclean andfreefromallobstructiononcompletionofthe Works.Thecompletedlineardrainagechannelsystems shallbesurveyedbyClosedCircuitTelevisionCCTV inaccordancewiththerelevantrequirementsofSeries MCHW.Partsto.Furtherguidanceis providedinsubClausesNG.andNG ..
Manufactured Systems Manufacturedsystemsshallconformto BSEN .
In Situ Systems Insitusystemsshallcomplywiththe requirementsofsubClauses .. and .. Theyshallalsocomplywiththerequirementsof subClause.exceptthattheconcreteshallbe consideredasplainconcretewithinthetermsofthis subClauseirrespectiveoftheinclusionof reinforcement .
Insitusystemsshallbeslipformedexcept forsectionsatgullieswhichshallbehandformed.Full depthjointsshallbeconstructedattheinterfaceateach sideofgullieswithammthickfillerboard complyingwithClauseandsealedinaccordance withClausesand .
Thecentralvoidmaybeformedbyan inflatedtubewhichisthenremovedorbyaninsitu suitablepipeorsimilarformerfitforthepurpose.At gullypositionstheinnerformershallbepresleeved withasuitablepipeorsimilarformerfitforthepurpose whichshallbeofsufficientlengthtooverlapthetwo jointsoneithersideofthegully .
Thecentralvoidshallbecheckedin accordancewithsubClause .. Verificationofslot widthsshallbedeterminedbysuitabletemplates .
ReinforcementshallcomplywithSeries .Covertoreinforcementshallbenotlessthan mm .
Triallengthsandtestingofinsituchannels shallbeundertakeninaccordancewithclausesand .
ofBSandtherelevantparagraphsofclauseof BSENrespectively .
thermoplastics Structured Wall Pipes and Fittings general Thermoplasticsstructuredwallpipeshallcomply withthisClauseandthespecialrequirementsdescribed inAppendix .
Thetermstructuredwallpipeshallmeanalltypesof smoothborepipeexceptsolidwallhomogeneouspipe .
Typicalformsofconstructionclassifiedasstructured wallpipesincludesinglewallexternallystructured smoothboretwinwallfoamedcoreandspirally wound .
Thetermfittingshallmeanaproductusedin conjunctionwiththepipetoformthesystembut excludinggulliesmanholechambersinspection chambersandaccesschambers .
Materials Thematerialsfromwhichthepipeandfittingsare madeshallbetreatedsothattheyareprotectedfrom thedeleteriouseffectsofshorttermexposureto ultravioletlightandshallberesistanttodegradationby acidsalkaliscommonchemicalsbacteriafungiand mouldsoccurringinsoilhighwayconstruction materialsandhighwaydrainagesystems.Inaddition thematerialsfromwhichthepipeandfittingsaremade shallnotincorporateanyadditivesinquantities sufficienttocausemicrobiologicaldegradationorto impairtheconformitytothechemicalphysicaland mechanicalpropertiesorimpactresistancerequirements giveninsubClauseofthisClause.Thespecification oftherawmaterialshallbeagreedbetweenthe certificationbodyasdefinedinsubClauseofthis Clauseandthemanufacturerandmayincorporate reprocessableandorrecyclablematerial.Theagreed specificationshallincorporatetolerancesforeachofthe relevantcharacteristicsdefinedintheappropriateclause ofprEN.TheContractorshallsubmittothe OverseeingOrganisationpriortocommencementofthe Workscompletedinformationsheetsinaccordance withAppendix .
dimensions Systemsforcarrierdrainageshallbebetween mmandmmnominalinternaldiameter.Pipes fornarrowfilterdrainsshallbemmormm nominalinternaldiameter.Pipesforserviceductsshall havenominalinternaldiametersofbetweenmmand mm.Pipesforsubsoildrainageshallincorporate slotsorholeswithaminimumcrosssectionalareaof mmpermetrerunofpipe .
AmendmentNovember Volume Series SpecificationforHighwayWorks DrainageandServiceDucts Theboreofthepipeandfittingsshallbeinaccordance withthestandardtolerancesfornominalboresgivenin BSEN .
appearance Thesystemshallhaveasmoothboreandbe freefromanybursflashorotherinconsistenciesthat couldhaveadetrimentaleffectontheperformanceof thesystem.Pipesandfittingsfordrainageshallbe externallycolouredeitherterracottaorblack.Thecolour ofductingpipesshallbeinaccordancewithNational JointUtilitiesGrouppublicationGuidelinesonthe PositioningandColourCodingofUtilitiesApparatus .
Anyvariationinthecolourshallbedescribedin Appendix .
Structured Wall Pipe Thestructuredwallpipeshallhavetheproperties definedinTable .
AmendmentMay taBLE Requirements for Structured Wall Pipe Property Relevant Standard Requirement General BSENISO BSENISOand BSISO Dimensionstobespecified Ringstiffness BSENISO kNmminimum.Lowerstiffnessvaluesarepermittedifdesign calculationstoBSENUKnationalannexbasedonsite specificinstallationconditionsindicatesatisfactoryperformance .
CreepRatio BSENISO PVCU maximum .
PPandPE maximum .
Highvolumelowpressurejetting WRcJettingTestMethod Minimumacceptablefailurepressurebar .
Longitudinalbending subClause .
Pipeswithnominaldiametersmmtohaveadifferencein dimensionswhenmeasuredintheverticalaxisoflessthanof thepipelengthandnolocalpermanentdeformationoccursduring thetest .
ImpactresistanceatC BSENwithdstriker ofkg PreliminarytesttestpiecesasdescribedinBSEN droppingthestrikerfromaheightofm.Ifanytestpiecesfail subjectthepipetothefulltestgiveninclause.ofBSEN startingthestrikerfromadropheightofmm.Themeanminus .timesthestandarddeviationmustexceedm .
ImpactresistanceatC BSENwithstrikeras above Valuetobederivedfromthesamebatchofpipeasusedinthe impactresistancetestatC.TheHmeanvaluetobe usedastheminimumvalueforqualitycontroltesting .
AlternativelytheCtestcanbeusedasaQCtestifthe manufacturerchooses .
Roddingresistance subClause .
Pipeswithnominaldiametersmmtohaveanaveragefailure energyjoules Staticfrictioncoefficientducts TS Pass Creepatelevatedtemperature ducts BSENISO TesttobecarriedoutatCcreepratiotobelessthantimesthe valuestoBSENISO .
Resistancetopointloadsducts subClause .
Noperforationatrodtravel Tensilestrengthofaseam BSEN prEN Fittings Thefittingsforusewithstructuredwallpipeshall havethepropertiesdefinedinTable .
Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Drainage and Service Ducts TABLE Requirements for Fittings Property Relevant Standard Requirement General BS EN ISO Dimensions to be specified BS EN ISO and BS EN ISO Ring stiffness excluding ISO kNm minimum couplers Rodding resistance subClause .
Fittings with nominal diameters mm to have an average failure energy joules Strength and flexibility of BS EN BS EN fabricated fittings Impact resistance drop test Drop Test to BS EN Fall height mm at a temperature of C .
Product less than ND shall show no damage .
Others may fail but must be identified as handle with care Watertightness of fabricated BS EN .
bar for minute fittings Pipe and Fittings The pipe and fittings shall have the properties defined in Table .
TABLE Requirements of the Systems Property Relevant Standard Requirement Leaktightness of joints diameter BS EN Method Use default values from BS EN distortion watertight joints Condition B Temperature C Leaktightness of joints angular BS EN Method Use default values from BS EN deflection watertight joints Condition C Temperature C Leakage rate from partially subClause .
Less than times the square of the ID of the pipe in metres shall watertight joints flow through the joint in litres per minute Resistance to wheel loads BS EN adapted to Less than deformation when loaded to kN for unequal suit HA loading conditions branches only Amendment November Bedding Backfill and Surround Material All systems shall be installed in accordance with the pipe and bedding combinations given in Advice Note HA DMRB Other combinations shall be supported by calculations in accordance with BS EN UK National Annex .
Bedding backfill and surround materials are classified in Clause and Clause .
Installation and Handling The bedding surround and backfill shall be installed so as to cause no damage to the pipes and fittings .
Installation of the pipe and fittings particularly procedures for preparation and execution of jointing operations shall be in accordance with the manufacturers instructions .
Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Drainage and Service Ducts Identification The Contractor shall maintain records with the following information for each separate consignment of structured wall pipe or fittings delivered to Site i system name ring stiffness gradenumber and size ii name and address of the system manufacturer iii consignment number and delivery date and iv a copy of the site delivery note .
Test Method for Longitudinal Bending i The test specimen shall be a six metre length of pipe or the maximum length available from the manufacturer if less than six metres .
ii The apparatus shall include a two level support blocks at least mm wide and of sufficient height to allow the pipe to sag over its length without touching the ground b a means of measuring the vertical distance between the pipe at the centre of the span and a fixed point of reference to an accuracy of .
mm .
iii The test procedure shall be as follows a condition the specimen for at least hour at C C b set the supports at a distance apart equal to the length of pipe minus mm c place the pipe symmetrically on the supports d measure the distance between the top of the supports and the fixed point of reference in the vertical axis through the centre line of the pipe e after a period of two minutes measure the distance between the underside of the pipe at mid span and the fixed point of reference f record the difference in readings as a percentage of pipe length .
Amendment November Test Method for Rodding Resistance Internal Puncture i The test specimens shall be a twenty specimens cut from the structured wall pipe each specimen to be mm to mm in length and a quarter section of the circumference or b twenty specimens cut from a number of identical fittings .
ii The apparatus shall include a a standard drop weight pipe testing apparatus capable of dropping a tup from a height of m b a g tup which can be varied in g multiples with a striker consisting a steel rod mm in diameter with a mm hemispherical end c a mm x mm box containing dry Leighton Buzzard sand Garside quarry such that there is at least mm of sand beneath the test specimen when bedded down .
iii Procedure shall be as follows a mark the intended point on the inside of the pipe on the intersection of the centre lines .
With profiled pipes the point of impact shall be at the point nearest the intersection that mid way between the ribs or in the middle of a hollow corrugation b alternatively mark the intended point of impact on the section of fitting c condition the test specimens in air at a temperature of C C for a period of at least one hour before the test d locate the box under the drop tube of the impact apparatus e embed the specimen into the sand using a vibrator with the inner surface exposed and facing upwards f locate the specimen such that the marked point of impact is under the centre line of the tup g drop the tup from a height of m on to the inner surface of the specimen within seconds of removing the specimen from the conditioning environment Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Drainage and Service Ducts h examine the specimen for damage .
Damage is defined as a puncture or crack of the inner layer .
Ductile bending or whitening is not considered to be damage i if the specimen exhibits no damage the next test shall be conducted with a tup of g greater mass .
If the specimen does exhibit damage the next test shall be conducted using a tup of g smaller mass j after having completed the strikes calculate the average of the energies where a pass no damage was recorded and the average of the energies where a failure damage was recorded then calculate the average of the two averages .
iv The test report shall include a identification of the samples b the overall average c whether or not the specimens were damaged .
Test Method for Resistance to Sharp Objects i Test specimens shall be three samples of duct each mm long .
ii The apparatus shall include a a compression testing machine b a . mm diameter steel rod with an hemispherical end c and a steel vee block at least mm long .
iii The test method shall be as follows a condition the test specimens for at least hour at C C b insert the steel rod in the jaws of the moveable platen of the compression testing machine so that the hemispherical end protrudes at least of the nominal pipe diameter c position the specimen in the vee block and place directly below the steel rod for twinwalled pipe the specimen shall be positioned firstly so that the rod strikes on the corrugation or rib and secondly in the valley where possible d set the machine to lower at a rate of mmmin e allow the rod to travel into the pipe a distance equal to of the nominal internal diameter of the pipe T mm or until the pipe wall is perforated .
When the outer skin of a twin wall pipe is perforated before is attained the rod travel up to the point of failure shall be recorded Tf mm and the rod allowed to travel to the inner wall .
The rod travel shall be continued to a total of ie T Tf or until complete penetration occurs .
iv For each test specimen pipe size reference maximum load and rod travel shall be recorded .
Notwithstanding the requirements of subClauses and of this Clause variations in the test methods specified therein shall be made where deemed necessary by the British Board of Agrment or equivalent following consultation with the manufacturer and in agreement with the Overseeing Organisation .
All such variations shall be recorded in the report .
Certification Pipes and fittings shall have a current British Board of Agrment Roads and Bridges Certificate or equivalent certifying the appropriate physical properties when tested in accordance with this Clause .
Concrete Bagwork ST concrete in compliance with Clause shall be used throughout .
The concrete filling to the bags shall have a low workability with a slump of mm .
The bags shall be hessian sand bags complying with BS .
The size of the bags shall be such that when filled the dimensions shall be mm x mm x mm .
The bags shall be placed in position and shaped to the profile shown on the Drawings by striking with a flat timber board until all faces are flat and all edges square .
The finished exposed faces of the bagwork shall not be punctured or torn and no tucked ends shall be visible .
Each concrete bag is to be spiked to the one below and the bottom row spiked to the foundation with mm x mm mild steel dowel bars .
Where the concrete bags have a concrete backing alternate rows of bags shall be spiked to the backing concrete with mm x mm mild steel dowel bars at degrees to the horizontal with one dowel per bag in the row .
Amendment November Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Drainage and Service Ducts Where bagwork forms a headwall headwall foundations are to be cast against the excavated face and any overdig filled with ST concrete .
Formed concrete surfaces shall be to Class F finish and unformed surfaces to Class U finish in accordance with Clause .
Where bagwork is provided to protect watercourses before placing the bags the banks shall be cut into horizontal steps to provide a suitable foundation and shall be covered in geotextile to the requirements of Clause .
The bottom course of bags shall be at least mm below the stream bed and all succeeding courses shall be horizontal and all vertical joints shall be staggered in alternate courses .
Headers shall be placed at every third bag in alternate courses .
The bagwork shall be thoroughly soaked with water upon completion of the construction to saturate the hessian bags .
The Cleaning of Existing Drainage Systems Where stated in Appendix the Contractor shall clean existing drainage systems in accordance with this Clause .
The Contractor shall take measures when clearing blocked drains to ensure that adjacent water courses or groundwater via soakaways will not be contaminated .
Contamination includes mud or soil being washed or flushed into streams as well as other more obvious contaminants including diesel fuel oil and chemicals .
Initial attempts to clear blocked drains prior to jetting shall be undertaken by hand rodding and any debris and silt removed by the operation shall be removed off Site .
The Contractor shall report any localised blockages that can not be cleared by rodding to the Overseeing Organisation .
Where jetting is required in Appendix the procedures stated in Clause shall be followed .
Cleaning of Gullies Catchpits Soakaways and Oil Separators At each chamber all mud and vegetation in the vicinity of the chamber likely to impede the flow of water shall be removed .
After lifting the cover or grating the chamber shall be cleansed of all water detritus debris and silt refilled with clean water to the outlet level and all covers and gratings replaced and evenly bedded .
Cleaning of chambers shall be by mechanical means .
The vehicle used to clean existing chambers shall be equipped with a mm dia gulley arm with boom jets an exhauster with a minimum output of .
cummin and minimum litres capacity .
Sediment detritus and liquor from the chamber shall not be permitted to discharge into the outlet .
This may be achieved either by plugging the outlet during cleaning or by simultaneous jetting and abstraction of liquor from the chamber using a tanker fitted with low pressure high volume water jets around the boom .
Gullies and chambers not cleaned for whatever reason blocked connections and broken or cracked covers gratings or frames shall be marked to aid subsequent identification .
Oil separators shall be refilled with uncontaminated water following the cleaning operation .
The Contractor shall dispose of all surplus water debris and arisings from the works off Site at a licensed tip .
Cleaning or Testing of Piped Drainage Systems and Subway Drainage Channels Routine cleaning or testing of piped drainage systems and subway drainage channels shall be carried out by rodding or low pressure high volume jetting in accordance with Clause .
The location of any obstruction that can not be removed by flushing shall be marked on the ground using a wooden peg or other semipermanent means and reported to the Overseeing Organisation using the Routine Maintenance Manual System RMMS referencing system in Part Chapter .. All covers which have been removed for cleaning operations shall be replaced and evenly bedded .
The Contractor shall report any damage and defects to the drainage system or components to the Overseeing Organisation each day or immediately if considered a safety hazard .
Cleaning Kerb or Channel Offlet Pipes Where necessary all vegetation and debris shall be removed from around metal kerb weirs and the cover lifted for cleaning .
Offlets shall be cleaned such that all silt and loose obstructions are removed from the pipe .
This shall be achieved by rodding or by using lorrymounted drain clearance equipment comprising combination pressure jetting with high air flow suction equipment .
The vehicle shall also be equipped with a hydraulically powered grid lifter .
The Contractor shall ensure that each end of the offlet is free from vegetation or other obstructions Amendment November Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Drainage and Service Ducts including any material expelled from the pipe .
Where the invert of the outlet is below the invert of the ditch the bottom of the ditch shall be excavated until the invert of the pipe is exposed and the ditch invert regraded to facilitate flow from the outlet .
The location of any obstruction that can not be removed shall be marked on the ground using a wooden peg or other semipermanent means and reported to the Overseeing Organisation .
All covers lifted for cleaning operations shall be replaced and evenly bedded .
Cleaning of Bridge Drainage Systems Cleaning of bridge bearing shelves subway sumps grit chambers and other bridge drainage systems shall be carried out by one of the following methods i vacuumair suction having the ability to remove materials from depths of up to .
m with a suction facility capable of displacing mmin of air at vacuum ii low pressure high volume jetting in accordance with Clause iii sweeping .
All adjacent surfaces of the structure shall be protected to prevent staining by arisings from the cleaning operation .
All arisings shall be taken off Site .
The Contractor shall report to the Overseeing Organisation any damage or defects to the bridge drainage system .
Low Pressure High Volume Jetting of Drainage Systems Where stated in Appendix the Contractor shall clean existing drainage systems in accordance with this Clause .
The drainage systems to be cleaned shall be as detailed in the Appendix .
The pipe material of the drainage systems to be cleaned shall be identified in Appendix .
Where the material is unknown and can not be verified by either visual inspection without recourse to manentry or from drainage records or damage to the pipeline is the suspected cause of a blockage cleaning shall proceed on the basis of use of the lowest pump pressure stated in Table .
Where the cleaning forms part of the precleansing works for the CCTV survey of drainage systems the works shall be detailed in Appendix see Model Contract Documents for CCTV Survey of Highway Drainage MCHW Amendment November Jetting of Piped Drainage Systems Cleaning shall take place from downstream of the blockage in an upstream direction .
The pipe shall be plugged below the jetting point to prevent contaminants flowing to the watercourse .
The cleaning shall take place from a chamber although it may be necessary to make a temporary excavation into the pipeline in some circumstances .
Should the Contractor find that it is not possible to jet in an upstream direction then the pipe shall be plugged below the blockage and the jetter then used to back jet to a suction hose .
TABLE Maximum Recommended Pump Pressures Material Maximum pump pressure barpsi Unknownstructurally damaged Brickmasonry Plastics Structural Wall Plastics Solid Wall Concrete Clay The Contractor shall select a jethead that is appropriate for delivering the maximum jetting pressure for the pipe material and also the minimum volume of water for the appropriate pipe diameter stated in Table .
The jet head shall be of a configuration such that the number and direction of jets are adequate to be directed to the sides and soffit of the pipeline to prevent debris passing over the top of the jetting head .
Table Minimum Jetting Flow Rates Pipe Diameter Minimum jetting flows mm lm mm lm mm lm mm lm The Contractor shall provide suitable jetting equipment that shall include the provision of the following i operation at a maximum rate of lmin at bar psi Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Drainage and Service Ducts ii liquid ring vacuum pump operating with air flows of m per hour with a working vacuum of not less than iii a minimum of m of mm diameter suction hose for cleaning pipes up to mm diameter and mm diameter suction hose for cleaning pipes of diameter greater than mm iv minimum of m of mm or mm diameter jetting hose and a capability of jetting up to m v automatic and continuous water recycling vi silt sand and rubble to be dewatered prior to discharge at licensed tip .
The Contractor shall ensure that no damage occurs to the manhole chamber or pipeline during insertion of the jetting equipment .
The jetting head shall be propelled through or over the blockage and then the hose pulled backwards enabling the force of the jet to break up the blockage material .
The minimum force necessary to penetrate the blockage shall be used but the pump pressures should not exceed those stated in Table .
The hose shall be rewound at a rate of between mm and mm per second .
There is a possibility that damage may occur to certain pipe materials should the jetting head remain stationary thus the Contractor must ensure that the jetting head never remains stationary for more than seconds .
Perforated pipes and porous concrete pipes commonly occur in piped highway drainage systems .
Where their presence is discovered during the course of the works the Overseeing Organisation shall be notified immediately and the cleaning operation suspended for that section of the works .
Cleaning of Linear Drainage Systems Where possible the Contractor shall clear blockages in linear drainage channels and combined kerb drainage units by rodding .
Where silt removal is necessitated the use of pressure jetting will result in the loss of pressure through the grating slot or drainage holes together with the escape of silt and debris unless the apertures can be temporarily covered .
The application of pressure shall be regulated such that there is only sufficient to drive the jetting head across the silt to access remote from the point of entry .
F Amendment May If necessary the jetting head shall be changed for one that can deliver the highest volume of water at low pressure .
The water pressure shall be sufficient to agitate the silt .
The nozzle shall be drawn back to the point of entry at a rate of between mm and mm per second .
Silt Removal Suitable measures such as stanks or stoppers shall be positioned downstream of the drainage system to be cleaned to minimise the risk of sediment causing contamination of watercourses or soakaways .
Wherever practical the Contractor shall use equipment to carry debris over a greater depth than one atmosphere and with a capability to suck liquid .
All arisings from the cleaning process shall be disposed of in an environmentally sensitive manner in accordance with current legislation .
Health and Safety The use of high pressure water can result in serious internal injuries that may not be apparent at the skin surface .
The Contractor shall ensure that all hoses are free from damage and that the equipment is in full working order .
Where overhead electric cables are present there is a potential danger from accidental strike by a jet of water .
Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Drainage and Service Ducts NI Gullies and Pipe Junctions Gullies shall be trapped untrapped or sumpless as described in Appendix and be in accordance with HCD Drawing Numbers F and F. All ST concrete referred to in this Clause shall comply with Clause unless otherwise described in Appendix .
Gullies shall be constructed so that no part of the spout or trap has a crosssectional area less than rd that of the outlet .
The depth of water seal in trapped gullies shall be not less than mm .
Precast concrete gullies shall comply with BS and clay gullies with BS EN .
In situ concrete gullies shall be as described in Appendix and constructed of ST concrete of mm minimum thickness using permanent or removable shuttering .
Where in situ concrete gullies are formed with permanent shuttering such shuttering shall have a current British Board of Agrment Roads and Bridges Certificate .
Precast rectangular section gullies shall be as described in Appendix .
Gully gratings kerb type gully covers and frames shall comply with BS EN and the following and shall be of the classes and sizes described in Appendix .
The upper surface of gully gratings shall be flat except where otherwise described in Appendix .
Slots in gratings or between gratings and frames shall not be orientated parallel to the direction of traffic except where the slots are less than mm long or less than mm wide .
Minimum waterway areas shall be as specified in Appendix .
Unless otherwise specified in Appendix all gratings and frames shall be supplied in a fine cast uncoated condition .
Where a coating is specified in Appendix the coating shall only be applied when the surfaces of the casting are clean free from rust and dry .
Gully gratings shall be laid parallel to and mm below the finished road surface .
Hinged gratings shall be orientated to close in the direction of traffic flow .
Frames shall be bedded on mortar complying with subClause .. Brickwork shall comply with subClause .. Backfilling to precast gullies shall be carried out up to subformation level with general fill material Class as described in Table compacted in compliance with Clause .
Where mechanical compaction is impracticable the backfilling shall be in NATIONAL ALTERATIONS OF THE OVERSEEING ORGANISATION OF NORTHERN IRELAND ST concrete .
The remainder of backfilling around gully shall be strength class C or ST concrete .
Gully connection pipes shall be either flexible or rigid not exceeding .
m in length with flexible joints for a distance of m from the gully and shall be in accordance with subClause .
when entering chambers .
Junction pipes shall be manufactured of the same type and class of material as the remainder of the pipes in the run .
Junction pipes which are laid but not immediately connected shall be fitted with temporary stoppers or seals and the position of all such junctions shall be clearly defined by means of stakes or tracing wires properly marked or labelled .
Saddles may be used to form junctions only where permitted in Appendix .
No internal projections greater than mm will be permitted .
Saddles for asbestos cement and plastics pipes shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
Saddles with clay pipes shall be jointed with mortar designation i complying with Clause excluding lime .
Saddles and pipes shall be surrounded with ST concrete .
Where the adjustment or replacement of existing frames and gratings is required the units shall be taken up and refixed or removed and replaced with new units complying with subClauses and of this Clause or as described in Appendix .
On taking up or removal of the unit any concrete or mortar bedding shall be broken out and the surface prepared .
Where existing frames and covers or gratings are to be adjusted the Contractor shall take up the unit and clean it for reuse .
The adjusted or replaced units shall be laid at a level unless otherwise described in Appendix mm below the adjoining road surface on a mortar bed complying with subClause ..
The finished thickness of the mortar bed shall be between mm and mm .
Where required in Appendix covers and gratings shall be bedded using a proprietary quick setting high strength mortar .
Details of such mortar shall be to the approval of the Overseeing Organisation .
Any additional adjustment shall be made by modifying the brickwork in compliance with subClause .
or by using a frame of suitable depth .
On completion of the works each grating shall be lifted and the frame and seating cleaned .
NF Amendment May MANUAL OF CONTRACT DOCUMENTS FOR HIGHWAY WORKS VOLUME SPECIFICATION FOR HIGHWAY WORKS Amendment February SERIES EARTHWORKS Contents Clause Title Page Classification Definitions and Uses of Earthworks Materials General Requirements Forming of Cuttings and Cutting Slopes Excavation for Foundations Special Requirements for Class Material Watercourses Explosives and Blasting for Excavation Construction of Fills Geotextiles and Geotextilerelated Products Used to Separate Earthworks Materials Fill to Structures Fill Above Structural Concrete Foundations Compaction of Fills Subformation and Capping Cement Stabilisation to Form Capping Lime Stabilisation to Form Capping Preparation and Surface Treatment of Formation Use of Subformation or Formation by Construction Plant Topsoiling Earthwork Environmental Bunds Landscape Areas Strengthened Embankments Earthworks for Reinforced Soil and Anchored Earth Structures Clause Title Page Earthworks for Corrugated Steel Buried Structures Ground Anchorages Crib Walling Gabions Swallow Holes and Other Naturally Occurring Cavities Disused Mine Workings Instrumentation and Monitoring Ground Improvement Earthworks Materials Tests Determination of Moisture Condition Value MCV of Earthworks Materials Determination of Undrained Shear Strength of Remoulded Cohesive Material Determination of Intact Lump Dry Density IDD of Chalk Los Angeles and Other Tests for Particle Soundness Determination of Effective Angle of Internal Friction j and Effective Cohesion c of Earthworks Materials Determination of Resistivity rs to Assess Corrosivity of Soil Rock or Earthworks Materials Determination of Redox Potential Eh to Assess Corrosivity of Earthworks Materials for Reinforced Soil and Anchored Earth Structures Determination of Coefficient of Friction and Adhesion Between Fill and Reinforcing Elements or Anchor Elements for Reinforced Soil and Anchored Earth Structures MANUAL OF CONTRACT DOCUMENTS FOR HIGHWAY WORKS VOLUME SPECIFICATION FOR HIGHWAY WORKS Amendment February Clause Title Page Determination of Permeability of Earthworks Materials Determination of Available Lime Content of Lime for Lime Stabilised Capping Determination of the Constrained Soil Modulus M of Earthworks Materials for Corrugated Steel Buried Structures Lime and Cement Stabilisation to Form Capping Determination of Sulfate Content Tables to NATIONAL ALTERATIONS OF THE OVERSEEING ORGANISATIONS OF SCOTLAND WALES AND NORTHERN IRELAND Scotland Clause Title Page TS Classification Definitions and Uses of Earthworks Materials S TS Determination of Moisture Condition Value MCV of Earthworks Materials in Scotland SF Wales W Classification Definitions and Uses of Earthworks Materials W Northern Ireland NI Classification Definitions and Uses of Earthworks Materials N NI Explosives and Blasting for Excavation N denotes a Clause or Sample Contract Specific Appendix which has a substitute National Clause or Sample Contract Specific Appendix for one or more of the Overseeing Organisations of Scotland Wales or Northern Ireland .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Earthworks Amendment February EARTHWORKS Classification Definitions and Uses of Earthworks Materials General This Series is part of the Specification for Highway Works .
Whilst this Series is particularly relevant to the subject matter in its title it must be read in conjunction with the general requirements in Series and and with all other Series relevant to the specification for the particular works to be undertaken .
General Classification Earthworks materials shall fall into one or other of the following general classifications i acceptable material material excavated from within the site or imported on to the site which meets the requirements of Table and contract specific Appendix for acceptability for use in the permanent works ii unacceptable material Class UA as defined in subClauses ia and ib of this Clause material excavated from within the site which unless processed so that it meets the requirements of Table and contract specific Appendix shall not be used in the permanent works iii unacceptable material Class UB as defined in subClause iia of this Clause material excavated from within the site which unless processed so that it meets the requirements of Table and contract specific Appendix shall not be used in the permanent works and iv unacceptable material Class U as defined in subClause i of this Clause material excavated from within the site which shall not be used in the permanent works .
Unacceptable Materials Unacceptable material Classes UA and UB i unacceptable material Class UA shall be a material which does not comply with the permitted constituents and material properties of Table and contract specific Appendix for acceptable material and b material or constituents of materials composed of the following unless otherwise described in contract specific Appendix peat materials from swamps marshes and bogs logs stumps and perishable material materials in a frozen condition clay having a liquid limit determined in accordance with BS Part exceeding or plasticity index determined in accordance with BS Part exceeding material susceptible to spontaneous combustion except unburnt colliery spoil complying with subClause of this Clause ii unacceptable material Class UB shall be a contaminated materials including controlled wastes as defined in the Environmental Protection Act Part IIA whose level of contamination is above that given either in contract specific Appendix or in contract specific Appendix but excluding all hazardous wastes as defined in the Hazardous Waste England and Wales Regulations and radioactive wastes as defined in the Radioactive Substances Act .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Earthworks Amendment February Unacceptable material Class U shall be i hazardous waste as defined in the Hazardous Waste England and Wales Regulations and radioactive waste as defined in the Radioactive Substances Act .
Where required in contract specific Appendix unacceptable material other than Class U shall be processed by mechanical chemical or other means to render the material acceptable for use in the permanent works in accordance with the requirements of Table and contract specific Appendix .
Definitions Where source codes are referred to these shall be for materials from the sources listed in Table .
Chalk shall mean i any porous material of natural origin composed essentially of calcium carbonate and identified as chalk on the maps produced by the British Geological Survey ii material designated as Class in contract specific Appendix .
Argillaceous rock shall mean shales mudstones siltstones slates and micaceous schists composed of particles of clay and silt and mica .
It shall include unburnt colliery spoil .
Where argillaceous rock is imported onto the site it shall be aggregate complying with BS EN from source codes P natural aggregates described as shale siltstone or slate or G refuse from hard coal mining black coal shale .
Pulverisedfuel ash shall mean solid material extracted by electrostatic and mechanical means from the flue gases of furnaces fired with pulverised bituminous coal .
It shall have a maximum particle size of mm .
Where pulverisedfuel ash is imported onto the site it shall be aggregate complying with BS EN from source code C coal fly ash .
Furnace bottom ash shall mean agglomerated pulverisedfuel ash obtained from the bottom of the power station furnace and having particle size no larger than mm .
Where furnace bottom ash is imported onto the site it shall be aggregate complying with BS EN from source code C coal bottom ash .
Formation shall be the top surface of capping .
Where no capping is required formation shall be the top surface of earthworks at the underside of subbase unless otherwise shown on the drawings .
Subformation shall be the top surface of earthworks at the underside of capping .
Stabilisation shall mean the spreading of cement or lime or both on a layer of deposited or intact granular or cohesive material and the subsequent process of pulverising and mixing followed by appropriate compaction to form the whole or a constituent layer of a capping .
Where recycled aggregate is used in this Series the material shall be aggregate resulting from the processing of inorganic or mineral material previously used in construction and shall have been tested in accordance with Clause .
It shall not contain more than other materials Class X not more than in Class Ra bituminous materials and not more than in Class Rg crushed glass .
Where recycled aggregate is imported onto the site it shall be aggregate complying with BS EN from source code A construction and demolition recycling industries .
Where recycled aggregate except recycled asphalt is used in this Series the aggregate shall have been tested in accordance with Clause .
It shall not contain more than other materials Class X not more than in Class Ra bituminous materials and not more than in Class Rg crushed glass .
Where recycled aggregate except recycled asphalt is imported onto the site it shall be aggregate complying with BS EN from source codes A crushed concrete andor A crushed bricks masonry .
As dug shall mean material that has been excavated transported and placed without any processing .
Where imported material undergoes any processing including cleaning and sorting it will not be deemed as dug and thus shall be aggregate complying with BS EN .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Earthworks Amendment February Use of Fill Materials In addition to any grading requirements the maximum particle size of any fill material shall be no more than twothirds of the compacted layer thickness except that cobbles having an equivalent diameter of more than mm shall not be deposited beneath verges or central reserves within .
m of the finished surface .
Materials placed within mm or any other distances described in the contract specific Appendix of concrete cement bound materials other cementitious mixtures or stabilised capping forming part of the permanent works shall conform to as appropriate the following requirements i Materials shall conform to the following criteria a Watersoluble sulfate WS content determined in accordance with BS EN clause shall not exceed mg of sulfate as S per litre b Total sulfur TS content determined in accordance with BS EN clause expressed as S shall not exceed for aggregates other than air cooled blast furnace slag or for air cooled blast furnace slag .
ii Materials shall conform to at least one of the following options a When described in accordance with BS EN and BS EN Annex A limestone chalk dolomite blast furnace slag steel slag or crushed concrete are predominant or b The sulfide content of the material determined in accordance with BS EN Clause is less than .
as S. When determining WS TS or sulfide content at least five samples of each material shall be tested .
The mean of the highest two values shall be used for comparison with the limiting values .
This shall also apply if six to nine results are available .
If ten or more results are available the mean of the highest of the results shall be used for comparison with the limiting values .
Material placed within mm or any other distances described in the contract specific Appendix of metallic structural elements forming part of the permanent works shall conform as appropriate to the following requirements i Materials shall conform to the following criteria a Watersoluble sulfate WS content determined in accordance with BS EN clause shall not exceed mg of sulfate as S per litre and b Total sulfur TS content determined in accordance with BS EN clause expressed as S shall not exceed for aggregates other than air cooled blast furnace slag or for air cooled blast furnace slag .
ii Materials shall conform to at least one of the following options a When described in accordance with BS EN and BS EN Annex A limestone chalk dolomite blast furnace slag steel slag or crushed concrete are predominant or b The sulfide content of the material determined in accordance with BS EN Clause is less than .
as S. When determining WS TS or sulfide content at least five samples of each material shall be tested .
The mean of the highest two values shall be used for comparison with the limiting values .
This shall also apply if six to nine results are available .
If ten or more results are available the mean of the highest of the results shall be used for comparison with the limiting values .
The requirements in i and ii above shall not apply to metallic items protected by concrete or ancillary metallic items such as the tops of chambers and gullies .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Earthworks Amendment February Unburnt colliery spoil may be used as general fill provided it is compacted in compliance with Clause and complies with the requirements of contract specific Appendix .
Pulverisedfuel ash shall not be placed within the dimension described in contract specific Appendix below subformation or formation .
Where pulverisedfuel ash is used the Contractor shall for each consignment make available to the Overseeing Organisation a record of the type and source from which it was obtained and a certificate of results of tests showing that the material complies with the requirements of Table .
General Requirements The Contractor shall employ only plant and working methods which are suited to the materials to be handled and traversed .
He shall be responsible for maintaining the nature of the acceptable material so that when it is placed and compacted it remains acceptable in accordance with the contract .
Acceptability shall be determined in accordance with Table and any special contract specific requirements in Appendix .
Haulage of material to embankments or other areas of fill shall proceed only when sufficient spreading and compaction plant is operating at the place of deposition to ensure compliance with Clause .
No excavated acceptable material or unacceptable material required to be processed other than surplus to the requirements of the contract shall be removed from the site unless indicated otherwise in contract specific Appendix .
Material which is unacceptable only by reason of being frozen shall be retained on site when in that condition .
Where the Contractor is permitted to remove acceptable material or unacceptable material required to be processed from the site to suit his operational procedure then he shall make good any consequent deficit of material arising therefrom .
Environmental requirements for processing of Class UB material in terms of limiting values of contaminants or other requirements shall be set out in contract specific Appendix in the earthworks Class for which the processed material is to be used .
If any acceptable material or unacceptable material required to be processed is where permitted by contract specific Appendix used by the Contractor for purposes other than for general fill sufficient acceptable fill material to occupy after full compaction a volume corresponding to that which the excavated material occupied shall be provided by the Contractor .
Acceptable material other than Class A or any Class B material replacing Class A material in accordance with subClause of this Clause surplus to the total requirements of the permanent works and all unacceptable material Class UA not required to be processed shall unless indicated otherwise in contract specific Appendix be run to spoil in tips provided by the Contractor .
In the case of unacceptable material Class UB and Class U the Contractor shall comply with any specific requirements for disposal described in contract specific Appendix .
Where the excavation reveals a combination of acceptable and unacceptable materials the Contractor shall unless indicated otherwise in contract specific Appendix carry out the excavation in such a manner that the acceptable materials are excavated separately for use in the permanent works without contamination by the unacceptable materials .
Unless otherwise described in the contract classes of fill material required to be deposited separately shall be excavated separately without contamination by other Classes of material .
The Contractor shall make his own arrangements for stockpiling of acceptable material and unacceptable material to be processed and for the provision of sites for the purpose .
The Contractor shall ensure that he does not adversely affect the stability of excavations or fills by his methods of stockpiling materials use of plant or siting of temporary buildings or structures .
Existing topsoil material shall except where it is to be left in place in the locations described in contract specific Appendix be stripped to depths as described in contract specific Appendix for Class A material from all areas of cutting and from all areas to be covered by embankment or by other areas of fill .
Where stated in contract specific Appendix existing topsoil shall be stripped as turf in accordance with sub Clause .. Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Earthworks Amendment February Topsoil shall wherever practicable be used immediately after its stripping and if not shall be stored in stockpiles of heights not exceeding m or other heights stated in contract specific Appendix .
Unless otherwise stated in contract specific Appendix topsoil shall not be stockpiled for more than two years .
Topsoil shall not be unnecessarily trafficked either before stripping or when in a stockpile .
Stockpiles shall not be surcharged or otherwise loaded and multiple handling shall be kept to a minimum .
All Class A topsoil arising from the site or any Class B material replacing Class A material in accordance with subClause of this Clause in excess of the requirements for topsoiling shall be subject to the requirements described in contract specific Appendix .
Excavations for foundations and trenches shall be adequately supported at all times and except where otherwise described in contract specific Appendix shall not be battered .
Where excavations are permitted to be battered they shall be benched as described in contract specific Appendix prior to backfilling and compaction .
The additional work and materials shall be provided by the Contractor .
Sheeting and other excavation supports shall be removed as filling proceeds except where they are required in contract specific Appendix to be left in position .
Excavations requiring backfilling shall remain open only for the minimum period necessary .
Excavations requiring backfilling in existing paved or other surfaces including those paved areas to be reconstructed or repaired shall be carried out and reinstated in compliance with Clause .
The Contractor shall keep earthworks free of water including i arranging for the rapid removal of water a shed on to the earthworks b entering the earthworks from any source ii lowering and maintaining by appropriate measures the water level in excavations sufficiently to enable the permanent works to be constructed .
In carrying out the requirements of subClause of this Clause the Contractor shall i form and maintain cuttings embankments and other areas of fill with appropriate falls and gradient and sealed surfaces ii provide where necessary temporary watercourses drains pumping and the like iii discharge accumulated water and groundwater into the permanent outfalls of the drainage system where practicable iv provide adequate means for trapping silt on temporary systems discharging into permanent drainage systems .
The Contractor shall carry out and maintain any groundwater lowering or other treatment required in contract specific Appendix .
Where materials are designated in the contract as either Class UB or Class U the Contractor shall carry out any special requirements for their handling described in contract specific Appendix .
Where such materials are encountered during the progress of the works the Contractor shall make all necessary arrangements for their safe handling and disposal after consultation with the appropriate environmental authority .
Subject to the surface level tolerances given in Clause and subClause .
material shall not be frost susceptible if it is used within mm of the designed final surface of a road or paved central reserve or mm if the annual frost index of the site is less than .
Material shall be classified as nonfrostsusceptible if the mean heave is mm or less when tested in accordance with BS Part or BS Part for lime stabilised capping amended as given in subClause .. Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Earthworks Amendment February Forming of Cuttings and Cutting Slopes Cuttings shall be excavated to the lines and levels described in contract specific Appendix .
Cutting slopes or toes of cuttings shall only be undercut when required in the contract for trench or other excavations .
Such excavations shall be restricted in extent as described in contract specific Appendix and where they require backfilling shall remain open only for the minimum period necessary so as to prevent risk to the permanent works .
Except where otherwise described in contract specific Appendix the excavation of cuttings may be halted at any stage providing at least mm of material as a weather protection is left in place above the formation or above the subformation subject to the requirements of Clauses and .
Where presplit blasting is required or permitted in contract specific Appendix it shall comply with Clause and any other requirements in contract specific Appendix .
Full details of the methods and arrangements to be adopted shall be made available to the Overseeing Organisation before commencement of drilling operations .
Final faces of cuttings which are not to receive topsoil shall i wherever possible be left without scars or damage from construction plant and ii to achieve a natural appearance when the stratum permits and when presplit blasting is not adopted have the face left irregular within tolerances given in contract specific Appendix and iii have boulders or other rock fragments that can be moved by hand without tools removed and iv where required in contract specific Appendix have material that can be blown away by airline hose having pressures no greater than those stated therein so removed and v have adequate access to enable inspection to be carried out to determine the extent of work required by this subClause .
Where required in contract specific Appendix faces of cuttings which are not required to receive topsoil shall have one or more of the following measures carried out as appropriate i Isolated patches of soft fragmented and insecure material shall each be excavated to a depth of at least mm unless other depths are stated in contract specific Appendix and replaced as soon as practicable with ST concrete to Clause well rammed into the cleaned out void .
ii Areas of cutting face requiring their surface to be made stable shall be trimmed back by a nominal mm or other amount required in contract specific Appendix and the resulting surface together with an area of any surrounding intact material as detailed in contract specific Appendix shall have a suitable cement based grout or sprayed concrete applied by pressure to form a total nominal thickness of mm unless the required thickness is stated in contract specific Appendix .
Where required in contract specific Appendix reinforcement shall be fixed to the surface before application of the concrete or grout .
Weep holes using permanent formers shall be constructed to the requirements of contract specific Appendix and at the locations described in contract specific Appendix .
iii Soft or insecure material interlayered with rock shall be excavated to the depth behind the face described in contract specific Appendix .
The resulting cavity shall be filled with ST concrete to Clause or with masonry infill complying with the Series and provided with weep holes all in accordance with requirements in contract specific Appendix .
iv Netting or other sheet covering as described in contract specific Appendix or rock bolts as described in contract specific Appendix .
Where required in contract specific Appendix faces of cuttings which are to receive topsoil shall have one or more of the following measures carried out as appropriate i Be benched to retain topsoil as described in contract specific Appendix .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Earthworks Amendment February ii Be harrowed to a depth of mm .
Such harrowing shall be carried out immediately prior to topsoiling diagonally at an angle between  to  to the line of the toe measured on the plane of the slope .
iii Isolated patches of soft fragmented or insecure material shall be excavated and either a filled by well ramming in a Class of fill with similar characteristics as the surrounding intact material or b excavated and dealt with as described in subClause i of this Clause .
iv Other areas required to be made stable shall be dealt with as stated in contract specific Appendix .
The concrete referred to in subClauses i and iii of this Clause permanently exposed on the face of the cutting shall have surface features as nearly as possible matching those of the adjacent intact face .
Such concrete and the grout referred to in subClause ii of this Clause shall have a consistent colour as nearly as possible matching that of the adjacent intact face .
Excavation for Foundations The bottom of all foundation excavations shall be formed to the lines and levels shown on the drawings .
Pockets of soft soil or loose rock shall be removed and the resulting voids and any natural voids shall be filled with ST concrete to Clause or other material as required by contract specific Appendix except in excavations for corrugated steel buried structures when Class K lower bedding fill material complying with Table shall be used .
After placing of any blinding concrete shown on the drawings no trimming of the side faces of the excavation shall be carried out for hours .
The Contractor shall make good i any lateral overbreak of the excavation above the bottom of the foundation greater than the net volume required for the permanent works with material of the same Class as used for fill above structural concrete foundations to comply with Clause except that for corrugated steel buried structures Class K lower bedding material shall be used or where the excavation is too narrow to allow the compaction of earthworks materials with ST concrete to Clause ii any additional excavation at or below the bottom of foundations including that resulting from removal of material which the Contractor has allowed to deteriorate with ST concrete to Clause or other material required by contract specific Appendix except that under corrugated steel buried structures Class K lower bedding material shall be used .
Class K lower bedding material referred to in this Clause shall be deposited and compacted in compliance with Clauses and and Table .
Special Requirements for Class Material When contract specific Appendix designates a material as Class to be used or to remain intact in the permanent works the following shall apply i No earthworks involving Class material or trafficking of areas which consist of Class material unless they are protected shall be carried out during the periods described in contract specific Appendix .
ii Excavation of Class material shall be by means of a face shovel which shall excavate swing and unload without moving the chassis or undercarriage during one operating cycle or by means of a similar shovelloading machine so as to reduce the degradation of the material to a minimum .
iii When excavating Class material the Contractor shall arrange his method of working so as to maintain a working face of minimum height m or other height required in contract specific Appendix Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Earthworks Amendment February within Class material except that where the depth of the cutting is less than m the full height of Class material shall form the working face excluding any protection required to the formation or sub formation .
iv Material other than chalk contained within the volume designated as Class material in the contract shall be excavated and deposited separately from chalk and not be mixed with it .
v Trafficking of areas of Class material shall not be permitted by vehicles having a capacity when struck of more than m unless otherwise described in contract specific Appendix .
vi Class material shall not be stockpiled or be subjected to multiple handling .
vii Class material shall not unless required in contract specific Appendix be layered with other fill material in the construction of embankments and other areas of fill .
viii When required in contract specific Appendix embankments and other areas of fill constructed of Class material shall either a upon reaching a level mm below subformation or where there is no capping a level mm below formation be left for a minimum of weeks or other period stated in contract specific Appendix before continuing filling which shall in all cases be continued in compliance with subClause .
or b be continued above subformation or formation with a protective layer in accordance with subClause .ii but which shall be of Class material .
Such material shall then be left for a minimum of weeks or other period stated in contract specific Appendix before removal of the protective layer and shall be immediately continued with the preparation of subformation or formation as appropriate in accordance with Clauses and .
ix Where temporary instability occurs in chalk during deposition or compaction due to excessive working by plant or to inclement weather the Contractor shall delay the further deposition of Class material until the chalk has recovered sufficient strength for work to proceed .
A detailed record of the areas of instability shall be made available to the Overseeing Organisation .
x At the end of each working day of filling exposed Class material laid that day shall unless otherwise stated in contract specific Appendix be rolled with two passes of a smooth wheeled roller having a mass per metre width of roll exceeding kg .
xi The other special requirements for Class material described in subClauses .i .i .ii and .
shall also apply together with any other special requirements described in contract specific Appendix or contract specific Appendix .
Watercourses The clearance and modification of existing or the construction of new watercourses including ditches streams rivers lagoons and ponds shall be as described in contract specific Appendix including any protection lining revetment or other works and shall comply with subClauses to of this Clause .
Clearance of existing watercourses shall include the removal of vegetation vegetable matter and all other deposits within the watercourse profile .
Materials resulting from this clearance shall be dealt with as unacceptable material .
New watercourses and cleared existing watercourses shall be maintained in a clear condition .
Redundant watercourses shall where required in contract specific Appendix be drained and cleared in accordance with subClause of this Clause and material outside the watercourse profile excavated and dealt with as unacceptable material .
The excavations shall be to the dimensions stated in the contract and the whole filled with general or selected fills of the Class described in contract specific Appendix complying with Table Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Earthworks Amendment February deposited and compacted in compliance with Clause and .
Where the surface is to remain exposed it shall be topsoiled and seeded or receive other treatment all as described in contract specific Appendix .
Explosives and Blasting for Excavation Blasting for excavation shall not be employed unless permitted or required in contract specific Appendix and such blasting shall be confined to the locations and to within the time limits stated therein .
The Contractor shall i not carry out plaster shooting ii for each location where blasting is to be undertaken give written notice to the Overseeing Organisation of the programme of blasting including trial explosions at least days before it commences and give written notice of each blasting event as described in v below at least hours beforehand iii carry out trial explosions starting with reduced quantities of explosive in order to determine the size of the actual explosive charges and their disposition for use in the main blasting operations so as not to exceed the values for vibrational amplitude and vibrational peak particle velocity stated in vi below at the positions described therein iv determine danger zones likely to be created by the blasting operations including trial explosions within which blasted material may be projected and utilise suitable arrangements including temporary works to retain such projectiles and ensure that no injury or damage is caused to persons or property thereby v limit blasting to a small number of events during permitted hours per day where an event shall comprise a single explosion or a group of explosions each separated by a short time interval the group lasting less than a minute vi ensure that a structures and earthworks existing or under construction on and off the site do not experience during blasting operations including trial explosions a vibrational amplitude exceeding .
mm and a resultant peak particle velocity exceeding mm per second or other limits stated in contract specific Appendix at the same time or individually and b peak overpressures of magnitude such as to endanger windows and glazed areas of structures do not occur .
vii where instrumentation and monitoring is appropriate a rigidly fix to structures and insert in earthworks described in via above suitable instruments to measure the vibrational amplitude and resultant vibrational peak particle velocity and peak overpressures experienced during blasting operations including trial explosions b make available details of the proposed instrumentation within the site c unless otherwise stipulated in contract specific Appendix make his own arrangements for installing instruments on property off the site including negotiating with landowners and other interested parties d read such instruments and take measurements throughout the period of blasting operations including trial explosions e for instruments on structures or earthworks on the site and where required in contract specific Appendix on property off the site make available the results to the Overseeing Organisation at the end of each days blasting .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Earthworks Amendment February viii take measurements of vibrational amplitude and peak particle velocity in each of three mutually perpendicular planes and determine the peak value taken as the maximum resultant calculated by vector summation of the three components of amplitude and velocity respectively measured as instantaneously as the resolution of the recording instrument permits ix ensure that noise from blasting operations is controlled in accordance with Clause x use explosives in the quantities and in the manner recommended by the manufacturer xi store explosives in registered premises in a licensed store or magazine provided with a separate compartment for detonators or use them under an Immediate Use Certificate issued by the police xii only permit explosives to be used or handled by or under the immediate control of a competent person in accordance with the Construction General Provisions Regulations Regulation and subsequent amending Regulations xiii ensure there is no unauthorised issue or improper use of explosives brought on the site and maintain a strict check on quantities issued and consumed xiv comply with the requirements of BS in respect of the use of electrical detonators in the vicinity of static and mobile radio transmitters including normal radio and television broadcasting stations and radar units associated with aircraft movements electricity generating plant and transmission lines .
Construction of Fills All fills including embankments shall be constructed i in the locations described in contract specific Appendix to the lines and levels stated therein ii of Classes of materials required or permitted in contract specific Appendix complying with Table with unless otherwise described in the contract only Class A material deposited into open water iii by depositing as soon as practicable after excavation in layers to meet the compaction requirements of Clause as required for each Class of material in Table except that a material requiring end product compaction shall be deposited in layers not exceeding mm uncompacted thickness b material placed into open water shall be deposited by end tipping without compaction c material deposited in areas to receive dynamic compaction complying with Clause shall be deposited and compacted to the requirements therein .
iv to the requirements of this Clause and any other requirements for fill in this Series .
Starter layers of Classes B C or D materials as described in contract specific Appendix shall be deposited as the first layer or layers of fill above existing ground level or if appropriate above any ground improvement required by contract specific Appendix .
Starter layers below Class E pulverisedfuel ash general fill shall be Class D material .
Plant movement across starter layer material shall be restricted to that plant which is necessary for its deposition spreading and compaction in compliance with this Clause and Clause and any plant required to carry out any ground improvement beneath it if required by Clause .
The Contractor shall take all reasonable measures to prevent damage to the underlying strata which may include use of lighter spreading plant or a reduction of the number of passes of compaction plant .
Coarse granular material Classes C and B shall before compaction be spread in layers by a crawler tractor of not less than tonnes total mass .
After compaction each layer shall if voids remain be blinded with an approved Class of granular material complying with Table so that all surface voids are filled before the next layer and before any capping or subbase is constructed .
Embankments and other areas of fill shall unless otherwise required in the contract be constructed evenly over their full width and their fullest possible extent and the Contractor shall control and direct Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Earthworks Amendment February constructional plant and other vehicular traffic uniformly over them .
Damage by constructional plant and other vehicular traffic shall be made good by the Contractor with material having the same characteristics and strength as the material had before it was damaged .
Embankments and other areas of unsupported fills shall not be constructed with steeper side slopes or to greater widths than those described in contract specific Appendix except to permit adequate compaction at the edges before trimming back or to obtain the final profile following any settlement of the fill and the underlying material .
However any oversteepening or increase in width shall not exceed any limits described in contract specific Appendix and shall remain only for the minimum periods necessary consistent with the safety of the permanent works .
Staged construction of fills and any controlled rates of filling shall be carried out in accordance with any requirements described in contract specific Appendix including installation of instrumentation and its monitoring in compliance with Clause .
Where required in contract specific Appendix the Contractor shall surcharge embankments or other areas of fill as described therein for the periods stated .
If settlement of surcharged fill results in any surcharging material which is unacceptable for use in the fill being surcharged lying below the formation or where there is a capping the sub formation the Contractor shall remove this unacceptable material and dispose of it in accordance with Clause .
He shall then bring the resultant level up to formation or subformation as appropriate with acceptable material .
Where pipes in embankments or in other areas of fill are permitted in contract specific Appendix to be constructed other than in a trench the fill shall be brought up to and over them equally on both sides .
The fill shall be deposited in even layers and shall not be heaped above the pipe .
Spreading and compaction shall be carried out evenly without dislodging distorting or damaging the pipe .
Power rammers are not to be used within mm of any part of the pipe or joint .
The last mm depth of fill up to subformation level or formation level as appropriate shall unless otherwise required in the Contract be carried out for the full width of embankments or between the outer extremities of the verges in other areas of fill in a continuous operation .
The Contractor shall then continue without delay to carry out either i or ii below i form the subformation or formation all in accordance with Clauses and following immediately either by a the construction of the full thickness of capping or subbase as appropriate or b if permitted in contract specific Appendix the construction of a lesser thickness of capping or subbase as described therein laid as a weather protection layer ii place an additional mm minimum compacted thickness of material above subformation level or formation level as appropriate for the full width of the filling to form a weather protection .
This weather protection shall be composed of the same material as the subformation or formation and compacted in compliance with Table .
The material shall be provided from the Contractors own resources and the protection layer shall be constructed in a continuous operation .
For stabilised capping the protective layer shall consist of unstabilised material .
During construction of embankments and other fills exposed sides of Classes E and B pulverisedfuel ash material shall be protected against scour and erosion from any source .
Completed slopes of Classes E and B fill material shall be covered immediately by Class topsoil as required in contract specific Appendix or turf or other material as required in contract specific Appendix .
Whenever fill is to be deposited against the face of a natural slope or sloping earthworks face including embankments cuttings other fills and excavations such faces shall be benched or otherwise shaped as required in contract specific Appendix immediately before placing the subsequent fill .
All permanent faces of side slopes of embankments and other areas of fill formed in Classes or cohesive materials other than pulverisedfuel ash shall subsequent to any trimming operations be reworked and sealed by tracking a tracked vehicle suitable for the purpose on the slope or by other suitable methods .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Earthworks Amendment February Geotextiles and Geotextilerelated Products Used to Separate Earthworks Materials Geotextiles and geotextilerelated products shall conform to the requirements of the product standard BS EN and other characteristics and locations as set out in contract specific Appendix .
A Declaration of Performance for each product stating compliance with BS EN and the required levels of performance stated in contract specific Appendix shall be submitted to the Overseeing Organisation prior to their placement in the works .
Fill to Structures This Clause shall apply to fill to structures other than i fill for reinforced earth structures including associated drainage layers ii fill for anchored earth structures including associated drainage layers iii fill for surround and bedding of corrugated steel buried structures iv fill above structural concrete foundations unless otherwise required in contract specific Appendix .
Materials as required or permitted in contract specific Appendix of Classes N P A or B and complying with Table shall be used as fill to structures in the locations described in contract specific Appendix .
The Contractor shall compact in compliance with Clause endproduct compaction Class N P A and B material to satisfy the compaction requirements for those Classes as listed in Table but subject to the restrictions in subClauses and of this Clause .
Where fill to structures is required to the same level on more than one side of a structural element or buried structure except where Clause applies it shall be maintained at heights not differing by more than mm after compaction on opposing sides of the structural element as filling proceeds .
The Contractor shall restrict compaction plant used on fill to structures within m of a structure to the following items as described in subClause .
and listed in Table i vibratory roller having a mass per metre width of roll as determined by subClause .
not exceeding kg with a total mass not exceeding kg ii vibrating plate compactor having a mass not exceeding kg iii vibrotamper having a mass not exceeding kg .
The compacted level of the fill within this zone shall not differ during construction from the compacted level of the remainder of the adjoining fill to structures by more than mm .
Where required in contract specific Appendix Class N P and B material shall be shown by means of a trial utilising not less than m of the material deposited and compacted in accordance with this Clause to be stable when it is trimmed to a slope of vertical to  horizontal or other slope described in contract specific Appendix .
Fill Above Structural Concrete Foundations Fill deposited above structural concrete foundations shall be as shown on the drawings i Class N P A or B selected fill material complying with Clause including compaction requirements ii Class M selected fill material deposited and compacted in accordance with Clause above the foundation of arch profile corrugated steel buried structures iii another class of selected fill or general fill complying with Table deposited and compacted in compliance with Clauses and and in addition be subject to subClauses .
and .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Earthworks Amendment February Compaction of Fills General Except for dynamic compaction which shall comply with Clause and unless otherwise described in contract specific Appendix the Contractor shall carry out compaction in compliance with this Clause as soon as practicable after deposition on all those Classes of fill in Table which require to be compacted .
Compaction shall be either method or endproduct as required for the Class of fill in Table using plant appropriate to the Class of fill and the site conditions .
The Contractor shall obtain permission from the Overseeing Organisation before carrying out compaction outside normal working hours .
Method Compaction Where method compaction is required to be adopted it shall comply with subClauses to of this Clause .
Except as stated in subClause of this Clause method compaction shall be undertaken using the plant and methods in Table appropriate to the compaction requirements as listed in Table for the Class of material being compacted .
Plant and methods not included in Table shall only be used providing the Contractor demonstrates at site trials that a state of compaction is achieved by the alternative method equivalent to that obtained using the specified method .
Earthmoving plant shall not be accepted as compaction equipment nor shall the use of a lighter category of plant to provide any preliminary compaction to assist the use of heavier plant be taken into account when assessing the amount of compaction required for any layer .
If more than one Class of material is being used in such a way that it is not practicable to define the areas in which each Class occurs the Contractor shall compact with plant operating as if only the material which requires the greater compactive effort is being compacted .
The Contractor or Overseeing Organisation may carry out field dry density tests as described in subClause of this Clause on material compacted to method requirements at a frequency defined in contract specific Appendix .
If the results of field tests show densities which indicate the state of compaction to be inadequate then if this is due to failure of the Contractor to comply with the requirements of the contract the Contractor shall carry out such further work as is required to comply with the contract .
For the purposes of Table the following shall apply i The minimum number of passes N is the minimum number of times that each point on the surface of the layer being compacted shall be traversed by the item of compaction plant in its operating mode or struck by power rammers or falling weight compactors .
D is the maximum depth of the compacted layer .
ii In column headed N the number of passes shown is to be doubled for material Classes A B A B C and D when such materials occur within mm of subformation if capping is required or formation .
Such extra compaction shall unless otherwise described in contract specific Appendix either be carried out for the full width of the embankment or in other areas of fill which are to receive a pavement between the outer extremities of the verges .
iii The compaction plant in Table is categorised in terms of static mass .
The mass per metre width of roll is the total mass on the roll divided by the total roll width .
Where a smooth wheeled roller has more than one axle the category of the machine shall be determined on the basis of the axle giving the highest value of mass per metre width .
iv A grid roller is a machine with a compacting roll or rolls constructed of heavy steel mesh of square pattern .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Earthworks Amendment February v A deadweight tamping roller is a machine with a roll or rolls from which feet project and where the projected end area of each foot exceeds .
m and the sum of the areas of the feet exceeds of the area of the cylinder swept by the ends of the feet .
The requirements for tamping rollers apply to machines that have rolls in tandem .
If only one tamping roll traverses each point on the surface of the layer on any one pass of the machine the minimum number of passes shall be twice the number given in Table plus any further doubling required to satisfy ii above .
vi For pneumatictyred rollers the mass per wheel is the total mass of the roller divided by the number of wheels .
In assessing the number of passes of pneumatictyred rollers the effective width shall be the sum of the widths of the individual wheel tracks together with the sum of the spacings between the wheel tracks provided that each spacing does not exceed mm .
Where the spacings exceed mm the effective width shall be the sum of the widths of the individual wheel tracks only .
vii A vibratory tamping roller which may be selfpropelled or towed is a machine having a means of applying mechanical vibration to one or more rolls .
The roll or rolls have projecting feet where the height of each foot exceeds of the radius of the roll drum the projected end area of each foot exceeds .
of the roll drum surface area and the sum of the areas of the feet exceeds of the area of the cylinder swept by the ends of the feet .
The requirements for the operation of vibratory tamping rollers shall be the same as those stated for vibratory rollers in subClause viii except that vibratory tamping rollers operating without vibration will be classified as deadweight tamping rollers .
viii Vibratory rollers are selfpropelled or towed smoothwheeled rollers having means of applying mechanical vibration to one or more rolls except that vibratory rollers employed for Method compaction shall be single roll types .
Vibratory rollers operating without vibration will be classified as smoothwheeled rollers .
The requirements for vibratory rollers are based on the use of the lowest gear on a selfpropelled machine with mechanical transmission and a speed of .
to .
kmh for a towed machine or a self propelled machine with hydrostatic transmission .
If higher gears or speeds are used an increased number of passes shall be provided in proportion to the increase in speed of travel .
Where the mechanical vibration is applied to two rolls in tandem the minimum number of passes shall be half the number given in Table for the appropriate mass per metre width of one vibrating roll but if one roll differs in mass per metre width from the other the number of passes shall be calculated as for the roll with the smallest value .
Alternatively the minimum number of passes may be determined by treating the machine as having a single vibrating roll with a mass per metre width equal to that of the roll with the higher value .
Vibratory rollers shall be operated with their vibratory mechanism operating only at the frequency of vibration recommended by the manufacturers .
Where more than one amplitude setting is available and or a range of frequencies is recommended the machine shall be operated at the maximum amplitude setting and at the maximum recommended frequency for that setting .
Vibratory rollers shall be equipped or provided with devices indicating the frequency at which the mechanism is operating and the speed of travel .
Both devices shall be capable of being read by an inspector alongside the machine .
ix Vibratingplate compactors are machines having a baseplate to which is attached a source of vibration consisting of one or two eccentrically weighted shafts and a the mass per square metre of the baseplate of a vibratingplate compactor is calculated by dividing the total mass of the machine in its working condition by its area in contact with compacted material b vibratingplate compactors shall be operated at the frequency of vibration recommended by the manufacturers .
They shall normally be operated at travelling speeds of less than kmh but if higher speeds are necessary the number of passes shall be increased in proportion to the increase in speed of travel .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Earthworks Amendment February x Vibrotampers are machines in which an enginedriven reciprocating mechanism acts on a spring system through which oscillations are set up in a baseplate .
xi Power rammers are machines which are actuated by explosions in an internal combustion cylinder each explosion being controlled manually by the operator .
xii Dropping weight compactors are machines in which a dead weight is dropped from a controlled height using a hoist mechanism and they include selfpropelled machines with mechanical traversing mechanisms capable of compacting soil in trenches and close to structures .
xiii In the case of power rammers and droppingweight compactors one pass will be considered as made when the compacting shoe has made one strike on the area in question .
xiv For items marked in the Method column of Table the roller shall be towed by tracklaying tractors .
Selfpropelled rollers are unsuitable .
xv Where combinations of different types or categories of plant are used the following shall apply a the depth of layer shall be that for the type of plant requiring the least depth of layer and b the number of passes shall be that for the type of plant requiring the greatest number of passes .
Endproduct Compaction Where endproduct compaction is required it shall comply with subClauses to of this Clause .
The Contractor shall at least days before commencement of endproduct compaction make available the following to the Overseeing Organisation i the values of maximum dry density and the optimum moisture content obtained in accordance with BS Part using the .
kg rammer method or vibrating hammer method as appropriate for each of the fills he intends to use which meet the requirements of the permitted Class or Classes where within any Class of material the fill contains material having different maximum dry densities and optimum moisture contents the Class shall be further subdivided by extending the identification system in order to monitor the compacted density ii a graph of density plotted against moisture content from which each of the values in i above of maximum dry density and optimum moisture content were determined and for Class A material a plot of the air voids curve for each subdivision .
Once the information contained in subClause of this Clause has been made available to the Overseeing Organisation it shall form the basis for compaction .
Fill compacted to endproduct requirements shall have a field dry density measured in accordance with subClause of this Clause equal to or greater than the percentage given in Table of the maximum dry density for the relevant Class of fill previously made available to the Overseeing Organisation in accordance with sub Clause of this Clause .
The field dry density referred to in subClause of this Clause shall be measured in accordance with BS Part except that nuclear methods shall only be used where required or permitted in contract specific Appendix .
Where nuclear methods are used the gauge shall be calibrated in accordance with BS Part .
Subformation and Capping Capping shall be provided only in those locations and to the extent particularly stated in the contract specific Appendix to be constructed with capping .
It shall comply with this Clause and in addition for stabilised capping with Clauses and as appropriate .
Capping shall be constructed with Class F F F F F S A B C D E or F material as required or permitted in contract specific Appendix and complying with Table .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Earthworks Amendment February Unless otherwise described in contract specific Appendix capping shall either consist of one Class of capping material throughout its depth laid in one or more layers of compacted thickness complying with Clause or be formed of not more than two elements of different capping materials .
Each element shall be formed of one or more layers of the same capping material each of compacted thickness complying with Clause .
Class D or E stabilised capping material shall not be placed or constructed above Class F granular capping material or Class S granular filter layer material .
Where required in contract specific Appendix before commencing the construction of capping in the permanent works the Contractor shall demonstrate the methods equipment and materials he proposes to use by constructing an area or areas as appropriate of capping on a typical prepared subformation to the same thickness as required in the permanent works .
The area of each capping construction demonstration shall be not less than m .
The materials placed during the demonstration may form part of the permanent works provided they meet the requirements of the contract or be carried out elsewhere on the site where this is detailed in contract specific Appendix .
After completion of each demonstration area the Contractor shall within a period of not greater than days and before commencing the main construction of the appropriate capping in the permanent works carry out tests on each demonstration area and provide the Overseeing Organisation with records substantiating compliance with the stipulated criteria of contract specific Appendix .
Where required by contract specific Appendix the Contractor shall provide sheeting to protect the demonstration area .
The demonstration area shall if it does not meet the requirements for the permanent works or is located elsewhere on site be removed and the area reinstated in accordance with contract specific Appendix .
The methods and materials used in the accepted demonstration shall not be changed during the course of the works without the construction of a further demonstration where such demonstrations are required by contract specific Appendix .
Unless otherwise stated in contract specific Appendix the subformation shall have the same longitudinal gradient crossfall and surface level tolerances as the formation .
The Contractor shall limit any unprotected area of subformation which is to receive capping to suit the output of the plant in use and the rate of deposition of capping .
No unprotected subformation which is to receive capping shall remain continuously exposed to rain causing degradation nor be left uncovered overnight .
In cuttings the Contractor shall as permitted or required in contract specific Appendix carry out one of the following procedures i for Class F granular capping material or Class S granular filter layer material excavate below formation level to a depth to accept the capping trim the surface to form the subformation and immediately compact with one pass of a smoothwheeled roller having a mass per m width of roll not less than kg or a vibratory roller having a mass per m width of roll not less than kg or a vibrating plate compactor having a mass per m of not less than kg except that only smooth wheeled rollers shall be used on Class chalk material and immediately deposit and compact above it a capping in Class F granular capping material or Class S granular filter layer material or ii for Class A B C D E or F capping material construct the capping by stabilising the intact material providing it complies with Class E R E F G or I material requirements immediately below formation to form Class A B C D E or F material respectively or iii excavate below formation to sufficient depth to enable stabilisation of intact Class E R E F G or I material to be carried out to produce Class A B C D E or F material forming the lower element of the capping after stabilisation of this element the capping shall be completed by depositing a further layer or layers of Class E R E F G or I material and stabilising it to form Class A B C D E or F capping or depositing and compacting Class F granular capping material to form the upper element of the capping or iv excavate to subformation level and deposit material complying with Classes E R E F G or I to be stabilised to form a capping of Class A B C D E or F layers .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Earthworks Amendment February Where a stabilised layer is directly overlain by Class F granular capping material the stabilised layer shall be compacted as for a subformation in i above .
On embankments and other areas of fill the Contractor shall as permitted or required in contract specific Appendix carry out one of the following procedures i complete the embankment to form the subformation or remove any protection layer and trim the surface to form the subformation and in both cases compact with one pass of a smoothwheeled roller having a mass per m width of not less than kg or a vibratory roller of not less than kg per m width or a vibrating plate compactor having a mass per m of not less than kg except that only smooth wheeled rollers shall be used on Class chalk material and immediately construct above it in one or more layers Class F granular capping material or Class S granular filter layer material or ii construct the embankment to sufficient height and carry out stabilisation to form a capping of Class A B C D E or F material in one or more layers utilising where appropriate any protection layer previously constructed or iii for multielement capping incorporating stabilised material construct the embankment to sufficient height to carry out the work described in ii above and immediately construct above it one or more layers of Class F granular capping material .
Where a stabilised layer is directly overlain by Class F granular capping material the stabilised layer shall be compacted as for a subformation in i above .
For Class F material Optimum Moisture Content shall be determined according to BS Part Method .
vibrating hammer test .
Measurements of moisture content both for control purposes and for optimum moisture content determination shall be according to BS Part Method oven dry method but using an oven on a reduced temperature setting of to C. Filter layers constructed of Class S granular filter layer material shall be protected from damage by traffic and construction plant .
The Contractor shall so organise work that only the traffic directly engaged in depositing spreading and compacting the filter layer shall be permitted access to the surface of this layer .
At no time shall the Contractor permit the leading edge of the filter layer to extend more than metres beyond the leading edge of the succeeding layer of subbase .
Cement Stabilisation to Form Capping Where capping is to consist of either wholly or in part cement stabilised material Class A B or C this Clause shall apply to the construction of those parts which are stabilised with cement .
Material to be stabilised with cement shall be Class E Class F and Class G materials all complying with Clause and Table .
Unless otherwise described in contract specific Appendix cement shall be Portland cement complying with BS EN and requirements given in contract specific Appendix .
Class E F or G material to be stabilised shall have added to it at any point that quantity of cement measured as a percentage of its dry weight as determined on the demonstration area to meet the required bearing ratio in contract specific Appendix subject to a minimum of cement .
The appropriate quantity of cement shall be uniformly spread by a suitable spreading machine on top of the layer to be processed .
Using a collecting tray and balance the Contractor shall check the rate of spread of the machine once for every m of cement spread .
Unless indicated otherwise in contract specific Appendix Class E F or G material shall be stabilised in a single layer if its compacted thickness is mm or less .
If its compacted thickness is greater the material shall be stabilised in layers not less than mm and not more than mm thick including any cutting in required by subClause of this Clause .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Earthworks Amendment February The Contractor shall not carry out cement stabilisation when the shade temperature is below C unless on a rising thermometer above C. Cement stabilisation shall not be carried out during periods of rain or when rain is imminent .
When cement is spread on material likely to cause premature hydration processing in accordance with subClause of this Clause shall follow immediately .
Unless indicated otherwise by contract specific Appendix Class E F or G material forming the layer to be stabilised shall be processed by pulverising and mixing in the cement by means of a sufficient number of passes of a suitable mobile stabilising machine until of the silt and clay fraction is reduced to particles or lumps passing a BS mm sieve after dry sieving and the pulverisation complies with Table .
During processing sufficient water shall be available in the material to hydrate the cement and enable satisfactory mixing and compaction to be achieved .
Any added water shall be through an integral spraybar on the stabilising machine .
Any added water shall have a sulfate content not exceeding mgl as SO when tested in accordance with BS EN clause .
The stabilising machine shall be equipped with a device for controlling the depth of processing which shall be maintained at the correct setting at all times .
An overlap of mm shall be made between adjacent passes of the stabilising machine .
Where a subsequent layer of material is placed on a layer previously stabilised the tines or blades of the stabilising machine shall be set so that they cut into the previously stabilised layer below by at least mm .
Each layer of Class A B or C processed material shall be compacted as soon as possible after the final pass of the stabilising machine .
Compaction shall be completed within hours following the mixing of the cement into the material to be stabilised .
Immediately before compaction Class B processed material shall have a Moisture Condition Value MCV of not greater than nor less than the figure stated in contract specific Appendix for Class B cement stabilised material both as determined in accordance with Clause .
Water shall be added if necessary in a uniform manner to enable this MCV requirement to be met .
Any added water shall have a sulfate content not exceeding mgl as SO when tested in accordance with BS EN clause .
The compaction of each layer of Class A or B material shall comply with Clause Table Method or Method respectively except that if layers of Class A or B greater than mm thickness are to be constructed the number of passes of the compaction plant shall be determined from the results of a demonstration area as detailed in contract specific Appendix .
The compaction of Class C material shall comply with Clause end product compaction to satisfy the compaction requirements given in Table of this Class .
Class A B and C materials shall be cured in accordance with Clause .
During periods when the air temperature is forecast to drop below C or when ground frost is forecast Class A B and C material shall be protected to prevent freezing for a period of days from the time of completion of compaction .
Such protection shall be sealed to prevent the ingress of moisture .
Class A B and C materials shall not have other material deposited or compacted above them until such time as the required bearing ratio in contract specific Appendix has been achieved .
The relaxation allowed in subClause .
shall not apply before this time .
Lime Stabilisation to Form Capping This Clause shall apply only to those capping materials which are to be stabilised with lime to form material Class D. Material to be stabilised with lime shall be Class E material complying with Clause and Table .
The form of lime used for lime stabilisation shall be as required in contract specific Appendix the lime shall conform to BS EN and meet the performance requirements stated in contract specific Appendix .
This shall be demonstrated by the Declaration of Performance .
Unless otherwise stated in contract specific Appendix lime shall be either quicklime or hydrated lime conforming to BS EN .
The particle size distribution of all types of quicklime shown in Tables and of BS EN shall be of designation P as shown in Tables and of BS EN .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Earthworks Amendment February The Contractor shall carry out testing of the lime as installed for available lime in accordance with Clause at weekly intervals unless otherwise required in contract specific Appendix during periods when lime stabilisation is carried out .
The results shall be reported to the Overseeing Organisation .
The available lime shall meet the requirements stated in contract specific Appendix and the values stated in the Declaration of Performance .
Class E material to be stabilised shall have added to it at any point the percentage of its dry weight of lime as determined on the demonstration area to meet the required bearing ratio in contract specific Appendix subject to a minimum of  by weight of available lime as a percentage of the dry weight of the Class E material .
Lime of quantity complying with subClause of this Clause shall be uniformly spread by a suitable spreading machine on top of the layer to be stabilised .
Using a collecting tray and balance the Contractor shall check the rate of spread by weight once for every m of lime spread or a different rate of testing for the rate of spread as described in contract specific Appendix .
At the same time the Contractor shall collect samples of lime deposited on the tray and test them for available lime content in accordance with Clause .
Unless indicated otherwise in contract specific Appendix the material shall be stabilised in a single layer if its compacted thickness is mm or less .
If its compacted thickness is greater the material shall be stabilised in layers not less than mm and not more than mm thick including any cuttingin required by subClause of this Clause .
Unless indicated otherwise in contract specific Appendix lime stabilisation shall be carried out only during the months of March to September inclusive and when the shade temperature is not below C. Only when the specified bearing ratio is attainable at a shade temperature less than C may lime stabilisation be carried out at such lower temperature .
Lime stabilisation shall be suspended if rainfall will have an adverse effect on the material being stabilised .
The spreading of lime shall not be carried out in a manner or under conditions that will result in lime being blown from the site onto adjacent land or property .
Unless indicated otherwise in contract specific Appendix the material forming the layers to be stabilised shall be processed by pulverising and mixing in the lime by means of sufficient number of passes of a suitable mobile stabilising machine until of the Class D processed material passes a BS mm sieve after dry sieving and the pulverisation complies with Table .
During processing sufficient water shall be available in the material to slake the quicklime if used and to enable satisfactory mixing and compaction to be achieved .
Any added water shall be through an integral spray bar on the stabilising machine .
Any added water shall have a sulfate content not exceeding mgl as SO when tested in accordance with BS EN clause .
The layer shall receive at least two passes of the stabilising machine to pulverise and mix the lime and soil after which the processing shall be interrupted by a period of not less than hours and not greater than hours to enable the lime to react with the soil .
Before this period commences the surface of the layer shall be sealed with one pass of a smooth wheeled roller having a mass per metre width of roll of not less than kg or a pneumatic tyred roller of not less than kg per wheel .
At the end of this period the layer shall receive one further pass of the stabilising machine or more if required to enable the material to comply with subClauses and of this Clause adding water uniformly if necessary .
Any added water shall have a sulfate content not exceeding mgl as SO when tested in accordance with BS EN clause .
The stabilising machine shall be equipped with a device for controlling the depth of processing which shall be maintained at the correct setting at all times .
An overlap of mm shall be made between adjacent passes of the stabilising machine .
Where a subsequent layer of material is placed on a layer previously stabilised the tines or blades of the stabilising machine shall be set so that they cut into the previously stabilised layer below by at least mm .
Each layer of Class D processed material shall be compacted as soon as possible after the final pass of the stabilising machine .
Immediately before compaction the processed material shall have a Moisture Condition Value MCV of not greater than nor less than the figures stated in contract specific Appendix for Class D lime stabilised material both as determined in accordance with Clause .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Earthworks Amendment February If there is a delay following the final pass and before commencement of compaction the surface shall be sealed by not less than passes of a smoothwheeled roller having a mass per metre width of not less than kg or of a pneumatic tyred roller of not less than kg mass per wheel .
On recommencement and before compaction the layer shall be reprocessed without the addition of lime by a sufficient number of passes of the stabilising machine to meet the MCV requirements of subClause of this Clause adding water uniformly if necessary .
The compaction of each layer shall comply with Clause Table Method except that if layers more than mm thick are constructed the number of passes of the compaction plant shall be those determined from results obtained on a demonstration area as detailed in contract specific Appendix .
Class D material shall not have other material deposited or compacted above it until such time as the required bearing ratio in contract specific Appendix has been achieved .
The relaxation allowed in subClause .
shall not apply before this time .
Preparation and Surface Treatment of Formation The formation shall after completion of any subgrade drainage and immediately before laying sub base on areas of completed formation have a surface level tolerance within mm and mm or other level of tolerance defined in contract specific Appendix relative to its designed level after completion of the following operations as necessary i Any protection layer shall be removed and any soft or damaged areas shall be rectified by excavating them and replacing with acceptable material having the same characteristics and strength as the surrounding material .
The surface of the formation shall be trimmed and immediately cleaned free from mud and slurry which shall be dealt with as unacceptable material in accordance with subClause .. ii The formation shall immediately be compacted in addition to the compaction required for the fill .
This additional compaction shall for this purpose be assumed to be as for a layer of mm finished thickness compacted in compliance with Clause and Table Method except for Class materials where Method shall be used .
Immediately after the additional compaction the formation shall be trimmed to achieve the tolerances of this subClause .
Where the tolerances in subClause of this Clause are exceeded the Contractor shall determine the full extent of the area which is out of tolerance and shall make good the formation as follows i if the surface is too high it shall be retrimmed and recompacted in compliance with Clause and subClause of this Clause ii if the surface is too low it shall be corrected by the addition of acceptable material complying with Table having characteristics and strength matching the overlain material deposited and compacted in compliance with Clause and and subClause of this Clause .
In cohesive materials Classes and where this low surface is less than mm below formation material shall be removed to a depth of at least mm below formation before the additional material is deposited and compacted .
After trimming or retrimming if necessary the formation shall be rolled with one pass of a smoothwheeled roller having a mass per metre width of roll not less than kg or except for Class material a vibratory roller having a mass per metre width of vibrating roll of not less than kg or a vibrating plate compactor having a mass per m under the base plate of not less than kg .
Where required in contract specific Appendix or where the tolerances in subClause of this Clause can not be achieved in the preparation of formation in rock then one of the following shall be carried out so as to achieve the above tolerances i the material shall be excavated below formation to the depth described in contract specific Appendix .
The excavated material shall be processed as described in contract specific Appendix and re deposited and compacted in compliance with Clauses and and Table Method in compacted layers not greater than mm thick or Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Earthworks Amendment February ii where the rock surface is tabular it shall be regulated by depositing and compacting cement bound material as described in contract specific Appendix complying with the Series or ST concrete to Clause .
The Contractor shall limit any areas of completed formation to suit the output of plant in use and the rate of deposition of subbase .
No formation of cohesive material Classes and shall remain continuously exposed to rain causing degradation or be left uncovered overnight .
The preparation of formation on existing subbase material shall be completed as described in contract specific Appendix .
Use of Subformation or Formation by Construction Plant Construction plant and other vehicular traffic except that required for the construction of capping shall not be operated on the subformation unless adequate protection if necessary in addition to any weather protection is provided .
Construction plant and other vehicular traffic except for that required for preparation of the formation in compliance with Clause shall not be operated on the formation unless adequate protection if necessary in addition to any weather protection is provided .
In addition to the requirements of subClauses and of this Clause the Contractor shall make available to the Overseeing Organisation his proposals for the protection of the subformation or formation in areas where they are within mm of the existing ground level after topsoil has been stripped before using construction plant or other vehicular traffic at or above subformation or formation .
Topsoiling Topsoiling shall be carried out using Class material complying with Table .
Imported topsoil Class B material shall only be imported when required in contract specific Appendix or contract specific Appendix .
When required in contract specific Appendix topsoil shall not be excavated from stockpiles whether on site or imported i which have been exposed to a cumulative rainfall exceeding mm or other figure stated in contract specific Appendix over the preceding days measured at a point detailed in contract specific Appendix or ii when heavy rain is falling or iii with a tracked vehicle or iv which have been stockpiled for more than years or v which are frozen or vi in the case of topsoil which has been stockpiled for more than months unless the stockpile has been treated with a total nonresidual herbicide as recently as is seasonally possible allowing the period of time recommended by the manufacturer to elapse prior to excavation .
Topsoil shall i be deposited and spread on the areas to the thicknesses described in contract specific Appendix in layers not exceeding mm .
Each layer shall be firmed before spreading the next .
The thickness shall be reduced where necessary to allow for any subsequent turfing required in contract specific Appendix it shall not be spread using a tracked vehicle when so stipulated in contract specific Appendix Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Earthworks Amendment February ii have stones and other debris removed and disposed off site which have a dimensions greater than mm equivalent diameter unless otherwise permitted in contract specific Appendix and b dimensions greater than mm equivalent diameter which lie within mm of the surface iii be graded to smooth contours eliminating all mounds and depressions where water may collect iv not have stones or other debris protruding above the surface by more than mm and comply with the further requirements of Clauses and .
Earthwork Environmental Bunds Earthwork environmental bunds shall be constructed in the locations described in contract specific Appendix with fill materials complying with the requirements therein and Clause and Table .
Deposition shall be in accordance with Clause and compaction with the requirements of Table unless otherwise described in contract specific Appendix or the requirements of subClauses or of this Clause apply .
Earthwork environmental bunds formed of reinforced or anchored earth shall be constructed in compliance with Clauses and .
Earthwork environmental bunds formed of strengthened embankments shall be constructed in accordance with Clause .
Where required in contract specific Appendix earthwork environmental bunds shall be topsoiled in accordance with Clause and seeded or turfed all in accordance with Clause and Clause .
Landscape Areas Landscape areas shall be constructed in the locations shown in contract specific Appendix with Class material as described therein and complying with Table .
Unless method compaction to Clause is required in contract specific Appendix the degree of compaction of Class material shall be sufficient to remove large voids and to produce a coherent mass whilst preventing overcompaction and any build up of excess pore pressures .
Following completion of filling of landscape areas Class material shall where required in contract specific Appendix be shaped as described therein .
Class material shall be deposited in landscape areas after any adjoining embankment or other area of fill has been completed .
Where permitted in contract specific Appendix and provided the adjoining embankment or other area of fill is always kept at least m higher than the landscape area fill construction of such landscape area may proceed until completion .
Landscape areas shall be topsoiled in accordance with Clause and seeded or turfed in accordance with Clause and Clause to the requirements of contract specific Appendix .
Strengthened Embankments Strengthened embankments shall be constructed in the locations and to the details described in contract specific Appendix with fill materials and strengthening materials described therein .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Earthworks Amendment February Earthworks for Reinforced Soil and Anchored Earth Structures The construction of earthworks for reinforced soil and anchored earth structures together with assembly and erection of reinforcing and anchor elements and associated components shall be in compliance with this Clause and Clause .
Excavation shall be carried out in compliance with Clause .
Fill for reinforced soil structures shall except for their associated drainage layers be of Class I J B C or D selected material complying with Table as permitted in contract specific Appendix together with any other additional requirements therein .
Where Class B conditioned pulverisedfuel ash is used for fill only nonmetallic reinforcing elements shall be used and metallic fasteners shall be of stainless steel .
Fill for anchored earth structures shall except for their associated drainage layers be of I or J selected material complying with Table as permitted in contract specific Appendix together with any other additional requirements therein .
Drainage layers to reinforced soil and anchored earth structures shall be one of the following as appropriate i Class H material complying with Table and contract specific Appendix .
ii for use with Class B material uncrushed partially crushed or crushed gravel sand complying with BS EN fines content category f and sizes CP MP or MP and when in contact with metallic components with the properties listed in Table .
iii Type B filter drain material complying with Clause for use only in horizontal drainage layers .
Vertical layers of drainage layer material shall be brought up at the same rate as the adjoining fill material without mixing or contamination .
In addition to the requirements of subClauses and of this Clause fill for reinforced soil and anchored earth structures shall be deposited and compacted in compliance with Clauses and and Table with method compaction for Classes H I J C and D materials and endproduct compaction for Class B material .
Drainage layer material other than Class H shall be deposited in accordance with Clause and compacted as described in contract specific Appendix .
Reinforced soil and anchored earth structures shall have i the deposition and compaction carried out so that all layers of reinforcing and anchor elements are fixed at the required levels on top of compacted fill ii the deposition spreading levelling and compaction of the fill carried out generally in a direction parallel to the facing and executed in stages to alternate with the placing and fixing of the reinforcing and anchor elements and the facing elements iii the reinforcing and anchor elements kept as free as possible from damage or displacement during deposition spreading levelling and compaction of the fill also the programme of filling shall be arranged so that no machines or vehicles run on the reinforcing or anchor elements iv all construction plant and all other vehicles having a mass exceeding kg kept at least m away from the back of the facing v within m of the back of the facing the plant used for compacting the fill restricted to the following items as described in subClause .
and listed in Table a vibratory roller having a mass per metre width of roll not exceeding kg with a total mass not exceeding kg b vibrating plate compactor having a mass not exceeding kg Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Earthworks Amendment February c vibro tamper having a mass not exceeding kg vi at the Contractors option the reinforced soil and anchored earth fill beyond the m zone referred to in v above raised in thicker layers than within the m zone providing this is compatible with the arrangement of the reinforcing and anchor elements and the difference in compacted level does not exceed mm vii during construction of the reinforced soil or anchored earth structure the retained fill at the rear of the structure as defined in subClause of this Clause maintained at the same level as the adjoining reinforced soil or anchored earth fill viii if the retained material at the rear of the reinforced soil or anchored earth structure as defined in subClause of this Clause is an existing earthwork or natural slope which requires supporting by temporary shoring this shoring shall be removed progressively as the work proceeds to prevent the formation of voids .
The rear of the reinforced soil or anchored earth structure is the position coinciding with the ends of the reinforcing or anchor elements furthest from the facing units .
Earthworks for Corrugated Steel Buried Structures The construction of earthworks for corrugated steel buried structures together with assembly and erection of their components shall be in compliance with this Clause and Clause .
Excavation shall be carried out in compliance with Clause and any additional requirements given in contract specific Appendix .
Fill for corrugated steel buried structures shall be of the following selected granular materials complying with Table i Lower bedding material Class K ii Upper bedding material Class L iii Surround material Class M. and the overlying fill shall be one of the following iv Well graded uniformly graded or coarse granular material Class Q or v Wet dry stony or silty cohesive material and chalk Class H. In addition to the requirements of subClauses to of this Clause Class K L and M materials shall be deposited in compliance with Clause and shall except for Class L upper bedding material which shall be uncompacted be endproduct compacted in compliance with Clause and Table except that the compacted layers shall not exceed mm thickness .
The compaction and testing requirements for Class K lower bedding and Class M surround materials shall also comply with any additional requirements given in contract specific Appendix .
As far as possible the Class K lower bedding material shall be shaped to fit the invert such that it supports of the circumference of circular structures or the whole of the portion of circumference occupied by the bottom plates of multiradii structures .
In the case of structures of span less than m where this can not be met and the structure is erected on a flat or partially preshaped bedding care shall be taken to ensure that the lower bedding material is properly placed and compacted under the haunches .
A uniform layer of uncompacted Class L upper bedding material shall be deposited before the placing of any part of the steel structure over the whole width of the shaped lower bedding material and shall be of sufficient depth to fill the corrugations of the underside of the structure .
Class M surround material shall be used for filling all excavations above the bedding except those in hard material for which Class K lower bedding material shall be used throughout .
Additional requirements for making good are given in Clause .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Earthworks Amendment February Class M surround material shall be deposited and compacted uniformly on either side of the structure .
The maximum difference in fill level on opposite sides of the structure shall be no more than mm at all times unless otherwise permitted in contract specific Appendix .
Class M surround material shall be deposited and compacted in accordance with subClause of this Clause above the concrete foundations of archprofile corrugated steel buried structures .
Class M surround material under the structure shall be well compacted by hand using a suitably sized pole or length of rectangular timber between the corrugations or by another suitable method .
Plant for compaction of Class M surround material within m of either side of the structure and up to a height of m or one fifth of the span if greater above the crown shall be restricted to the following items as described in subClause .
and listed in Table i vibratory rollers having a mass per metre width of roll not exceeding kg ii vibrating plate compactors having mass not exceeding kg iii vibrotampers .
Fill placed above the level of the crown of the structure including Class M surround material shall be deposited spread and compacted in such a manner that any out of balance forces transmitted to the culvert are kept to a minimum .
This will require that trafficking by construction plant is not all in one direction and that the compacted surface of the fill is kept as near horizontal as practicable .
During all operations of filling compaction road pavement construction and of any other traffic movements which affect the shape of the structure the changes in the horizontal and vertical diameters of the structure shall not exceed for circular structures and for structures of other crosssections .
The longitudinal straightness over any m length of the structure shall not deviate by more than mm and the rotational displacement in any m length of structure shall not be greater than mm .
Only that compaction plant described in subClause of this Clause shall be used in the vicinity of the structure unless the depth of compacted Class M surround material placed above the crown of the structure is more than m or one fifth of the span whichever is the greater .
The structure shall not be subjected to a surcharge greater than the depth of fill required in the contract and permitted depth of any protection layer given in contract specific Appendix .
No material shall be placed by tipping either onto the structure or within a distance on either side of the structure of m or half the span of the structure whichever is the greater .
Method compaction shall be used for the overlying fill Classes Q and H according to Clause the method used being that for the corresponding general fill in Table .
Ground Anchorages The Contractor shall design the ground anchorages required as part of the permanent works and listed in contract specific Appendix in accordance with the design requirements described in contract specific Appendix .
The ground anchorages shall be installed and where required in contract specific Appendix proof loaded in accordance with the requirements therein .
Ground anchorages not forming part of the permanent works will only be permitted where such anchorage will not affect the permanent works .
Crib Walling The Contractor shall design the crib walling listed in contract specific Appendix in accordance with the design specification and procedures in contract specific Appendix and Design Manual for Roads and Bridges document BD DMRB Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Earthworks Amendment February Gabions Gabions shall be manufactured and constructed in compliance with this Clause and with requirements stated in contract specific Appendix .
Gabion units shall be assembled in accordance with the manufacturers instructions .
Unless otherwise stated in contract specific Appendix they shall be filled with Class G material complying with Table .
The grading of fill shall be as described in Appendix the maximum size of fill material shall not exceed two thirds of the minimum dimension of the gabion compartment or mm whichever is smaller and the minimum size of the fill material shall be not less than the size of the mesh opening .
Gabion units shall be filled to fully achieve the required minimum cage density and compaction of fill .
At no point before during or after filling shall the cage be deformed by working methods or in use loading .
The required cage density shall be as stated in contract specific Appendix .
Internal tie wires shall be inserted and units shall be tensioned in accordance with the manufacturers instructions .
Gabion units shall be constructed so as to maintain tightness of mesh and shall be laced securely with wire complying with subClause of this Clause .
Gabion wire mesh units shall be woven steel wire conforming to BS EN or welded steel mesh conforming to BS EN .
The Contractor shall submit documentary evidence to the Overseeing Organisation to demonstrate compliance of the gabion units at least four weeks prior to the commencement of gabion work .
Documentation that demonstrates compliance with a product acceptance scheme as described in Clause sub Clauses and can be supplied to meet this requirement where the scheme demonstrates that the gabion units meet the level of performance required by the specification .
Unless otherwise stated in contract specific Appendix the site environment level shall be High Aggressive C and the Assumed Working Life shall be years or greater .
Coating requirements for all wire shall be as required by Tables and A. of BS EN and BS EN .
Unless otherwise stated in contract specific Appendix woven steel gabions shall be of mesh designation x or x with minimum wire diameter of .mm .
Unless otherwise stated in contract specific Appendix welded mesh shall be mm to mm diameter bars with the mesh size mm x mm maximum .
Swallow Holes and Other Naturally Occurring Cavities Infilled swallow holes and other naturally occurring cavities shall where required in contract specific Appendix be excavated filled and capped as described in contract specific Appendix .
Open swallow holes and other shallow cavities shall where required in contract specific Appendix be flushed cleared of rubbish where to do so would not endanger operatives and filled and capped as described in contract specific Appendix .
Disused Mine Workings Disused mine workings shall where required in contract specific Appendix be investigated inspected monitored cleared flushed filled capped or have any other treatment carried out all as described in contract specific Appendix .
Instrumentation and Monitoring Instrumentation other than that required in compliance with Clause shall be as described in contract specific Appendix and shall be installed in the locations shown therein .
Monitoring of instrumentation shall be carried out as required in the contract specific Appendix and the results supplied to the Overseeing Organisation as required therein .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Earthworks Amendment February Ground Improvement Dynamic Compaction Dynamic compaction carried out to either method or endproduct as required in contract specific Appendix and achieved by dropping a freefalling heavy mass pounder a number of times at pre determined spacings on the surface of the ground or fill shall be applied to the areas described in contract specific Appendix .
Dynamic compaction shall be completed before the commencement of construction of any permanent works or work on the placement or diversion of Statutory Undertakers equipment within that part of the site defined in the contract specific Appendix which contains the area to be dynamically compacted .
The Contractor shall ensure that no damage or injury is caused to persons or property on or off the site as a result of the dynamic compaction .
Vibrated Stone Columns Vibrated stone columns in existing natural soils or fill by vibroreplacement or vibrodisplacement shall be formed in the manner and in the areas described in contract specific Appendix .
Unless otherwise described in contract specific Appendix materials shall comply with subClause of this Clause .
The Contractor shall report immediately to the Overseeing Organisation any circumstance which indicates that in the Contractors opinion the ground conditions differ from those expected from his interpretation of the ground investigation reports .
Columns shall be installed as shown on the drawings and within the permitted tolerances stated in contract specific Appendix .
Materials The material used to form the columns shall be clean hard inert material and shall be natural sand gravel crushed rock other than argillaceous rocks crushed hardcore crushed concrete crushed slag or well burnt nonplastic shale .
The material shall be appropriate to the ground conditions in which the stone columns are formed and its use shall not be detrimental to any other work on site .
The material shall be nominally single sized coarse aggregate with a value of upper D sieve size in the range mm to mm or a graded material complying with Clause Type unbound mixtures for subbase except the material passing the .
mm sieve shall be non plastic when tested in accordance with BS Part .
Testing of Ground Treatment Testing of treated ground shall be undertaken for control purposes during the treatment and on completion of the ground treatment .
The performance criteria for treated ground are given in contract specific Appendix .
Improvement in treated ground shall be measured in accordance with the criteria stated in contract specific Appendix .
Types of Test The following tests or alternatives permitted in contract specific Appendix shall be carried out at the positions and frequency given in contract specific Appendix .
Plate tests Plate bearing tests are loading tests carried out using a plate on treated ground .
The test is described in BS Part Method .. Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Earthworks Amendment February Zone Tests Zone tests are loading tests carried out with a slab intended to test bearing pressure over a wider and deeper zone than in the plate tests .
The test is described in BS Part Method ..
Penetration Tests In granular soils the static cone Dutch cone penetration test the standard penetration test SPT or dynamic cone penetration tests shall be employed as described in contract specific Appendix .
Trial Areas Trial areas are to be treated and tested where required in contract specific Appendix .
Trial areas which meet the performance requirements may form part of the permanent works .
Equipment and materials used in trial areas shall be identical to those proposed for the permanent works .
Testing in trial areas shall be carried out as given in contract specific Appendix .
Detailed reports shall be prepared for all testing as defined in Table .
Records and Reports Complete records of plant equipment and materials shall be maintained during all ground treatment operations .
Records shall be made available to the Overseeing Organisation including all information identified in Table and any other information required by contract specific Appendix .
All records pertaining to a particular days operations shall be made available to the Overseeing Organisation at the start of the following days operations .
Other Methods Other methods of ground improvement shall be carried out where required in contract specific Appendix and as described therein .
Earthworks Materials Tests Unless otherwise described in the contract sampling and testing of earthworks materials shall be carried out in accordance with BS Part to Part inclusive .
Determination of Moisture Condition Value MCV of Earthworks Materials Where the Moisture Condition Value MCV is to be determined the determination shall be carried out in accordance with BS Part .
The determination of the MCVmoisture content relation in accordance with BS Part shall be carried out when required in contract specific Appendix .
Where permitted in contract specific Appendix the rapid assessment procedure for material acceptability also given in BS Part may be used .
Determination of Undrained Shear Strength of Remoulded Cohesive Material Where required in contract specific Appendix the undrained shear strength of cohesive soil under total stress conditions shall be determined from triaxial compression tests performed on remoulded specimens and tested under conditions where the lateral pressure is maintained constant and there is no change in total Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Earthworks Amendment February water content of the specimens .
Unless otherwise required in contract specific Appendix the tests shall be in accordance with BS Part and the additional requirements of subClauses to of this Clause .
The specimens shall be prepared in accordance with BS Part using remoulded material compacted into a split mould of nominal diameter mm and nominal height mm .
The soil shall be at its natural moisture content and compacted in accordance with BS Part using the .
kg rammer method described in BS Part .
The specimens shall be tested at an operating cell pressure of kNm and an axial strain rate of per minute .
Where contract specific Appendix requires c and j to be determined the test shall be modified to enable Mohr circles to be plotted and c and j reported .
Where stated and described in contract specific Appendix other tests may be used during construction to supplement the test described above provided the results have been correlated to ensure compatibility .
Determination of Intact Lump Dry Density IDD of Chalk The intact lump dry density IDD of chalk lumps shall be determined in accordance with BS Part .
Los Angeles and Other Tests for Particle Soundness Resistance to Fragmentation Los Angeles Coefficient LA The value of Los Angeles coefficient shall be determined in accordance with BS EN .
Other Tests for Particle Soundness Where contract specific Appendix requires magnesium sulfate soundness tests to be carried out they shall be carried out in accordance with BS EN .
Where contract specific Appendix requires slake durability point load or other tests for soundness to be carried out they shall be carried out in accordance with the procedures given therein .
Determination of Effective Angle of Internal Friction j and Effective Cohesion c of Earthworks Materials The effective angle of internal friction j and effective cohesion c shall be determined by shear box or triaxial tests as required in Table and contract specific Appendix .
Unless otherwise required in contract specific Appendix the tests shall be in accordance with the requirements in subClauses to of this Clause .
Shear Box Tests For Classes N P I and J granular materials the tests shall be carried out in accordance with BS Part and the following i The plan size of the shear box shall be nominally mm square .
ii Three samples shall be tested each sample occupying the full depth of the shear box and shall be compacted at the optimum moisture content to a dry density of of the maximum dry density determined in accordance with BS Part using the vibrating hammer method .
The samples shall not be immersed in water .
iii Each of the samples shall be subjected to a different normal stress equal to the maximum vertical pressure in the fill at the base quarter height and midheight of the structure respectively .
Each of the Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Earthworks Amendment February samples shall be sheared in a single stage test within one hour of compaction and the rate of shearing shall be such that no pore water pressure is generated .
iv The values of c and j reported shall be those corresponding to the maximum strength envelope .
For Classes A C and D cohesive materials the tests shall be carried out in accordance with BS Part and the following i The shear boxes shall be nominally mm square and nominally mm square .
ii For the initial determination of fill properties three samples shall be tested in each size of shear box .
The samples shall occupy the full depth of the shear box and shall be compacted at the optimum moisture content to a dry density of of the maximum dry density determined in accordance with BS Part using the .
kg rammer method .
To allow the samples to soften the shear box assembly shall then be immersed in water for a minimum period of hours .
iii Each of the three samples in a set shall be subjected to a different effective normal stress equal to the maximum vertical pressure in the fill at the base quarter height and midheight of the structure respectively .
Normal stresses shall be applied to the softened sample for a minimum period of hours prior to shearing in a single stage test .
The rate of shearing shall be such that no pore water pressure is generated .
iv The values of c and j reported shall be those corresponding to the maximum strength envelope .
v The test results obtained using the mm square box shall be taken as the properties of the fill .
The initial test results obtained using the mm square box shall be used for the subsequent quality control of the fill .
For Class B pulverisedfuel ash material the procedure shall be as for subClause of this Clause except that i The maximum dry density and optimum moisture content shall be determined in accordance with BS Part using the .
kg rammer method .
ii An additional sample in each set shall be subjected to an effective normal stress equal to the maximum vertical pressure in the fill at three quarters of the height of the structure or the lowest attainable normal stress whichever is the greater .
iii As soon as the shear box has been filled and the sample compacted the normal stress shall be applied and the sample immersed in water .
This concurrent loading and immersion of the sample shall continue for a period of hours and the sample shall then be sheared without further delay .
Triaxial Tests Where Class A cohesive fill to structures is to be tested by a consolidated drained triaxial test the test shall be in accordance with BS Part using the sample size and preparation procedure in Clause and the requirements of contract specific Appendix .
Determination of Resistivity rs to Assess Corrosivity of Soil Rock or Earthworks Materials Method of Test Where the resistivity of the ground or of material to be used in the permanent works is required to be determined this shall be obtained by in situ tests as described in subClause of this Clause or when required in contract specific Appendix by laboratory tests on samples in accordance with BS Part .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Earthworks Amendment February In Situ Resistivity Tests In situ resistivity shall be determined at the site of the structure or the cutting or the proposed borrow pit or on stockpiles in accordance with BS Part and the requirements of contract specific Appendix .
Details of the area and volume of material to be tested shall be made available to the Overseeing Organisation together with the arrangement of electrodes in each test .
The Overseeing Organisation shall be given notice of the date time and location of each test .
At any test location at each selected depth two measurements shall be made such that the electrode alignment for the second measurement is approximately at right angles to the electrode alignment for the first measurement .
At any test location the first selected depth shall be no more than .
m below the ground surface or no more than .
m below the upper surface of the material to be tested whichever is appropriate .
Following the measurements at the first selected depth further measurements shall be made at selected depths increasing by approximately m each time until measurements have been carried out on the full depth of ground or material to be tested .
Where the depth of material to be tested is too great to be tested from the surface within the confines of the site the Contractor shall undertake all necessary arrangements for testing such material including subsequent tests which may be required at a lower level following excavation .
Details of his arrangements shall be made available to the Overseeing Organisation .
Determination of Redox Potential Eh to Assess Corrosivity of Earthworks Materials for Reinforced Soil and Anchored Earth Structures Method of Test Where the redox potential of material to be incorporated into reinforced earth or anchored earth structures is required to be determined this shall be obtained by in situ tests as described in subClauses to of this Clause or when required in contract specific Appendix by laboratory tests on samples in accordance with BS Part .
In Situ Redox Potential Tests In situ redox potential shall be determined in undisturbed ground at the site of the cutting or the proposed borrow pit or on stockpiles in accordance with BS Part and the requirements of contract specific Appendix .
Details of the area and volume of material to be tested shall be made available to the Overseeing Organisation together with the locations of the test pits .
The Overseeing Organisation shall be given notice of the date time and location of each test .
At each test location the tests shall be carried out in a test pit not less than mm square in plan excavated to a depth given in contract specific Appendix .
At each test location a sample shall be taken from the base of the excavation and kept in a hermetically sealed container for determining the pH value of the fill which shall be obtained in accordance with BS Part .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Earthworks Amendment February Determination of Coefficient of Friction and Adhesion Between Fill and Reinforcing Elements or Anchor Elements for Reinforced Soil and Anchored Earth Structures Reinforcing Elements The coefficient of friction and the adhesion shall be determined by tests carried out in a mm size shear box with the element material fixed at the top of the lower half of the box and the fill sample occupying the top half only .
The test shall be carried out following the procedure given in Clause for the determination of the effective angle of internal friction and effective cohesion of earthworks materials except that i The apparatus shall in addition include a steel block fitting closely inside the lower half of the shear box and equal in height to it less the thickness of the reinforcing element material .
The flat toothed grid fitting the bottom of the shear box is not required .
ii The preparation of test specimens shall be as follows Element material shall be cut to fit the interior plan shape of the shear box using a sufficient number of strips of such material abutting to completely fill the interior plan area without overlap .
They shall be firmly fixed to the top of the steel block so that the top face of the material is flush with the top edge of the lower half of the box and aligned so that shearing occurs in a direction parallel to the longitudinal axis of a reinforcing element .
A sample of the fill material to be used in the permanent works of sufficient size to carry out the tests and within the range of moisture contents permitted in Table for such material shall be sieved to obtain a test sample passing the mm BS sieve of sufficient quantity after compaction to fill the top half of the shear box .
The top and bottom of the shear box shall be fixed together and the test sample of the sieved fill materials immediately placed and compacted in the top half of the box as described in Clause .
The value of the coefficient of friction between the fill and the reinforcing element shall be obtained by plotting the values of peak shear stress obtained in the tests against applied normal stress and by measuring the slope of the resulting straight line graph .
The adhesion between the fill and the reinforcement shall be obtained by taking the shear stress corresponding with zero normal stress .
The following additional information shall be recorded for each test i Normal stress applied kNm .
ii Peak shear stress kNm .
iii Strain at peak shear stress .
iv Moisture content of fill after test Classes B C and D. Anchor Elements Where required in contract specific Appendix tests shall be carried out as described therein to assess the interaction between the fill and the element .
Determination of Permeability of Earthworks Materials Where required in Table or contract specific Appendix the permeability of earthworks materials shall be determined as described in contract specific Appendix .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Earthworks Amendment February Determination of Available Lime Content of Lime for Lime Stabilised Capping Contract compliance testing shall be carried out by the Contractor to determine the available lime content of lime as installed for lime or lime and cement stabilised capping .
This compliance testing shall be carried out in accordance with BS EN except that the sample increments shall be taken from the collecting tray used to check the rate of spread at intervals of one increment per m per lane .
The available lime content shall be determined as required by BS EN it shall be reported and categorised as required in BS EN .
Determination of the Constrained Soil Modulus M of Earthworks Materials for Corrugated Steel Buried structures General When required in contract specific Appendix the constrained soil modulus M shall be determined by one of the following methods i From plate loading tests in accordance with BS Part .
ii From the results of Standard Penetration resistance tests SPT on noncohesive materials in accordance with BS Part .
iii From the values of the coefficient of volume compressibility mv from onedimensional consolidation tests on undisturbed soil specimens of cohesive materials in accordance with BS Part .
Plate Loading Tests When testing compacted granular fill materials the test surface shall be prepared by either i removing the surface layer carefully using hand tools to perform the test at a depth of mm below the surface or ii compacting the surface after the required compaction has been applied with two additional passes with no vibration to remove the overstressing in the surface layer .
If necessary the plate shall be bedded onto the fill using a small quantity of dry sand to remove any slight unevenness of the surface of the fill .
The field dry density and moisture content shall be determined at the position of each plate loading test in accordance with Clause and BS Part or equivalent respectively .
When using the plate loading test to determine M of the material existing on site a smooth surface shall be prepared by careful hand excavation and the plate bedded onto the soil using either sand or quick setting gypsum plaster depending on whether the soil is granular or cohesive .
The loading test shall be carried out under a series of maintained loads .
The maximum load shall be such that the average pressure applied to the plate is in excess of kNm .
The elastic modulus Es shall be determined as the secant modulus between average pressures applied to the plate of and kNm in the first load cycle .
A value of Poissons ratio of .
shall be assumed .
A second load cycle testing shall also be conducted and the results of this test compared with the first load cycle to check that the plate was seated satisfactorily during the first load cycle .
If the results of the first load cycle suggest that the plate was not seated satisfactorily then the procedure shall be repeated at a new location .
Second load cycle results shall not be used to demonstrate the adequacy of the material being tested .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Earthworks Amendment February The constrained soil modulus M shall be determined from the elastic modulus Es using the equation vEs M Nmm v v where v Poissons ratio to be taken as .
and Es Elastic modulus of the soil Nmm Standard Penetration resistance Tests The constrained soil modulus M of noncohesive materials existing on site shall be determined from the relationship .N .
M Nmm m Where N uncorrected SPT value and m .
Onedimensional Consolidation Tests The constrained soil modulus M of undrained cohesive materials existing on site shall be determined from the formula M Nmm mv where mv mmN is the coefficient of volume compressibility The value of mv to be used in the formula is that calculated from the test results for the loading increment in the consolidation test corresponding to the in situ effective overburden pressure at the level of the crown of the structure .
Number of Tests Three tests for M shall be carried out on the soil occurring on each side of the structure one of which is to be at the level of the maximum span unless otherwise described in contract specific Appendix .
Lime and Cement Stabilisation to Form Capping Where capping is to consist of either wholly or in part lime and cement stabilised material Class E or F this Clause shall apply to the construction of those parts which are stabilised with lime and cement .
Material to be stabilised with lime and cement shall be Class R or I material all complying with Clause and Table .
The form of lime used for lime and cement stabilisation shall be as required in contract specific Appendix the lime shall conform to BS EN and meet the performance requirements stated in contract specific Appendix .
This shall be demonstrated by the Declaration of Performance .
Unless otherwise stated in contract specific Appendix lime shall be either quicklime or hydrated lime conforming to BS EN .
The particle size distribution of all types of quicklime shown in Tables and of BS EN shall be of designation P as shown in Tables and of BS EN .
The Contractor shall carry out testing of the lime as installed for available lime in accordance with Clause at weekly intervals unless otherwise required in contract specific Appendix during periods when lime and cement stabilisation is carried out .
The results shall be reported to the Overseeing Organisation .
The available lime shall meet the requirements stated in contract specific Appendix and the values stated in the Declaration of Performance .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Earthworks Amendment February Cement for lime and cement stabilisation shall be Portland cement complying with Clause unless otherwise described in contract specific Appendix .
Classes R and I material to be stabilised shall have added to it at any point the percentage of its dry weight of lime and cement as determined on the demonstration area to meet the required bearing ratio in contract specific Appendix subject to a minimum of by weight of available lime and cement as a percentage of the dry weight of the R and I materials .
The Contractor shall not carry out lime and cement stabilisation when the shade temperature is below C unless on a rising thermometer above C. Lime and cement stabilisation shall not be carried out during periods of rain or when rain is imminent .
When cement is spread on material likely to cause premature hydration processing in accordance with subClause of this Clause shall follow immediately .
Lime of quantity complying with subClause of this Clause shall be uniformly spread by an approved spreading machine on top of the layer to be stabilised .
Using a collecting tray and balance the Contractor shall check the rate of spread by weight once for every m of lime spread or a different rate of testing for the rate of spread as described in contract specific Appendix .
At the same time the Contractor shall collect samples of lime deposited on the tray and test them for available lime content in accordance with Clause .
Unless indicated otherwise in contract specific Appendix the material shall be stabilised in a single layer if its compacted thickness is mm or less .
If its compacted thickness is greater the material shall be stabilised in layers not less than mm and not more than mm thick including any cuttingin required by subClause of this Clause .
Unless indicated otherwise in contract specific Appendix the material forming the layer to be stabilised shall be processed by pulverising and mixing in the lime by means of sufficient number of passes of an approved mobile stabilising machine until of the Class E or of the silt and clay fraction of Class F processed material passes a BS mm sieve after dry sieving and the pulverisation complies with Table .
During processing sufficient water shall be available in the material to slake the quicklime if used and to enable satisfactory mixing and compaction to be achieved .
Any added water shall be through an integral spray bar on the stabilising machine .
Any added water shall have a sulfate content not exceeding mgl as SO when tested in accordance with BS EN clause .
The layer shall receive at least two passes of the stabilising machine to pulverise and mix the lime and soil after which the processing shall be interrupted by a period of not less than hours and not greater than hours to enable the lime to react with the soil .
Before this period commences the surface of the layer shall be sealed with one pass of a smooth wheeled roller having a mass per metre width of roll of not less than kg or a pneumatic tyred roller of not less than kg per wheel .
At the end of this period the layer shall receive one further pass of the stabilising machine or more if required to enable the material to comply with subClauses of this Clause .
The stabilising machine shall be equipped with a device for controlling the depth of processing which shall be maintained at the correct setting at all times .
An overlap of mm shall be made between adjacent passes of the stabilising machine .
Where a subsequent layer of material is placed on a layer previously stabilised the tines or blades of the stabilising machine shall be set so that they cut into the previously stabilised layer below by at least mm .
The appropriate quantity of cement shall be uniformly spread by a suitable spreading machine on top of the layer previously processed with lime .
Using a collecting tray and balance the Contractor shall check the rate of spread of the machine once for every m of cement spread .
Unless indicated otherwise in contract specific Appendix the material previously mixed with lime shall be stabilised with cement in a single layer or in layers of the same compacted thickness as for the lime mixed material layers including any cuttingin required by subClause of this Clause .
Unless indicated otherwise in contract specific Appendix the material forming the layer to be stabilised shall be processed by pulverising and mixing in the cement by means of a sufficient number of passes of an approved mobile stabilising machine until of the silt and clay fraction is reduced to particles or lumps passing a BS mm sieve after dry sieving and the pulverisation complies with Table .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Earthworks Amendment February During processing sufficient water shall be available in the material to hydrate the cement and enable satisfactory mixing and compaction to be achieved .
Any added water shall be through an integral spraybar on the stabilising machine .
Any added water shall have a sulfate content not exceeding mgl as SO when tested in accordance with BS EN clause .
The stabilising machine shall be equipped with a device for controlling the depth of processing which shall be maintained at the correct setting at all times .
An overlap of mm shall be made between adjacent passes of the stabilising machine .
Where a subsequent layer of material is placed on a layer previously stabilised the tines or blades of the stabilising machine shall be set so that they cut into the previously stabilised layer below by at least mm .
Each layer of Class E or F processed material shall be compacted as soon as possible after the final pass of the stabilising machine .
Compaction shall be completed within hours following the mixing of the cement into the material to be stabilised .
Immediately before compaction Class E processed material shall have a Moisture Condition Value MCV of not greater than nor less than the figure stated in contract specific Appendix both as determined in accordance with Clause .
Water shall be added if necessary in a uniform manner to enable this MCV requirement to be met .
Any added water shall have a sulfate content not exceeding mgl as SO when tested in accordance with BS EN clause .
The compaction of each layer of Class E or F material shall comply with Clause Table Method except that if layers of Class E or F greater than mm thickness are to be constructed the number of passes of the compaction plant shall be determined from the results of a demonstration area as detailed in contract specific Appendix .
Class E and F materials shall be cured in accordance with Clause .
During periods when the air temperature is forecast to drop below C or when ground frost is forecast Class E and F material shall be protected to prevent freezing for a period of days from the time of completion of compaction .
Such protection shall be sealed to prevent the ingress of moisture .
Class E and F materials shall not have other material deposited or compacted above them until such time as the required bearing ratio in contract specific Appendix has been achieved .
The relaxation allowed in subClause .
shall not apply before this time .
Determination of Sulfate Content Where required in Table or contract specific Appendix the effects of watersoluble sulfate oxidisable sulfides and total potential sulfate shall be assessed in accordance with BS EN clauses and .
Test results and limiting values for sulfate shall be given as SO .
At least five samples of each material shall be tested for WS OS and TPS .
The mean of the highest two values shall be used for comparison with the limiting values .
This also applies if six to nine results are available .
If ten or more results are available the mean of the highest of the results shall be used for comparison with the limiting values .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Earthworks Amendment February TABLE Acceptable Earthworks Materials Classification and Compaction Requirements See footnotes Class General Material Description Typical Use Permitted Constituents All Subject to Requirements of Clause and contract specific Appendix Material Properties Required for Acceptability In Addition to Requirements on Use of Fill Materials in Clause and Testing in Clause Compaction Requirements in Clause Class Property See Exceptions in Previous Column Defined and Tested in Accordance with Acceptable Limits Within Lower Upper G E N E R A L G R A N U L A R F I L L A Well graded granular material General Fill Any material or combination of materials other than material designated as Class in the Contract .
Properties i ii and iv in next column shall not apply to chalk .
Recycled aggregate .
Where material is imported onto site which is not as dug it shall be aggregate conforming to BS EN from one or more of the following source codes see Notes and P natural aggregates A construction and demolition recycling industries B municipal incinerator bottom ash MIBA D air cooled blast furnace slag D basic oxygen furnace slag D electric arc furnace slag EAF C E non ferrous steel industry except E molybdenum slag G mining and quarry industry i grading BS Part or BS EN Tab Tab Tab Method A ii uniformity coefficient See Note iii mc BS Part See Note App App iv MCV Clause App App v IDD of chalk Clause App Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Earthworks Amendment February Class General Material Description Typical Use Permitted Constituents All Subject to Requirements of Clause and contract specific Appendix Material Properties Required for Acceptability In Addition to Requirements on Use of Fill Materials in Clause and Testing in Clause Compaction Requirements in Clause Class Property See Exceptions in Previous Column Defined and Tested in Accordance with Acceptable Limits Within Lower Upper G E N E R A L G R A N U L A R F I L L B Uniformly graded granular material General Fill Any material or combination of materials other than chalk .
Recycled aggregate Where material is imported onto site which is not as dug it shall be aggregate conforming to BS EN from one or more of the following source codes see Notes and P natural aggregates except chalk A construction and demolition recycling industries B municipal incinerator bottom ash MIBA C coal fly ash C coal bottom ash D air cooled blast furnace slag D basic oxygen furnace slag D electric arc furnace slag EAF C E non ferrous steel industry except E molybdenum slag F foundry industry G mining and quarry industry H dredge spoil sand i grading BS Part or BS EN Tab Tab Tab Method B ii uniformity coefficient See Note iii mc BS Part See Note App App iv MCV Clause App App C Coarse granular material General Fill Any material or combination of materials other than material designated as Class in the Contract .
Properties i and ii in next column shall not apply to chalk .
Recycled aggregate Where material is imported onto site which is not as dug it shall be aggregate conforming to BS EN from one or more of the following source codes see Notes and P natural aggregates A construction and demolition recycling industries D air cooled blast furnace slag G mining and quarry industry i grading BS Part or BS EN Tab Tab Tab Method C ii uniformity coefficient See Note iii Los Angeles coefficient Clause TABLE Acceptable Earthworks Materials Classification and Compaction Requirements See footnotes continued Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Earthworks Amendment February TABLE Acceptable Earthworks Materials Classification and Compaction Requirements See footnotes continued Class General Material Description Typical Use Permitted Constituents All Subject to Requirements of Clause and contract specific Appendix Material Properties Required for Acceptability In Addition to Requirements on Use of Fill Materials in Clause and Testing in Clause Compaction Requirements in Clause Class Property See Exceptions in Previous Column Defined and Tested in Accordance with Acceptable Limits Within Lower Upper G E N E R A L C O H E S I V E F I L L A Wet cohesive material General Fill Any material or combination of materials other than chalk .
i grading BS Part Tab Tab Tab Method except for materials with liquid limit greater than determined by BS Part only deadweight tamping or vibratory tamping rollers or grid rollers shall be used .
A ii plastic limit PL BS Part iii mc BS Part See Note PL App iv MCV Clause App App v Undrained shear strength of remoulded material Clause App App B Dry cohesive material General Fill Any material or combination of materials other than chalk i grading BS Part Tab Tab Tab Method B ii plastic limit PL BS Part iii mc BS Part See Note App PL iv MCV Clause App App v undrained shear strength of remoulded material Clause App App C Stony cohesive material General Fill Any material or combination of materials other than chalk i grading BS part Tab Tab Tab Method C ii plastic limit PL BS part iii mc BS Part See Note App App iv MCV Clause App v Undrained shear strength of remoulded material Clause App Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Earthworks Amendment February Class General Material Description Typical Use Permitted Constituents All Subject to Requirements of Clause and contract specific Appendix Material Properties Required for Acceptability In Addition to Requirements on Use of Fill Materials in Clause and Testing in Clause Compaction Requirements in Clause Class Property See Exceptions in Previous Column Defined and Tested in Accordance with Acceptable Limits Within Lower Upper G E N E R A L C O H E S I V E F I L L D Silty cohesive material General Fill Any material or combination of materials other than chalk i grading BS Part Tab Tab Tab Method D ii mc BS Part See Note App App iii MCV Clause App App iv undrained shear strength of remoulded material Clause App App E Reclaimed pulverised fuel ash cohesive material General Fill Reclaimed material from lagoon or stockpile containing not more than furnace bottom ash i mc BS Part See Note To enable compaction to Clause End product of maximum dry density of BS Part .
kg rammer method E ii bulk density BS Part App App G E N C H A L K F I L L Chalk General Fill Chalk and associated materials all designated as Class in the Contract i mc BS Part See Note App Tab Method or Method if required in App .
All types of vibratory rollers of Categories over kg shall not be used ii IDD Clause App App TABLE Acceptable Earthworks Materials Classification and Compaction Requirements See footnotes continued Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Earthworks Amendment February TABLE Acceptable Earthworks Materials Classification and Compaction Requirements See footnotes continued Class General Material Description Typical Use Permitted Constituents All Subject to Requirements of Clause and contract specific Appendix Material Properties Required for Acceptability In Addition to Requirements on Use of Fill Materials in Clause and Testing in Clause Compaction Requirements in Clause Class Property See Exceptions in Previous Column Defined and Tested in Accordance with Acceptable Limits Within Lower Upper L A N D S C A P E F I L L Various Fill to landscape areas See App i grading BS Part App App See Clause and App ii mc BS Part See Note App iii MCV Clause App App T O P S O I L A Topsoil or turf existing on site Topsoiling Topsoil or turf designated as Class A in the Contract i grading Clause Clause A B Imported topsoil Topsoiling General purpose grade complying with BS B Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Earthworks Amendment February Class General Material Description Typical Use Permitted Constituents All Subject to Requirements of Clause and contract specific Appendix Material Properties Required for Acceptability In Addition to Requirements on Use of Fill Materials in Clause and Testing in Clause Compaction Requirements in Clause Class Property See Exceptions in Previous Column Defined and Tested in Accordance with Acceptable Limits Within Lower Upper S E L E C T E D G R A N U L A R F I L L A Selected well graded granular material Below water Natural gravel natural sand crushed gravel crushed rock other than argillaceous rock crushed concrete chalk well burnt colliery spoil or any combination thereof .
Properties i and ii in next column shall not apply to chalk .
Recycled aggregate Where material is imported onto site which is not as dug it shall be aggregate conforming to BS EN from one or more of the following source codes see Notes and P natural aggregates except shale siltstone or slate see Note A construction and demolition recycling industries G red coal shale G preselected allin from quarryingmining i grading BS Part Onsite Tab Tab No compaction A BS EN Imported onto site Tab Tab ii uniformity See Note iii SMC of chalk index Clause iv plasticity index BS Part Nonplastic B Selected coarse granular material Starter layer Natural gravel natural sand crushed gravel crushed rock crushed concrete chalk well burnt colliery spoil slag or any combination thereof .
Properties ii and iii in next column shall not apply to chalk .
Recycled aggregate Where material is imported onto site which is not as dug it shall be aggregate conforming to BS EN from one or more of the following source codes see Notes and P natural aggregates except shale siltstone or slate see Note A construction and demolition recycling industries D air cooled blast furnace slag D basic oxygen furnace slag D electric arc furnace slag EAF C G red coal shale G preselected allin from quarryingmining i grading BS Part Onsite Tab Tab Tab Method B BS EN Imported onto site Tab Tab ii plasticity index BS Part Nonplastic iii Los Angeles coefficient Clause iv mc BS Part See Note App App TABLE Acceptable Earthworks Materials Classification and Compaction Requirements See footnotes continued Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Earthworks Amendment February TABLE Acceptable Earthworks Materials Classification and Compaction Requirements See footnotes continued Class General Material Description Typical Use Permitted Constituents All Subject to Requirements of Clause and contract specific Appendix Material Properties Required for Acceptability In Addition to Requirements on Use of Fill Materials in Clause and Testing in Clause Compaction Requirements in Clause Class Property See Exceptions in Previous Column Defined and Tested in Accordance with Acceptable Limits Within Lower Upper S E L E C T E D G R A N U L A R F I L L C Selected uniformly graded granular material Starter layer Natural gravel natural sand crushed gravel crushed rock other than argillaceous rock crushed concrete chalk well burnt colliery spoil slag or any combination thereof .
Property iii in next column shall not apply to chalk .
Recycled aggregate Where material is imported onto site which is not as dug it shall be aggregate conforming to BS EN from one or more of the following source codes see Notes and P natural aggregates except shale siltstone or slate see Note A construction and demolition recycling industries D air cooled blast furnace slag D basic oxygen furnace slag D electric arc furnace slag EAF C G red coal shale G preselected allin from quarryingmining i grading BS Part Onsite Tab Tab Tab Method C BS EN Imported onto site Tab Tab ii uniformity coefficient See Note iii plasticity index BS Part Nonplastic iv Los Angeles coefficient Clause v mc BS Part See Note App App Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Earthworks Amendment February Class General Material Description Typical Use Permitted Constituents All Subject to Requirements of Clause and contract specific Appendix Material Properties Required for Acceptability In Addition to Requirements on Use of Fill Materials in Clause and Testing in Clause Compaction Requirements in Clause Class Property See Exceptions in Previous Column Defined and Tested in Accordance with Acceptable Limits Within Lower Upper S E L E C T E D G R A N U L A R F I L L D Selected uniformly graded granular material Starter layer below pulverised fuel ash Natural gravel natural sand crushed gravel crushed rock other than argillaceous rock crushed concrete chalk well burnt colliery spoil slag or any combination thereof .
Recycled aggregate Where material is imported onto site which is not as dug it shall be aggregate conforming to BS EN from one or more of the following source codes see Notes and P natural aggregates except shale siltstone or slate see Note A construction and demolition recycling industries D air cooled blast furnace slag D basic oxygen furnace slag D electric arc furnace slag EAF C G red coal shale i grading BS Part On site Tab Tab Tab Method D BS EN Imported onto site Tab Tab ii uniformity coefficient See Note iii plasticity index BS Part Nonplastic iv mc BS Part See Note App App v MCV Clause App App TABLE Acceptable Earthworks Materials Classification and Compaction Requirements See footnotes continued Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Earthworks Amendment February TABLE Acceptable Earthworks Materials Classification and Compaction Requirements See footnotes continued Class General Material Description Typical Use Permitted Constituents All Subject to Requirements of Clause and contract specific Appendix Material Properties Required for Acceptability In Addition to Requirements on Use of Fill Materials in Clause and Testing in Clause Compaction Requirements in Clause Class Property See Exceptions in Previous Column Defined and Tested in Accordance with Acceptable Limits Within Lower Upper S E L E C T E D G R A N U L A R F I L L E Selected granular material Class A For stabilisation with cement to form capping Any material or combination of materials other than unburnt colliery spoil and argillaceous rock .
Properties i ii and iii in next column shall not apply to chalk .
Recycled aggregate Where material is imported onto site which is not as dug it shall be aggregate conforming to BS EN from one or more of the following source codes see Notes and P natural aggregates except shale siltstone or slate see Note A construction and demolition recycling industries D air cooled blast furnace slag G mining and quarry industry except G black coal shale i grading BS Part Onsite Tab Tab Not applicable E BS EN Imported onto site Tab Tab ii mc BS Part See Note App iii liquid limit BS Part iv plasticity index BS Part v organic matter BS Part App vi water soluble WS sulfate content BS EN clause mgl as SO vii oxidisable sulfides OS content BS EN clause .
as SO viii SMC of chalk Clause F Selected granular material fine grading Capping Any material or combination of materials including recycled aggregates with not more than by mass of recycled bituminous planings and granulated asphalt but excluding materials contaminated with tar and tar bitumen binders unburnt colliery spoil argillaceous rock and chalk .
Property vi in the next column shall not apply if the Class Ra asphalt content of any recycled aggregate is or less .
Where material in this Class is imported onto site it shall be classified as Class F and comply with the requirements for that material .
i grading BS Part On site materials only Tab Tab Tab Method F ii optimum mc BS Part vibrating hammer method iii mc BS Part See Note Optimum mc Optimum mc iv Los Angeles coefficient Clause v Class Ra asphalt content Clause vi bitumen content BS EN or BS EN .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Earthworks Amendment February Class General Material Description Typical Use Permitted Constituents All Subject to Requirements of Clause and contract specific Appendix Material Properties Required for Acceptability In Addition to Requirements on Use of Fill Materials in Clause and Testing in Clause Compaction Requirements in Clause Class Property See Exceptions in Previous Column Defined and Tested in Accordance with Acceptable Limits Within Lower Upper S E L E C T E D G R A N U L A R F I L L F Selected granular material coarse grading Capping Any material or combination of materials including recycled aggregates with not more than by mass of recycled bituminous planings and granulated asphalt but excluding materials contaminated with tar and tar bitumen binders unburnt colliery spoil and argillaceous rock .
Property i in the next column shall not apply to chalk .
Property vi in the next column shall not apply if the Class Ra asphalt content of any recycled aggregate is or less .
Where material in this Class is imported onto site it shall be classified as Class F and comply with the requirements for that material .
i grading BS Part On site materials only Tab Tab Tab Method F ii optimum mc BS Part vibrating hammer method iii mc BS Part See Note Optimum mc Optimum mc iv Los Angeles coefficient Clause v Class Ra asphalt content Clause vi bitumen content BS EN or BS EN .
F Selected granular material Capping Any material or combination of materials with not less than by mass of recycled bituminous planings and granulated asphalt but excluding materials contaminated with tar and tarbitumen binders unburnt colliery spoil and argillaceous rock .
Where material is imported onto site which is not as dug it shall be aggregate conforming to BS EN from the following source codes see Notes and A reclaimed asphalt A mixed recycled aggregate Aggregates from source code A shall contain at least of constituents in Class Ra bituminous materials .
i grading BS Part Onsite Tab Tab Tab Method Maximum Compacted layer thickness shall be mm F BS EN Imported onto site Tab Tab ii optimum mc Clause iii mc Clause See Note Optimum mc Optimum mc iv Class Ra asphalt content Clause v bitumen content BS EN or BS EN TABLE Acceptable Earthworks Materials Classification and Compaction Requirements See footnotes continued Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Earthworks Amendment February TABLE Acceptable Earthworks Materials Classification and Compaction Requirements See footnotes continued Class General Material Description Typical Use Permitted Constituents All Subject to Requirements of Clause and contract specific Appendix Material Properties Required for Acceptability In Addition to Requirements on Use of Fill Materials in Clause and Testing in Clause Compaction Requirements in Clause Class Property See Exceptions in Previous Column Defined and Tested in Accordance with Acceptable Limits Within Lower Upper S E L E C T E D G R A N U L A R F I L L F Selected granular material fine grading imported on to the Site Capping Unbound mixture complying with BS EN containing aggregate conforming to BS EN from one or more of the following source codes see Notes and P natural aggregates except chalk shale siltstone or slate see Note A crushed concrete A crushed bricks masonry A mixed recycled aggregate B municipal incinerator bottom ash MIBA D air cooled blast furnace slag D basic oxygen furnace slag D electric arc furnace slag EAF C G mining and quarry industry except G black coal shale Aggregates from source code A shall contain not more than of constituents in Class Ra bituminous materials .
Property x in the next column shall not apply if the Class Ra asphalt content of any recycled aggregate is or less .
i Size designation and overall grading category BS EN .
and GE Tab Tab Tab Method F ii Maximum fines and oversize categories BS EN UF and OC Tab Tab iii Los Angeles coefficient BS EN LA iv Volume stability of blast furnace slag BS EN free from dicalcium silicate and iron disintegration v Volume stability of steel BOF and EAF slag BS EN V vi Other aggregate requirements BS EN CategoryNR no requirement vii Laboratory dry density and optimum water content BS EN Clause .
declared values viii Water content BS EN Optimum wc Optimum wc ix Class Ra asphalt content Clause x bitumen content BS EN or BS EN .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Earthworks Amendment February Class General Material Description Typical Use Permitted Constituents All Subject to Requirements of Clause and contract specific Appendix Material Properties Required for Acceptability In Addition to Requirements on Use of Fill Materials in Clause and Testing in Clause Compaction Requirements in Clause Class Property See Exceptions in Previous Column Defined and Tested in Accordance with Acceptable Limits Within Lower Upper S E L E C T E D G R A N U L A R F I L L F Selected granular material coarse grading imported on to the Site Capping Unbound mixture complying with BS EN containing aggregate conforming to BS EN from one or more of the following source codes see Notes and P natural aggregates except chalk shale siltstone or slate see Note A crushed concrete A crushed bricks masonry A mixed recycled aggregate B municipal incinerator bottom ash MIBA D air cooled blast furnace slag D basic oxygen furnace slag D electric arc furnace slag EAF C G mining and quarry industry except G black coal shale Aggregates from source code A shall contain not more than of constituents in Class Ra bituminous materials .
Property x in the next column shall not apply if the Class Ra asphalt content of any recycled aggregate is or less .
i Size designation and overall grading category BS EN and GE Tab Tab Tab Method F ii Maximum fines and oversize categories BS EN UF and OC Tab Tab iii Los Angeles coefficient BS EN LA iv Volume stability of blast furnace slag BS EN free from dicalcium silicate and iron disintegration v Volume stability of steel BOF and EAF slag BS EN V vi Other aggregate requirements BS EN Category NR no requirement vii Laboratory dry density and optimum water content BS EN Clause .
declared values viii Water content BS EN Optimum wc Optimum wc ix Class Ra asphalt content Clause x bitumen content BS EN or BS EN .
G Selected granular material Gabion filling Natural gravel crushed rock crushed concrete or any combination thereof .
None of these constituents shall include any argillaceous rock .
Where material is imported onto site which is not as dug it shall be aggregate conforming to BS EN from one or more of the following source codes see Notes and P natural aggregates except shale siltstone or slate see Note A crushed concrete .
i grading BS Part Onsite Tab Tab None G BS EN Imported onto site Tab Tab ii Los Angeles coefficient Clause TABLE Acceptable Earthworks Materials Classification and Compaction Requirements See footnotes continued Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Earthworks Amendment February Class General Material Description Typical Use Permitted Constituents All Subject to Requirements of Clause and contract specific Appendix Material Properties Required for Acceptability In Addition to Requirements on Use of Fill Materials in Clause and Testing in Clause Compaction Requirements in Clause Class Property See Exceptions in Previous Column Defined and Tested in Accordance with Acceptable Limits Within Lower Upper S E L E C T E D G R A N U L A R F I L L H Selected granular material Drainage layer to reinforced soil and anchored earth structures Natural gravel natural sand crushed gravel crushed rock crushed concrete chalk well burnt colliery spoil or any structures combination thereof .
None of these constituents shall include any argillaceous rock .
Properties vi vii viii ix x xi and xii in next column only apply when metallic reinforcing or anchor elements facing units or fastenings are used .
Properties ii and v in next column shall not apply to chalk .
Recycled aggregate except recycled asphalt .
Where material is imported onto site which is not as dug it shall be aggregate conforming to BS EN from one or more of the following source codes see Notes and P natural aggregates except shale siltstone or slate see Note A crushed concrete A crushed bricks masonry G red coal shale i grading BS Part Onsite Tab Tab Tab Method H BS EN Imported onto site Tab Tab ii plasticity index BS Part Nonplastic iii Los Angeles coefficient Clause iv mc BS Part See Note App App v MCV Clause App App vi pH value BS Part Tab Tab vii chloride ion content BS EN Tab viii water soluble WS sulfate content BS EN clause Tab ix oxidisable sulfides OS content BS EN clause Tab x resistivity Clause Tab xi redox potential Clause Tab xii organic content BS Part Tab xiii microbial activity index Table Tab TABLE Acceptable Earthworks Materials Classification and Compaction Requirements See footnotes continued Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Earthworks Amendment February Class General Material Description Typical Use Permitted Constituents All Subject to Requirements of Clause and contract specific Appendix Material Properties Required for Acceptability In Addition to Requirements on Use of Fill Materials in Clause and Testing in Clause Compaction Requirements in Clause Class Property See Exceptions in Previous Column Defined and Tested in Accordance with Acceptable Limits Within Lower Upper S E L E C T E D G R A N U L A R F I L L I Selected well graded granular material Fill to reinforced soil and anchored earth structures Natural gravel natural sand crushed gravel crushed rock crushed concrete slag chalk well burnt colliery spoil or any combination thereof except that chalk shall not be combined with any other constituent .
None of these constituents shall include any argillaceous rock .
Properties i ii and v in next column shall not apply to chalk .
Properties viii ix x xi xii xiii and xiv only apply when metallic reinforcing or anchor elements facing units or fastenings are used .
Recycled aggregate except recycled asphalt .
Where material is imported onto site which is not as dug it shall be aggregate conforming to BS EN from one or more of the following source codes see Notes and P natural aggregates except shale siltstone or slate see Note A crushed concrete A crushed bricks masonry D air cooled blast furnace slag G red coal shale i grading BS Part Onsite Tab Tab Tab Method I BS EN Imported onto site Tab Tab ii uniformity coefficient See Note iii SMC of chalk Clause iv mc BS Part See Note App App v MCV Clause App App vi effective angle of friction j and effective cohesion c Clause App vii coefficient of friction and adhesion fill elements Clause App viii pH value BS Part Tab Tab ix chloride ion content BS EN Tab x water soluble WS sulfate content BS EN clause Tab xi oxidisable sulfides OS content BS EN clause Tab xii resistivity Clause Tab xiii redox potential Clause Tab xiv organic content BS Part Tab xv microbial activity index Table Tab TABLE Acceptable Earthworks Materials Classification and Compaction Requirements See footnotes continued Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Earthworks Amendment February Class General Material Description Typical Use Permitted Constituents All Subject to Requirements of Clause and contract specific Appendix Material Properties Required for Acceptability In Addition to Requirements on Use of Fill Materials in Clause and Testing in Clause Compaction Requirements in Clause Class Property See Exceptions in Previous Column Defined and Tested in Accordance with Acceptable Limits Within Lower Upper S E L E C T E D G R A N U L A R F I L L J Selected uniformly graded granular material Fill to reinforced soil and anchored earth Natural gravel natural sand crushed gravel crushed rock crushed concrete slag chalk well burnt colliery spoil or any combination thereof except that chalk shall not be combined with any other constituent .
None of these constituents shall include any argillaceous rock .
Properties viii ix x xi xii xiii and xiv in next column only apply when metallic reinforcing or anchor elements facing units or fastenings are used .
Properties i ii and v in next column shall not apply to chalk .
Recycled aggregate except recycled asphalt .
Where material is imported onto site which is not as dug it shall be aggregate conforming to BS EN from one or more of the following source codes see Notes and P natural aggregates except shale siltstone or slate see Note A crushed concrete A crushed bricks masonry D air cooled blast furnace slag G red coal shale .
i grading BS Part Onsite Tab Tab Tab Method J BS EN Imported onto site Tab Tab ii uniformity coefficient See Note iii SMC of chalk Clause iv mc BS Part See Note App App v MCV Clause App App vi effective angle of friction j and effective cohesion c Clause App vii coefficient of friction and adhesion fill elements Clause App viii pH value BS Part Tab Tab ix chloride ion content BS EN Tab x water soluble WS sulfate content BS EN clause Tab xi oxidisable sulfides OS content BS EN clause Tab xii resistivity Clause Tab xiii redox potential Clause Tab xiv organic content BS Part Tab xv microbial activity index Table Tab TABLE Acceptable Earthworks Materials Classification and Compaction Requirements See footnotes continued Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Earthworks Amendment February Class General Material Description Typical Use Permitted Constituents All Subject to Requirements of Clause and contract specific Appendix Material Properties Required for Acceptability In Addition to Requirements on Use of Fill Materials in Clause and Testing in Clause Compaction Requirements in Clause Class Property See Exceptions in Previous Column Defined and Tested in Accordance with Acceptable Limits Within Lower Upper S E L E C T E D G R A N U L A R F I L L K Selected granular material Lower bedding for corrugated steel buried structures Natural gravel natural sand crushed gravel crushed rock crushed concrete well burnt colliery spoil or any combination thereof .
None of these constituents shall include any argillaceous rock .
Recycled aggregate except recycled asphalt .
Where material is imported onto which is not as dug site it shall be aggregate conforming to BS EN from one or more of the following source codessee Notes and P natural aggregates except shale siltstone or slate see Note A crushed concrete A crushed bricks masonry G red coal shale i grading BS Part Onsite Tab Tab End product of maximum dry density of BS Part Vibrating hammer method K BS EN Imported onto site Tab Tab ii uniformity coefficient See Note iii plasticity index BS Part iv optimum mc BS Part vibrating hammer method v mc BS Part See Note Optimum mc Optimum mc vi MCV Clause App App vii Los Angeles coefficient Clause viii resistivity Clause ohm cm ix water soluble WS sulfate content BS EN clause mg l as SO x oxidisable sulfides OS content BS EN clause .
as SO xi chloride ion content BS EN .
xii pH value BS Part xiii sulfide and hydrogen sulfide Standard textbook of qualitative inorganic analysis Rapid blackening of lead acetate paper TABLE Acceptable Earthworks Materials Classification and Compaction Requirements See footnotes continued Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Earthworks Amendment February Class General Material Description Typical Use Permitted Constituents All Subject to Requirements of Clause and contract specific Appendix Material Properties Required for Acceptability In Addition to Requirements on Use of Fill Materials in Clause and Testing in Clause Compaction Requirements in Clause Class Property See Exceptions in Previous Column Defined and Tested in Accordance with Acceptable Limits Within Lower Upper S E L E C T E D G R A N U L A R F I L L L Selected uniformly graded granular material Upper bedding for corrugated steel buried structures Natural gravel natural sand crushed gravel crushed rock crushed concrete well burnt colliery spoil or any combination thereof .
None of these constituents shall include any argillaceous rock .
Recycled aggregate except recycled asphalt .
Where material is imported onto site which is not as dug it shall be aggregate conforming to BS EN from one or more of the following source codes see Notes and P natural aggregates except shale siltstone or slate see Note A crushed concrete A crushed bricks masonry G red coal shale i grading BS Part Onsite Tab Tab L BS EN Imported onto site Tab Tab ii resistivity Clause ohm cm iii water soluble WS sulfate content BS EN clause mg l as SO iv oxidisable sulfides OS content BS EN clause .
as SO v chloride ion content BS EN .
vi pH value BS Part vii sulfide and hydrogen sulfide Standard textbook of qualitative inorganic analysis Rapid blackening of lead acetate paper TABLE Acceptable Earthworks Materials Classification and Compaction Requirements See footnotes continued Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Earthworks Amendment February Class General Material Description Typical Use Permitted Constituents All Subject to Requirements of Clause and contract specific Appendix Material Properties Required for Acceptability In Addition to Requirements on Use of Fill Materials in Clause and Testing in Clause Compaction Requirements in Clause Class Property See Exceptions in Previous Column Defined and Tested in Accordance with Acceptable Limits Within Lower Upper S E L E C T E D G R A N U L A R F I L L M Selected granular material Surround to corrugated steel buried structures Natural gravel natural sand crushed gravel crushed rock crushed concrete well burnt colliery spoil or any combination thereof .
None of these constituents shall include any argillaceous rock .
Recycled aggregate except recycled asphalt .
Where material is imported onto site which is not as dug it shall be aggregate conforming to BS EN from one or more of the following source codes see Notes and P natural aggregates except shale siltstone or slate see Note A crushed concrete A crushed bricks masonry G red coal shale .
i grading BS Part Onsite Tab Tab End product of maximum dry density of BS Part Vibrating hammer method unless otherwise stated in App M BS EN Imported onto site Tab Tab ii uniformity coefficient See Note iii plasticity index BS Part iv optimum mc BS Part vibrating hammer method v mc BS Part See Note Optimum mc Optimum mc vi MCV Clause App App vii Los Angeles coefficient Clause viii resistivity Clause ohm cm ix water soluble WS sulfate content BS EN clause mg l as SO x oxidisable sulfides OS content BS EN clause .
as SO xi chloride ion content BS EN .
xii pH value BS Part xiii sulfide and hydrogen sulfide Standard textbook of qualitative inorganic analysis Rapid blackening of lead acetate paper TABLE Acceptable Earthworks Materials Classification and Compaction Requirements See footnotes continued Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Earthworks Amendment February Class General Material Description Typical Use Permitted Constituents All Subject to Requirements of Clause and contract specific Appendix Material Properties Required for Acceptability In Addition to Requirements on Use of Fill Materials in Clause and Testing in Clause Compaction Requirements in Clause Class Property See Exceptions in Previous Column Defined and Tested in Accordance with Acceptable Limits Within Lower Upper S E L E C T E D G R A N U L A R F I L L N Selected well graded granular material Fill to structures Natural gravel natural sand crushed gravel crushed rock crushed concrete slag well burnt colliery spoil or any combination thereof .
None of these constituents shall include any argillaceous rock .
Recycled aggregate except recycled asphalt .
Where material is imported onto site which is not as dug it shall be aggregate conforming to BS EN from one or more of the following source codes see Notes and P natural aggregates except shale siltstone or slate see Note A crushed concrete A crushed bricks masonry D air cooled blast furnace slag G red coal shale .
i grading BS Part Onsite Tab Tab End product of maximum dry density of BS Part vibrating hammer method N BS EN Imported onto site Tab Tab ii uniformity coefficient See Note iii Los Angeles coefficient Clause iv undrained shear parameters c and j Clause App v effective angle of internal friction j and effective cohesion c Clause App vi permeability Clause App vii mc BS Part See Note App App viii MCV Clause App App ix slope stability test where required in App Clause App TABLE Acceptable Earthworks Materials Classification and Compaction Requirements See footnotes continued Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Earthworks Amendment February Class General Material Description Typical Use Permitted Constituents All Subject to Requirements of Clause and contract specific Appendix Material Properties Required for Acceptability In Addition to Requirements on Use of Fill Materials in Clause and Testing in Clause Compaction Requirements in Clause Class Property See Exceptions in Previous Column Defined and Tested in Accordance with Acceptable Limits Within Lower Upper S E L E C T E D G R A N U L A R F I L L P Selected granular material Fill to structures Natural gravel natural sand crushed gravel crushed rock crushed concrete slag chalk well burnt colliery spoil or any combination thereof .
None of these constituents shall include any argillaceous rock .
Properties i ii and ix in next column shall not apply to chalk .
Recycled aggregate except recycled asphalt .
Where material is imported onto site which is not as dug it shall be aggregate conforming to BS EN from one or more of the following source codes see Notes and P natural aggregates except shale siltstone or slate see Note A crushed concrete A crushed bricks masonry D air cooled blast furnace slag G red coal shale .
i grading BS Part Onsite Tab Tab End product of maximum dry density of BS Part vibrating hammer method P BS EN Imported onto site Tab Tab ii uniformity coefficient See Note iii IDD of chalk Clause App iv Los Angeles coefficient Clause v undrained shear parameters c and j Clause App vi effective angle of internal friction j and effective cohesion c Clause App vii permeability Clause App viii mc BS Part See Note App App ix MCV Clause App App x slope stability test where required in App Clause App TABLE Acceptable Earthworks Materials Classification and Compaction Requirements See footnotes continued Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Earthworks Amendment February Class General Material Description Typical Use Permitted Constituents All Subject to Requirements of Clause and contract specific Appendix Material Properties Required for Acceptability In Addition to Requirements on Use of Fill Materials in Clause and Testing in Clause Compaction Requirements in Clause Class Property See Exceptions in Previous Column Defined and Tested in Accordance with Acceptable Limits Within Lower Upper S E L E C T E D G R A N U L A R F I L L Q Selected granular material Fill to structures Natural gravel natural sand crushed gravel crushed rock crushed concrete slag chalk well burnt colliery spoil or any combination thereof .
None of these constituents shall include any argillaceous rock .
Properties i ii and ix in next column shall not apply to chalk .
Recycled aggregate except recycled asphalt .
Where material is imported onto site which is not as dug it shall be aggregate conforming to BS EN from one or more of the following source codes see Notes and P natural aggregates except shale siltstone or slate see Note A crushed concrete A crushed bricks masonry D air cooled blast furnace slag G red coal shale .
As for Class A B or C with the addition of the following End product of maximum dry density of BS Part vibrating hammer method Q i water soluble WS sulfate content BS EN clause mg l as SO ii oxidisable sulfides OS content BS EN clause .
as SO iii chloride ion content BS EN .
iv pH value BS Part v sulfide and hydrogen sulfide Standard textbook of qualitative inorganic analysis Rapid blackening of lead acetate paper TABLE Acceptable Earthworks Materials Classification and Compaction Requirements See footnotes continued Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Earthworks Amendment February Class General Material Description Typical Use Permitted Constituents All Subject to Requirements of Clause and contract specific Appendix Material Properties Required for Acceptability In Addition to Requirements on Use of Fill Materials in Clause and Testing in Clause Compaction Requirements in Clause Class Property See Exceptions in Previous Column Defined and Tested in Accordance with Acceptable Limits Within Lower Upper S E L E C T E D G R A N U L A R F I L L R Selected granular material For stabilisation with lime and cement to form capping Class F Any material or combination of materials other than unburnt colliery spoil and argillaceous rock .
Properties i ii and iii in next column shall not apply to chalk .
i grading BS Part Onsite Tab Tab R BS EN Imported onto site Tab Tab ii mc BS Part See Note App iii liquid limit BS Part iv plasticity index BS Part v organic matter BS Part App vi water soluble WS sulfate content BS EN clause mg l as SO vii oxidisable sulfides OS content BS EN clause .
as SO viii IDD of chalk Clause App S Selected well graded granular material Filter layer below subbase Crushed rock or sand .
Where material is imported onto site which is not as dug it shall be aggregate conforming to BS EN from one or more of the following source codes see Notes and P natural aggregates except chalk shale siltstone or slate see Note .
i grading BS Part Onsite Tab Tab S BS EN Imported onto site Tab Tab ii plasticity index BS Part Nonplastic TABLE Acceptable Earthworks Materials Classification and Compaction Requirements See footnotes continued Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Earthworks Amendment February Class General Material Description Typical Use Permitted Constituents All Subject to Requirements of Clause and contract specific Appendix Material Properties Required for Acceptability In Addition to Requirements on Use of Fill Materials in Clause and Testing in Clause Compaction Requirements in Clause Class Property See Exceptions in Previous Column Defined and Tested in Accordance with Acceptable Limits Within Lower Upper S E L E C T E D C O H E S I V E F I L L A Selected cohesive material Fill to structures Any material or combination of materials other than argillaceous rock and materials designated as Class in the Contract .
If chalk is used it shall form of constituents .
Properties i and iii shall not apply to chalk .
Properties vii and viii may be increased to and respectively for Lias Clay only and subject to the requirements of contract specific Appendix i grading BS Part Tab Tab End product of maximum dry density of BS Part .
kg rammer method or a dry density corresponding to air voids at field mc whichever is lower A ii mc BS Part See Note App App iii MCV Clause App App iv undrained shear parameters c and j Clause App App v effective angle of internal friction j and effective cohesion c Clause App App vi IDD of chalk Clause App App vii liquid limit BS Part viii plasticity index BS Part TABLE Acceptable Earthworks Materials Classification and Compaction Requirements See footnotes continued Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Earthworks Amendment February Class General Material Description Typical Use Permitted Constituents All Subject to Requirements of Clause and contract specific Appendix Material Properties Required for Acceptability In Addition to Requirements on Use of Fill Materials in Clause and Testing in Clause Compaction Requirements in Clause Class Property See Exceptions in Previous Column Defined and Tested in Accordance with Acceptable Limits Within Lower Upper S E L E C T E D C O H E S I V E F I L L B Selected conditioned pulverised fuel ash cohesive material Fill to structures and to reinforced soil Conditioned material direct from power station dust collection system and to which a controlled quantity of water has been added i mc BS Part See Note To enable compaction to Clause End product of maximum dry density of BS Part .
kg rammer method B ii bulk density BS Part App App iii undrained shear parameters c and j Clause App iv effective angle of internal friction j and effective cohesion c Clause App v coefficient of friction and adhesion fill elements Clause App vi permeability Clause App vii slope stability test where required in App Clause App TABLE Acceptable Earthworks Materials Classification and Compaction Requirements See footnotes continued Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Earthworks Amendment February Class General Material Description Typical Use Permitted Constituents All Subject to Requirements of Clause and contract specific Appendix Material Properties Required for Acceptability In Addition to Requirements on Use of Fill Materials in Clause and Testing in Clause Compaction Requirements in Clause Class Property See Exceptions in Previous Column Defined and Tested in Accordance with Acceptable Limits Within Lower Upper S E L E C T E D C O H E S I V E F I L L C Selected wet cohesive material Fill to reinforced soil Any material or combination of materials other than unburnt colliery spoil argillaceous rock and chalk .
Properties viii ix x xi and xii in next column only apply when metallic reinforcing elements facing units or fastenings are used i grading BS Part Tab Tab Tab Method C ii mc BS Part See Note App App iii MCV Clause App App iv effective angle of internal friction j and effective cohesion c Clause App v coefficient of friction and adhesion fill elements Clause App vi liquid limit BS Part vii plasticity index BS Part viii pH value BS Part Tab Tab ix chloride ion content BS EN Tab x water soluble WS sulfate content BS EN clause Tab xi oxidisable sulfides OS content BS EN clause Tab xii resistivity Clause Tab xiii redox potential Clause Tab TABLE Acceptable Earthworks Materials Classification and Compaction Requirements See footnotes continued Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Earthworks Amendment February Class General Material Description Typical Use Permitted Constituents All Subject to Requirements of Clause and contract specific Appendix Material Properties Required for Acceptability In Addition to Requirements on Use of Fill Materials in Clause and Testing in Clause Compaction Requirements in Clause Class Property See Exceptions in Previous Column Defined and Tested in Accordance with Acceptable Limits Within Lower Upper S E L E C T E D C O H E S I V E F I L L D Selected stony cohesive material Fill to reinforced soil Any material or combination of materials other than unburnt colliery spoil argillaceous rock and chalk .
Properties vi vii viii ix x xi and xii in next column only apply when metallic reinforcing elements facing units or fastenings are used i grading BS Part Tab Tab Tab Method D ii mc BS Part See Note App App iii MCV Clause App App iv effective angle of internal friction j and effective cohesion c Clause App v coefficient of friction and adhesion fill elements Clause App vi liquid limit BS Part vii plasticity index BS Part viii pH value BS Part Tab Tab ix chloride ion content BS EN Tab x water soluble WS sulfate content BS EN clause Tab xi oxidisable sulfides OS content BS EN clause Tab xii resistivity Clause Tab xiii redox potential Clause Tab TABLE Acceptable Earthworks Materials Classification and Compaction Requirements See footnotes continued Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Earthworks Amendment February Class General Material Description Typical Use Permitted Constituents All Subject to Requirements of Clause and contract specific Appendix Material Properties Required for Acceptability In Addition to Requirements on Use of Fill Materials in Clause and Testing in Clause Compaction Requirements in Clause Class Property See Exceptions in Previous Column Defined and Tested in Accordance with Acceptable Limits Within Lower Upper S E L E C T E D C O H E S I V E F I L L E Selected cohesive material For stabilisation with lime to form capping Class D Any material or combination of materials other than unburnt colliery spoil i grading BS Part Tab Tab Not applicable E ii mc BS Part See Note App iii MCV Clause App iv plasticity index BS Part v organic matter BS Part App vi water soluble WS sulfate content BS EN clause App vii oxidisable sulfides OS content BS EN clause App viii total potential sulfate TS content BS EN clause App F Selected silty cohesive material For stabilisation with cement to form capping Class B Any material or combination of materials other than chalk unburnt colliery spoil and argillaceous rock i grading BS Part Tab Tab Not applicable F ii uniformity coefficient See Note iii mc BS Part See Note App App iv MCV Clause App App v liquid limit BS Part vi plasticity index BS Part vii organic matter BS Part App viii water soluble WS sulfate content BS EN clause App ix oxidisable sulfides OS content BS EN clause App x total potential sulfate TS content BS EN clause App TABLE Acceptable Earthworks Materials Classification and Compaction Requirements See footnotes continued Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Earthworks Amendment February Class General Material Description Typical Use Permitted Constituents All Subject to Requirements of Clause and contract specific Appendix Material Properties Required for Acceptability In Addition to Requirements on Use of Fill Materials in Clause and Testing in Clause Compaction Requirements in Clause Class Property See Exceptions in Previous Column Defined and Tested in Accordance with Acceptable Limits Within Lower Upper S E L E C T E D C O H E S I V E F I L L G Selected conditioned pulverised fuel ash cohesive material For stabilisation with cement to form capping Class C Conditioned material direct from power station dust collection system and to which a controlled quantity of water has been added i mc BS Part See Note App App G ii water soluble WS sulfate content BS EN clause mgl as SO iii oxidisable sulfides OS content BS EN clause .
as SO iv total potential sulfate TS content BS EN clause .
as SO H Wet dry stony or silty cohesive material and chalk Overlying fill for corrugated steel buried structures As Class A B C D general cohesive fill material or Class chalk fill material except that argillaceous rock slag PFA or any combination thereof shall not be used As for Class A B C D or with the addition of the following H i water soluble WS sulfate content BS EN clause mgl as SO ii oxidisable sulfides OS content BS EN clause .
as SO iii chloride ion content BS EN .
iv pH value BS Part I Selected cohesive material For stabilisation with lime and cement to form capping Class E Any material or combination of materials other than unburnt colliery spoil i grading BS Part Tab Tab Not applicable I ii mc BS Part See Note App iii MCV Clause App iv plasticity index BS Part v organic matter BS Part App vi water soluble WS sulfate content BS EN clause App vii oxidisable sulfides OS content BS EN clause App viii total potential sulfate TS content BS EN clause App TABLE Acceptable Earthworks Materials Classification and Compaction Requirements See footnotes continued Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Earthworks Amendment February Class General Material Description Typical Use Permitted Constituents All Subject to Requirements of Clause and contract specific Appendix Material Properties Required for Acceptability In Addition to Requirements on Use of Fill Materials in Clause and Testing in Clause Compaction Requirements in Clause Class Property See Exceptions in Previous Column Defined and Tested in Accordance with Acceptable Limits Within Lower Upper M I S C F I L L Class Class or Class material Lower trench fill Any material except no stones or lumps of clay shall be retained on the mm test sieve .
Recycled aggregate Where material is imported onto site which is not as dug it shall be aggregate conforming to BS EN from one or more of the following source codes see Notes and P natural aggregates A construction and demolition recycling industries B municipal incinerator bottom ash MIBA D air cooled blast furnace slag D basic oxygen furnace slag D electric arc furnace slag EAF C G mining and quarry industry .
i mc BS Part See Note App App Tab ii MCV Clause App App S T A B I L I S E D M A T E R I A L S A Cement stabilised well graded granular material Capping Class E with addition of cement according to Clause i pulverisation BS EN Tab Method A ii bearing ratio BS EN App iii mc BS EN App App B Cement stabilised silty cohesive material Capping Class F with addition of cement according to Clause i pulverisation BS EN App Tab Method B ii MCV immediately before compaction Clause App iii bearing ratio BS EN App iv mc BS EN App App C Cement stabilised conditioned pulverised fuel ash cohesive material Capping Class G with addition of cement according to Clause i pulverisation BS EN End product of maximum dry density BS EN .
kg rammer method C ii bearing ratio BS EN App iii mc BS EN To enable compaction to Clause TABLE Acceptable Earthworks Materials Classification and Compaction Requirements See footnotes continued Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Earthworks Amendment February Class General Material Description Typical Use Permitted Constituents All Subject to Requirements of Clause and contract specific Appendix Material Properties Required for Acceptability In Addition to Requirements on Use of Fill Materials in Clause and Testing in Clause Compaction Requirements in Clause Class Property See Exceptions in Previous Column Defined and Tested in Accordance with Acceptable Limits Within Lower Upper S T A B I L I S E D M A T E R I A L S D Lime stabilised cohesive material Capping Class E with addition of lime according to Clause i pulverisation BS EN Tab Method D ii MCV immediately before compaction Clause App App iii bearing ratio BS EN App iv mc BS EN App App E Lime and cement stabilised cohesive material Capping Class I with addition of lime and cement according to Clause i pulverisation BS EN Tab Method E ii MCV immediately before completion Clause App App iii bearing ratio BS EN App iv mc BS EN App App F Lime and cement stabilised well graded granular material Capping Class R with addition of lime and cement according to Clause i pulverisation BS EN Tab Method F ii bearing ratio BS EN App iii mc BS EN See Note App App Footnotes to Table App contract specific Appendix Tab Table Where in the Acceptable Limits column reference is made to App only those properties having limits ascribed to them in contract specific Appendix shall apply .
Where contract specific Appendix gives limits for other properties not listed in this Table such limits shall also apply .
Where BS Part is specified for mc this shall mean BS Part where the material is a soil or BS EN where the material is required to conform to a harmonised European Standard .
Uniformity coefficient is defined as the ratio of the particle diameters D to D on the particlesize distribution curve where D particle diameter at which of the soil by weight is finer D particle diameter at which of the soil by weight is finer .
The limiting values for Class UB material are given in contract specific Appendix and contract specific Appendix .
For works in Wales see subClause .W .
Where material source codes are referenced these are as listed in Table .
Where materials are required to be aggregates conforming to BS EN materials certificated as being compliant with BS EN are acceptable for use provided that they meet all the specification requirements and the Declaration of Performance for constituent parts to BS EN are provided to the Overseeing Organisation .
Materials shall comply with the current Environmental Regulations at the time of use .
Reference shall be made to Annex ZA informative of BS EN .
TABLE Acceptable Earthworks Materials Classification and Compaction Requirements See footnotes continued Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Earthworks Amendment February TABLE Grading Requirements for Acceptable Earthworks Materials Other Than Classes F F and S Percentage by Mass Passing the Size Shown Class Size mm Size mm BS Series Size microns BS Series Size micr ons Class . . . . A A B B C C A B A B C C D D A A B B C C D except for crushed rock D E R E R F F F F F F H H I J I J K K L except for crushed rock L Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Earthworks Amendment February TABLE Grading Requirements for Acceptable Earthworks Materials continued Percentage by Mass Passing the Size Shown Class Size mm Size mm BS Series Size microns BS Series Size micr ons Class . . . . M M N P N P S S A A C C D D E E F F I I Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Earthworks Amendment February TABLE Limits of Material Properties of Fill for Use With Metal Components in Reinforced Soil and Anchored Earth Structures for Class H I J C and D Materials Reinforcing Element Material Properties of Fill pH Value Max Chloride Ion Content Max Organic Content Max Water Soluble WS Sulfate Content mgl as SO Maximum Oxidisable Sulfides OS Content as SO Minimum Restivity Ohm.cm Minimum Redox Potential volts Microbial Activity Index Min Max Galvanised Steel . . . . Less than Stainless Steel . . . . NOTES A method of calculating the Microbial Activity Index may be obtained by reference to TRRL Contractor Report Soil Corrosivity Assessment .
The corrosion potential of frictional fill shall be assessed from resistivity pH chloride water soluble sulfate and oxidisable sulfides tests .
For cohesive soil it will be necessary to test additionally for organic content .
Should either organic content or sulfate be in excess of the specified levels then tests shall also be included for Redox Potential and Microbial Activity Index .
The water soluble sulfate content and oxidisable sulfides content shall be determined in accordance with the methods described in BS EN clause and .
Methods of test except for Microbial Activity Index water soluble sulfate content and oxidisable sulfides content are given in BS Part .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Earthworks Amendment February TABLE Method Compaction for Earthworks Materials Plant and Methods Method to Method This Table is to be read in conjunction with subClause .
Type of Compaction Plant Ref No .
Category Method Method Method Method Method Method D N D N D N D N D N N for D mm N for D mm N for D mm Smoothed wheeled roller or vibratory roller operating without vibration Mass per metre width of roll over kg up to kg unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable over kg up to kg unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable over kg unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable Grid roller Mass per metre width of roll over kg up to kg unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable over kg up to kg unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable over kg unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable Deadweight tamping roller Mass per metre width of roll over kg up to kg unsuitable unsuitable over kg unsuitable Pneumatictyred roller Mass per wheel over kg up to kg unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable over kg up to kg unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable over kg up to kg unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable over kg up to kg unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable over kg up to kg unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable over kg up to kg unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable over kg up to kg unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable over kg unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable Vibratory tamping roller Mass per metre width of a vibrating roll over kg up to kg unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable over kg up to kg unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable over kg up to kg unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable over kg up to kg unsuitable unsuitable over kg up to kg unsuitable unsuitable over kg up to kg unsuitable unsuitable over kg up to kg unsuitable over kg unsuitable Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Earthworks Amendment February TABLE Method Compaction for Earthworks Materials Plant and Methods Method to Method This Table is to be read in conjunction with subClause .
Continued Type of Compaction Plant Ref No .
Category Method Method Method Method Method Method D N D N D N D N D N N for D mm N for D mm N for D mm Vibratory roller Mass per metre width of vibratory roll over kg up to kg unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable over kg up to kg unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable over kg up to kg unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable over kg up to kg unsuitable unsuitable over kg up to kg unsuitable unsuitable over kg up to kg unsuitable over kg up to kg unsuitable over kg up to kg unsuitable over kg up to kg unsuitable over kg unsuitable Vibrating plate compactor Mass per m of base plate over kg up to kg unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable over kg up to kg unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable over kg up to kg unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable over kg up to kg unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable over kg up to kg unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable over kg unsuitable unsuitable Vibrotamper Mass over kg up to kg unsuitable unsuitable over kg up to kg unsuitable over kg up to kg unsuitable over kg unsuitable Power rammer Mass kg up to kg unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable over kg unsuitable unsuitable Droppingweight compactor Mass of rammer over kg weight drop over m up to m unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable over m unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Earthworks Amendment February TABLE Method Compaction for Earthworks Materials Plant and Methods Method This Table is to be read in conjunction with subClause .
Continued Type of Compaction Plant Ref No .
Category Method N for D mm N for D mm Smooth wheeled roller or vibratory roller operating without vibration Mass per metre width of roll over kg up to kg over kg up to kg over kg unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable Grid roller Mass per metre width of roll over kg up to kg over kg up to kg over kg unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable Deadweight tamping roller Mass per metre width of roll over kg up to kg over kg Pneumatictyred roller Mass per wheel over kg up to kg over kg up to kg over kg up to kg over kg up to kg over kg up to kg over kg up to kg over kg up to kg over kg unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable Vibratory tamping roller Mass per metre width of vibrating roll over kg up to kg over kg up to kg over kg up to kg over kg up to kg over kg up to kg over kg up to kg over kg up to kg over kg unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable Vibratory roller Mass per metre width of vibrating roll over kg up to kg over kg up to kg over kg up to kg over kg up to kg over kg up to kg over kg up to kg over kg up to kg over kg up to kg over kg up to kg over kg unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable Vibratory plate compactor Mass per m of base plate over kg up to kg over kg up to kg over kg up to kg over kg up to kg over kg up to kg over kg unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable Vibrotamper Mass over kg up to kg over kg up to kg over kg up to kg over kg unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable Power rammer Mass kg up to kg over kg unsuitable Dropping weight compactor Mass of rammer over kg height drop over m up to m over m unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Earthworks Amendment February TABLE Imported Onto Site Grading Requirements for Class Acceptable Earthworks Materials Percentage by Mass Passing the Size Shown Class Size mm Size mm BS EN Series Size microns BS EN Series Class . . A A B B C C D except for crushed rock D E R E R F F F F F F H H I J I J K K L except for crushed rock L M M N P N P S S Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Earthworks Amendment February TABLE Records and Reports Information Required Ground Treatment In situ Testing For each columnarea treated Date Contract title Area identification Unique grid location Ground level at commencement Material used Approximate column diameter Depth of penetration of each compaction point Vibrator power consumption during operation Jetting pressure where applicable Duration of penetration Duration of compaction Obstructions and delays Number and type of tests carried out For each area tested Date Contract Title Area identification Test position coordinates and level Method of test used All information required by appropriate British Standard test procedure Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Earthworks Amendment February F TABLE Material Sources and Source Codes for Imported Materials This table is taken from BS EN which was published on st May and subsequently withdrawn on th January .
All other specification requirements which reference BS EN shall be taken as reference to the version of that standard current at the Contract Reference Document Date unless otherwise detailed in the contract specific specification .
Source Code Source SubCode Specific Material P Natural Aggregates P All petrographic types included in BS EN A Construction and demolition recycling industries A Reclaimed asphalt A Crushed concrete A Crushed bricks masonry A Mix of A A and A B Municipal solid waste incineration industry B Municipal incinerator bottom ash excluding fly ash MIBA B Municipal incinerator fly ash MIFA C Coal Power Generation Industry C Coal fly ash C Fluidised bed combustion fly ash FBCFA C Boiler slag C Coal bottom ash C Fluidised bed combustion bottom ash FBC bottom ash D Iron and steel industry D Granulated blast furnace slag GBS D Aircooled blast furnace slag ABS D Basic oxygen furnace slag converter slag BOS D Electric arc furnace slag from carbon steel production EAF C D Electric arc furnace slag from stainlesshigh alloy steel production EAF S D Ferrochromium slag E Non ferrous steel industry E Copper slag E Molybdenum slag E Zinc slag E Phosphorous slag F Foundry industry F Foundry sand F Foundry cupola furnace slag G Mining and quarry industry G Red coal shale G Refuse from hard coal mining black coal shale G Preselected allin from quarrymining G Spent oil shale H Maintenance dredging works H Dredge spoil sand H Dredge spoil clay I Miscellaneous I Excavated soil I Paper sludge ash I Sewage sludge incineration ash municipal I Biomass ash I Crushed glass I Expanded clay Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Earthworks Amendment February S NATIONAL ALTERATIONS OF THE OVERSEEING ORGANISATION OF SCOTLAND TS Classification Definitions and Uses of Earthworks Materials General This Series is part of the Specification for Highway Works .
Whilst this Series is particularly relevant to the subject matter in its title it must be read in conjunction with the general requirements in Series and and with all other Series relevant to the specification for the particular works to be undertaken .
General Classification Earthworks materials shall fall into one or other of the following general classifications i acceptable material material excavated from within the site or imported on to the site which meets the requirements of Table and contract specific Appendix for acceptability for use in the permanent works ii unacceptable material Class UA as defined in subClauses ia and ib of this Clause material excavated from within the site which unless processed so that it meets the requirements of Table and contract specific Appendix shall not be used in the permanent works iii unacceptable material Class UB as defined in subClause iia of this Clause material excavated from within the site which unless processed so that it meets the requirements of Table and contract specific Appendix shall not be used in the permanent works and iv unacceptable material Class U as defined in subClause i of this Clause material excavated from within the site which shall not be used in the permanent works .
Unacceptable Materials Unacceptable material Classes UA and UB i unacceptable material Class UA shall be a material which does not comply with the permitted constituents and material properties of Table and contract specific Appendix for acceptable material and b material or constituents of materials composed of the following unless otherwise described in contract specific Appendix peat materials from swamps marshes and bogs logs stumps and perishable material materials in a frozen condition clay having a liquid limit determined in accordance with BS Part exceeding or plasticity index determined in accordance with BS Part exceeding material susceptible to spontaneous combustion except unburnt colliery spoil complying with subClause of this Clause ii unacceptable material Class UB shall be a contaminated materials including controlled wastes as defined in the Environmental Protection Act Part IIA whose level of contamination is above that given either in contract specific Appendix or in contract specific Appendix but excluding all special wastes as defined in the Special Waste Amendment Scotland Regulations and radioactive wastes as defined in the Radioactive Substances Act .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Earthworks S Amendment February Unacceptable material Class U shall be i special waste as defined in the Special Waste Scotland Amendment Regulations and radioactive waste as defined in the Radioactive Substances Act .
Where required in contract specific Appendix unacceptable material other than Class U shall be processed by mechanical chemical or other means to render the material acceptable for use in the permanent works in accordance with the requirements of Table and contract specific Appendix .
Definitions Where source codes are referred to these shall be for materials from the sources listed in Table .
Chalk shall mean i any porous material of natural origin composed essentially of calcium carbonate and identified as chalk on the maps produced by the British Geological Survey ii material designated as Class in contract specific Appendix .
Argillaceous rock shall mean shales mudstones siltstones slates and micaceous schists composed of particles of clay and silt and mica .
It shall include unburnt colliery spoil .
Where argillaceous rock is imported onto the site it shall be aggregate complying with BS EN from source codes P natural aggregates described as shale siltstone or slate or G refuse from hard coal mining black coal shale .
Pulverisedfuel ash shall mean solid material extracted by electrostatic and mechanical means from the flue gases of furnaces fired with pulverised bituminous coal .
It shall have a maximum particle size of mm .
Where pulverisedfuel ash is imported onto the site it shall be aggregate complying with BS EN from source code C coal fly ash .
Furnace bottom ash shall mean agglomerated pulverisedfuel ash obtained from the bottom of the power station furnace and having particle size no larger than mm .
Where furnace bottom ash is imported onto the site it shall be aggregate complying with BS EN from source code C coal bottom ash .
Formation shall be the top surface of capping .
Where no capping is required formation shall be the top surface of earthworks at the underside of subbase unless otherwise shown on the drawings .
Subformation shall be the top surface of earthworks at the underside of capping .
Stabilisation shall mean the spreading of cement or lime or both on a layer of deposited or intact granular or cohesive material and the subsequent process of pulverising and mixing followed by appropriate compaction to form the whole or a constituent layer of a capping .
Where recycled aggregate is used in this Series the material shall be aggregate resulting from the processing of inorganic or mineral material previously used in construction and shall have been tested in accordance with Clause .
It shall not contain more than other materials Class X not more than in Class Ra bituminous materials and not more than in Class Rg crushed glass .
Where recycled aggregate is imported onto the site it shall be aggregate complying with BS EN from source code A construction and demolition recycling industries .
Where recycled aggregate except recycled asphalt is used in this Series the aggregate shall have been tested in accordance with Clause .
It shall not contain more than other materials Class X not more than in Class Ra bituminous materials and not more than in Class Rg crushed glass .
Where recycled aggregate except recycled asphalt is imported onto the site it shall be aggregate complying with BS EN from source codes A crushed concrete andor A crushed bricks masonry .
As dug shall mean material that has been excavated transported and placed without any processing .
Where imported material undergoes any processing including cleaning and sorting it will not be deemed as dug and thus shall be aggregate complying with BS EN .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Earthworks Amendment February S Use of Fill Materials In addition to any grading requirements the maximum particle size of any fill material shall be no more than twothirds of the compacted layer thickness except that cobbles having an equivalent diameter of more than mm shall not be deposited beneath verges or central reserves within .
m of the finished surface .
Material placed within mm or any other distances described in contract specific Appendix of concrete cement bound materials other cementitious materials or stabilised capping forming part of the permanent works shall conform to as appropriate the following requirements .
i Materials shall conform to the following criteria a Watersoluble sulfate WS content determined in accordance with BS EN clause shall not exceed mg of sulfate as S per litre b Total sulfur TS content determined in accordance with BS EN clause expressed as S shall not exceed for aggregates other than air cooled blast furnace slag or for air cooled blast furnace slag .
ii Materials shall conform to at least one of the following options a When described in accordance with BS EN and BS EN Annex A limestone chalk dolomite blast furnace slag steel slag or crushed concrete are predominant or b The sulfide content of the mixture determined in accordance with BS EN Clause is less than .
as S. When determining WS TS or sulfide content at least five samples of each material shall be tested .
The mean of the highest two values shall be used for comparison with the limiting values .
This shall also apply if six to nine results are available .
If ten or more results are available the mean of the highest of the results shall be used for comparison with the limiting values .
Material placed within mm or any other distances described in contract specific Appendix of metallic structural elements forming part of the permanent works shall conform as appropriate to the following requirements .
i Materials shall conform to the following criteria a Watersoluble sulfate WS content determined in accordance with BS EN clause shall not exceed mg of sulfate as S per litre and b Total sulfur TS content determined in accordance with BS EN clause expressed as S shall not exceed for aggregates other than air cooled blast furnace slag or for air cooled blast furnace slag .
ii Materials shall conform to at least one of the following options a When described in accordance with BS EN and BS EN Annex A limestone chalk dolomite blast furnace slag steel slag or crushed concrete are predominant or b The sulfide content of the mixture determined in accordance with BS EN Clause is less than .
as S. When determining WS TS or sulfide content at least five samples of each material shall be tested .
The mean of the highest two values shall be used for comparison with the limiting values .
This shall also applies apply if six to nine results are available .
If ten or more results are available the mean of the highest of the results shall be used for comparison with the limiting values .
The requirements in i and ii above shall not apply to metallic elements protected by concrete or ancillary metallic items such as the tops of chambers and gullies .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Earthworks Amendment February SF Unburnt colliery spoil may be used as general fill provided it is compacted in compliance with Clause and complies with the requirements of contract specific Appendix .
Pulverisedfuel ash shall not be placed within the dimension described in contract specific Appendix below subformation or formation .
Where pulverisedfuel ash is used the Contractor shall for each consignment make available to the Overseeing Organisation a record of the type and source from which it was obtained and a certificate of results of tests showing that the material complies with the requirements of Table .
TS Determination of Moisture Condition Value MCV of Earthworks Materials in Scotland Where the Moisture Condition Value MCV is required in contract specific Appendix the MCV determination shall be carried out in accordance with TRL Report Appendix A Sections to .
Where the natural moisture content MCV is required in contract specific Appendix the MCV determination shall be carried out in accordance with TRL Report Appendix A Sections to .
Where the MCV of saturated materials is required in contract specific Appendix the MCV determination shall be carried out in accordance with TRL Report Appendix A Sections and .
When required in contract specific Appendix the determination of the MCVmoisture content relation shall be carried out in accordance with TRL Report Appendix A Sections and .
An alternative procedure is given in Appendix A Sections and of TRL Report .
The rapid assessment procedure for material acceptability may be used when permitted in contract specific Appendix .
The Contractor shall provide for each Moisture Condition Apparatus MCA to be used a test certificate to show that the MCA is functioning correctly .
The tests for correct function shall be carried out as described in Appendix D of TRL Report and the results recorded on form MCA TRL Report Appendix B or similar .
All equipment used shall be traceable to national standards .
The Contractor shall provide for each operator of the MCA a certificate which shows the operator has completed an appropriate course of training approved by the Overseeing Organisation .
The Overseeing Organisation shall be contacted for details of those organisations able to provide such training .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Earthworks Amendment February W NATIONAL ALTERATIONS OF THE OVERSEEING ORGANISATION OF WALES W Classification Definitions and Uses of Earthworks Materials General This Series is part of the Specification for Highway Works .
Whilst this Series is particularly relevant to the subject matter in its title it must be read in conjunction with the general requirements in Series and and with all other Series relevant to the specification for the particular works to be undertaken .
General Classification Earthworks materials shall fall into one or other of the following general classifications i acceptable material material excavated from within the site or imported on to the site which meets the requirements of Table and contract specific Appendix for acceptability for use in the permanent works ii unacceptable material Class UA as defined in subClauses ia and ib of this Clause material excavated from within the site which unless processed so that it meets the requirements of Table and contract specific Appendix shall not be used in the permanent works v unacceptable material Class UB as defined in subClause iia of this Clause material excavated from within the site which unless processed so that it meets the requirements of Table and contract specific Appendix shall not be used in the permanent works and vi unacceptable material Class U as defined in subClause i of this Clause material excavated from within the site which shall not be used in the permanent works .
Unacceptable Materials Unacceptable material Classes UA and UB i unacceptable material Class UA shall be a material which does not comply with the permitted constituents and material properties of Table and contract specific Appendix for acceptable material and b material or constituents of materials composed of the following unless otherwise described in contract specific Appendix peat materials from swamps marshes and bogs logs stumps and perishable material materials in a frozen condition clay having a liquid limit determined in accordance with BS Part exceeding or plasticity index determined in accordance with BS Part exceeding material susceptible to spontaneous combustion except unburnt colliery spoil complying with subClause of this Clause ii unacceptable material Class UB shall be a contaminated materials including controlled wastes as defined in the Environmental Protection Act Part IIA whose level of contamination is above that given either in contract specific Appendix or in contract specific Appendix but excluding all hazardous wastes as Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Earthworks W Amendment February defined in the Hazardous Waste England and Wales Regulations and radioactive wastes as defined in the Radioactive Substances Act .
Unacceptable material Class U shall be i hazardous waste as defined in the Hazardous Waste England and Wales Regulations and radioactive waste as defined in the Radioactive Substances Act .
Where required in contract specific Appendix unacceptable material other than Class U shall be processed by mechanical chemical or other means to render the material acceptable for use in the permanent works in accordance with the requirements of Table and contract specific Appendix .
Definitions Where source codes are referred to these shall be for materials from the sources listed in Table .
Chalk shall mean i any porous material of natural origin composed essentially of calcium carbonate and identified as chalk on the maps produced by the British Geological Survey ii material designated as Class in contract specific Appendix .
Argillaceous rock shall mean shales mudstones siltstones slates and micaceous schists composed of particles of clay silt and mica .
It shall include unburnt colliery spoil .
Where argillaceous rock is imported onto the site it shall be aggregate complying with BS EN from source codes P natural aggregates described as shale siltstone or slate or G refuse from hard coal mining black coal shale .
See subClause .
Pulverisedfuel ash shall mean solid material extracted by electrostatic and mechanical means from the flue gases of furnaces fired with pulverised bituminous coal .
It shall have a maximum particle size of mm .
Where pulverisedfuel ash is imported onto the site it shall be aggregate complying with BS EN from source code C coal fly ash .
Furnace bottom ash shall mean agglomerated pulverisedfuel ash obtained from the bottom of the power station furnace and having particle size no larger than mm .
Where furnace bottom ash is imported onto the site it shall be aggregate complying with BS EN from source code C coal bottom ash .
Formation shall be the top surface of capping .
Where no capping is required formation shall be the top surface of earthworks at the underside of subbase unless otherwise shown on the drawings .
Subformation shall be the top surface of earthworks at the underside of capping .
Stabilisation shall mean the spreading of cement or lime or both on a layer of deposited or intact granular or cohesive material and the subsequent process of pulverising and mixing followed by appropriate compaction to form the whole or a constituent layer of a capping .
Where recycled aggregate is used in this Series the material shall be aggregate resulting from the processing of inorganic or mineral material previously used in construction and shall have been tested in accordance with Clause .
It shall not contain more than other materials Class X not more than in Class Ra bituminous materials and not more than in Class Rg crushed glass .
Where recycled aggregate is imported onto the site it shall be aggregate complying with BS EN from source code A construction and demolition recycling industries .
Where recycled aggregate except recycled asphalt is used in this Series the aggregate shall have been tested in accordance with Clause .
It shall not contain more than other materials Class X not more than in Class Ra bituminous materials and not more than in Class Rg crushed glass .
Where recycled aggregate except recycled asphalt is imported onto the site it shall be aggregate complying with BS EN from source codes A crushed concrete andor A crushed bricks masonry .
As dug shall mean material that has been excavated transported and placed without any processing .
Where imported material undergoes any processing including cleaning and sorting it will not be deemed as dug and thus shall be aggregate complying with BS EN .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Earthworks Amendment February W Use of Fill Materials In addition to any grading requirements the maximum particle size of any fill material shall be no more than twothirds of the compacted layer thickness except that cobbles having an equivalent diameter of more than mm shall not be deposited beneath verges or central reserves within .
m of the finished surface .
Materials placed within mm or any other distances described in the contract specific Appendix of concrete cement bound materials other cementitious mixtures or stabilised capping forming part of the permanent works shall conform to as appropriate the following requirements i Materials shall conform to the following criteria a Watersoluble sulfate WS content determined in accordance with BS EN clause shall not exceed mg of sulfate as S per litre b Total sulfur TS content determined in accordance with BS EN clause expressed as S shall not exceed for aggregates other than air cooled blast furnace slag or for air cooled blast furnace slag .
ii Materials shall conform to at least one of the following options a When described in accordance with BS EN and BS EN Annex A limestone chalk dolomite blast furnace slag steel slag or crushed concrete are predominant or b The sulfide content of the material determined in accordance with BS EN Clause is less than .
as S. When determining WS TS or sulfide content at least five samples of each material shall be tested .
The mean of the highest two values shall be used for comparison with the limiting values .
This shall also apply if six to nine results are available .
If ten or more results are available the mean of the highest of the results shall be used for comparison with the limiting values .
Material placed within mm or any other distances described in the contract specific Appendix of metallic structural elements forming part of the permanent works shall conform as appropriate to the following requirements i Materials shall conform to the following criteria a Watersoluble sulfate WS content determined in accordance with BS EN clause shall not exceed mg of sulfate as S per litre and b Total sulfur TS content determined in accordance with BS EN clause expressed as S shall not exceed for aggregates other than air cooled blast furnace slag or for air cooled blast furnace slag .
ii Materials shall conform to at least one of the following options a When described in accordance with BS EN and BS EN Annex A limestone chalk dolomite blast furnace slag steel slag or crushed concrete are predominant or b The sulfide content of the material determined in accordance with BS EN Clause is less than .
as S. When determining WS TS or sulfide content at least five samples of each material shall be tested .
The mean of the highest two values shall be used for comparison with the limiting values .
This shall also apply if six to nine results are available .
If ten or more results are available the mean of the highest of the results shall be used for comparison with the limiting values .
The requirements in i and ii above shall not apply to metallic items protected by concrete or ancillary metallic items such as the tops of chambers and gullies .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Earthworks Amendment February WF Unburnt colliery spoil may be used as general fill provided it is compacted in compliance with Clause and complies with the requirements of contract specific Appendix .
Pulverisedfuel ash shall not be placed within the dimension described in contract specific Appendix below subformation or formation .
Where pulverisedfuel ash is used the Contractor shall for each consignment make available to the Overseeing Organisation a record of the type and source from which it was obtained and a certificate of results of tests showing that the material complies with the requirements of Table .
Where stated in contract specific Appendix permissible options for fill materials shall include slate or other argillaceous rock materials as stated .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Earthworks Amendment February N NATIONAL ALTERATIONS OF THE OVERSEEING ORGANISATION OF NORTHERN IRELAND NI Classification Definitions and Uses of Earthworks Materials General This Series is part of the Specification for Highway Works .
Whilst this Series is particularly relevant to the subject matter in its title it must be read in conjunction with the general requirements in Series and and with all other Series relevant to the specification for the particular works to be undertaken .
General Classification Earthworks materials shall fall into one or other of the following general classifications i acceptable material material excavated from within the site or imported on to the site which meets the requirements of Table and contract specific Appendix for acceptability for use in the permanent works ii unacceptable material Class UA as defined in subClauses ia and ib of this Clause material excavated from within the site which unless processed so that it meets the requirements of Table and contract specific Appendix shall not be used in the permanent works iii unacceptable material Class UB as defined in subClause iia of this Clause material excavated from within the site which unless processed so that it meets the requirements of Table and contract specific Appendix shall not be used in the permanent works and iv unacceptable material Class U as defined in subClause i of this Clause material excavated from within the site which shall not be used in the permanent works .
Unacceptable Materials Unacceptable material Classes UA and UB i unacceptable material Class UA shall be a material which does not comply with the permitted constituents and material properties of Table and contract specific Appendix for acceptable material and b material or constituents of materials composed of the following unless otherwise described in contract specific Appendix peat materials from swamps marshes and bogs logs stumps and perishable material materials in a frozen condition clay having a liquid limit determined in accordance with BS Part exceeding or plasticity index determined in accordance with BS Part exceeding material susceptible to spontaneous combustion except unburnt colliery spoil complying with subClause of this Clause ii unacceptable material Class UB shall be a contaminated materials including controlled wastes as defined in the Waste and Contaminated Land Northern Ireland Order whose level of contamination is above that given either in contract specific Appendix or in contract specific Appendix but excluding all hazardous wastes as defined in the Hazardous Waste Regulations Northern Ireland and radioactive wastes as defined in the Radioactive Substances Act .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Earthworks N Amendment February Unacceptable material Class U shall be i hazardous waste as defined in the Hazardous Waste Regulations Northern Ireland and radioactive waste as defined in the Radioactive Substances Act .
Where required in contract specific Appendix unacceptable material other than Class U shall be processed by mechanical chemical or other means to render the material acceptable for use in the permanent works in accordance with the requirements of Table and the contract specific Appendix .
Definitions Where source codes are referred to these shall be for materials from the sources listed in Table .
Chalk shall mean i any porous material of natural origin composed essentially of calcium carbonate and identified as chalk on the maps produced by the Geological Survey of Northern Ireland ii material designated as Class in contract specific Appendix .
Argillaceous rock shall mean shales mudstones siltstones slates and micaceous schists composed of particles of clay silt and mica .
It shall include unburnt colliery spoil .
Where argillaceous rock is imported onto the site it shall be aggregate complying with BS EN from source codes P natural aggregates described as shale siltstone or slate or G refuse from hard coal mining black coal shale .
Pulverisedfuel ash shall mean solid material extracted by electrostatic and mechanical means from the flue gases of furnaces fired with pulverised bituminous coal .
It shall have a maximum particle size of mm .
Where pulverisedfuel ash is imported onto the site it shall be aggregate complying with BS EN from source code C coal fly ash .
Furnace bottom ash shall mean agglomerated pulverisedfuel ash obtained from the bottom of the power station furnace and having particle size no larger than mm .
Where furnace bottom ash is imported onto the site it shall be aggregate complying with BS EN from source code C coal bottom ash .
Formation shall be the top surface of capping .
Where no capping is required formation shall be the top surface of earthworks at the underside of subbase unless otherwise shown on the drawings .
Subformation shall be the top surface of earthworks at the underside of capping .
Stabilisation shall mean the spreading of cement or lime or both on a layer of deposited or intact granular or cohesive material and the subsequent process of pulverising and mixing followed by appropriate compaction to form the whole or a constituent layer of a capping .
Where recycled aggregate is used in this Series the material shall be aggregate resulting from the processing of inorganic or mineral material previously used in construction and shall have been tested in accordance with Clause .
It shall not contain more than other materials Class X not more than in Class Ra bituminous materials and not more than in Class Rg crushed glass .
Where recycled aggregate is imported onto the site it shall be aggregate complying with BS EN from source code A construction and demolition recycling industries .
Where recycled aggregate except recycled asphalt is used in this Series the aggregate shall have been tested in accordance with Clause .
It shall not contain more than other materials Class X not more than in Class Ra bituminous materials and not more than in Class Rg crushed glass .
Where recycled aggregate except recycled asphalt is imported onto the site it shall be aggregate complying with BS EN from source codes A crushed concrete andor A crushed bricks masonry .
As dug shall mean material that has been excavated transported and placed without any processing .
Where imported material undergoes any processing including cleaning and sorting it will not be deemed as dug and thus shall be aggregate complying with BS EN .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Earthworks Amendment February N Use of Fill Materials In addition to any grading requirements the maximum particle size of any fill material shall be no more than twothirds of the compacted layer thickness except that cobbles having an equivalent diameter of more than mm shall not be deposited beneath verges or central reserves within .
m of the finished surface .
Materials placed within mm or any other distances described in contract specific Appendix of concrete cement bound materials other cementitious materials or stabilised capping forming part of the permanent works shall conform to as appropriate the following requirements i Materials shall conform to the following criteria a Watersoluble sulfate WS content determined in accordance with BS EN clause shall not exceed mg of sulfate as S per litre b Total sulfur TS content determined in accordance with BS EN clause expressed as S shall not exceed for aggregates other than air cooled blast furnace slag or for air cooled blast furnace slag .
ii Marerials shall conform to at least one of the following options a When described in accordance with BS EN and BS EN Annex A limestone chalk dolomite blast furnace slag steel slag or crushed concrete are predominant or b The sulfide content of the mixture determined in accordance with BS EN Clause is less than .
as S. When determining WS TS or sulfide content at least five samples of each material shall be tested .
The mean of the highest two values shall be used for comparison with the limiting values .
This shall also apply if six to nine results are available .
If ten or more results are available the mean of the highest of the results shall be used for comparison with the limiting values .
Material placed within mm or any other distances described in contract specific Appendix of metallic structural elements forming part of the permanent works shall conform as appropriate to the following requirements .
i Materials shall conform to the following criteria a Watersoluble sulfate WS content determined in accordance with BS EN clause shall not exceed mg of sulfate as S per litre and b Total sulfur TS content determined in accordance with BS EN clause expressed as S shall not exceed for aggregates other than air cooled blast furnace slag or for air cooled blast furnace slag .
ii Materials shall conform to at least one of the following options a When described in accordance with BS EN and BS EN Annex A limestone chalk dolomite blast furnace slag steel slag or crushed concrete are predominant or b The sulfide content of the mixture determined in accordance with BS EN Clause is less than .
as S. When determining WS TS or sulfide content at least five samples of each material shall be tested .
The mean of the highest two values shall be used for comparison with the limiting values .
This shall also applies apply if six to nine results are available .
If ten or more results are available the mean of the highest of the results shall be used for comparison with the limiting values .
The requirements in i and ii above shall not apply to metallic elements protected by concrete or ancillary metallic items such as the tops of chambers and gullies .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Earthworks N Amendment February Unburnt colliery spoil may be used as general fill provided it is compacted in compliance with Clause and complies with the requirements of contract specific Appendix .
Pulverisedfuel ash shall not be placed within the dimension described in contract specific Appendix below subformation or formation .
Where pulverisedfuel ash is used the Contractor shall for each consignment make available to the Overseeing Organisation a record of the type and source from which it was obtained and a certificate of results of tests showing that the material complies with the requirements of Table .
NI Explosives and Blasting for Excavation Blasting for excavation shall not be employed unless permitted or required in contract specific Appendix and such blasting shall be confined to the locations and to within the time limits stated therein .
The Contractor shall i not carry out plaster shooting ii for each location where blasting is to be undertaken provide written notice to the Overseeing Organisation of the programme of blasting including trial explosions at least days before it commences and give written notice of each blasting event as described in v below at least hours beforehand iii carry out trial explosions starting with reduced quantities of explosive in order to determine the size of the actual explosive charges and their disposition for use in the main blasting operations so as not to exceed the values for vibrational amplitude and vibrational peak particle velocity stated in vi below at the positions described therein iv determine danger zones likely to be created by the blasting operations including trial explosions within which blasted material may be projected and utilise suitable arrangements including temporary works to retain such projectiles and ensure that no injury or damage is caused to persons or property thereby v limit blasting to a small number of events during permitted hours per day where an event shall comprise a single explosion or a group of explosions each separated by a short time interval the group lasting less than a minute vi ensure that a structures and earthworks existing or under construction on and off the site do not experience during blasting operations including trial explosions a vibrational amplitude exceeding .
mm and a resultant peak particle velocity exceeding mm per second or other limits stated in contract specific Appendix at the same time or individually and b peak overpressures of magnitude such as to endanger windows and glazed areas of structures do not occur vii where instrumentation and monitoring is appropriate a rigidly fix to structures and insert in earthworks described in via above suitable instruments to measure the vibrational amplitude and resultant vibrational peak particle velocity and peak overpressures experienced during blasting operations including trial explosions b make available details of the proposed instrumentation within the site c unless otherwise stipulated in contract specific Appendix make his own arrangements for installing instruments on property off the site including negotiating with landowners and other interested parties Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Earthworks Amendment February NF d read such instruments and take measurements throughout the period of blasting operations including trial explosions e for instruments on structures or earthworks on the site and where required in contract specific Appendix on property off the site make available the results to the Overseeing Organisation at the end of each days blasting viii take measurements of vibrational amplitude and peak particle velocity in each of three mutually perpendicular planes and determine the peak value taken as the maximum resultant calculated by vector summation of the three components of amplitude and velocity respectively measured as instantaneously as the resolution of the recording instrument permits ix ensure that noise from blasting operations is controlled in accordance with Clause x use explosives in the quantities and in the manner recommended by the manufacturer xi store explosives in registered premises in a licensed store or magazine provided with a separate compartment for detonators or use them under an Immediate Use Certificate issued by the police xii only permit explosives to be used or handled by or under the immediate control of a competent person in accordance with the Construction General Provisions Northern Ireland Regulations Regulation and subsequent amending Regulations xiii ensure there is no unauthorised issue or improper use of explosives brought on the site and maintain a strict check on quantities issued and consumed xiv comply with the requirements of BS in respect of the use of electrical detonators in the vicinity of static and mobile radio transmitters including normal radio and television broadcasting stations and radar units associated with aircraft movements electricity generating plant and transmission lines .
MANUAL OF CONTRACT DOCUMENTS FOR HIGHWAY WORKS VOLUME SPECIFICATION FOR HIGHWAY WORKS Amendment February SERIES ROAD PAVEMENTS GENERAL Contents Clause Title Page General Pavement Construction Horizontal Alignments Surface Levels and Surface Regularity of Pavement Courses to Not used Excavation Trimming and Reinstatement of Existing Surfaces Breaking Up or Perforation of Redundant Pavement Not used Coldmilling Planing of Bituminous Bound Flexible Pavement Testing for Constituent Materials in Recycled Aggregate and Recycled Concrete Aggregate Overband and Inlaid Crack Sealing Systems Maintenance of Arrester Beds Sawcut and Seal Bituminous Overlays on Existing Jointed Concrete Pavements Preparation of Jointed Concrete Pavements Prior to Overlaying and Sawcut and Seal of the Bituminous Overlays Sawcut Crack and Seat Existing Jointed Reinforced Concrete Pavements Cracking and Seating of Existing Jointed Unreinforced Concrete Pavements and Hydraulically Bound Mixture HBM Bases Monitoring of Cracked and Seated Jointed Unreinforced Concrete Pavements and HBM Bases Using the Falling Weight Deflectometer FWD Monitoring of Sawcut Cracked and Seated Jointed Reinforced Concrete Pavements Using the Falling Weight Deflectometer FWD Clause Title Page Backanalysis of Falling Weight Deflectometer FWD Measurements Made on Concrete Pavements Treated by Fractured Slab Techniques NATIONAL ALTERATIONS OF THE OVERSEEING ORGANISATIONS OF SCOTLAND WALES AND NORTHERN IRELAND Northern Ireland NI Horizontal Alignments Surface Levels and Surface Regularity of Pavement Courses N NI Excavation Trimming and Reinstatement of Existing Surfaces N denotes a Clause or Sample Contract Specific Appendix which has a substitute National Clause or Sample Contract Specific Appendix for one or more of the Overseeing Organisations of Scotland Wales or Northern Ireland .
Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements General ROAD PAVEMENTS GENERAL General This Series is part of the Specification for Highway Works .
Whilst this Series is particularly relevant to the subject matter in its title it must be read in conjunction with the general requirements in Series and and with all other Series relevant to the specification for the particular works to be undertaken .
Pavement Construction Road pavements shall be constructed from one of the permitted options described in contract specific Appendix and in compliance with this Series and the appropriate Clauses of Series and .
The Contractor shall in his choice of permitted materials for subbases and bases have regard to the nature of those materials and of the subgrade or any capping and the need to protect them from deterioration due to the ingress of water the adverse effects of weather and the use of constructional plant .
The Contractor shall programme the laying and compaction of the subbase and the subsequent pavement courses and take such other steps as may be considered necessary to afford protection to the base subbase and subgrade .
Horizontal Alignments Surface Levels and Surface Regularity of Pavement Courses Horizontal Alignments Horizontal alignments shall be determined from one edge of the pavement surface as described in contract specific Appendix .
The edge of the pavement as constructed and all other parallel alignments shall be correct within a tolerance of mm therefrom except for kerbs and channel blocks which shall be laid with a smooth alignment within a tolerance of mm .
Longitudinal road markings lateral tolerance shall be in accordance with subClause ..
Surface Levels of Pavement Courses The design levels of pavement courses shall be calculated from the vertical profile crossfalls and the pavement course thicknesses described in contract specific Appendix .
The level of any point on the constructed surface of the pavement courses shall be the design level subject to the appropriate tolerances stated in Table .
TABLE Tolerances in Surface Levels of Pavement Courses Road surfaces general adjacent to a surface water channel mm mm Binder course mm Base mm Subbase under concrete pavement surface slabs laid full thickness in one operation by machines with surface compaction mm Subbases other than above mm Where a surface water channel is laid before the adjacent road pavement layer the top of that layer measured from the top of the adjacent edge of the surface water channel shall be to the tolerances given in Table .
Notwithstanding the tolerances permitted in surface levels of pavement courses the cumulative tolerance shall not result in a reduction in thickness of the pavement excluding the subbase by more than mm from the specified thickness nor a reduction in the thickness of the bituminous surface course by more than mm from that specified .
Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements General For checking compliance with subClause of this Clause measurements of the surface levels of all courses will be taken on a grid of points located as described in contract specific Appendix .
In any length of pavement compliance shall be deemed to be met for all surfaces other than the final road surface when not more than one of ten consecutive measurements taken longitudinally or one in any transverse line exceeds the tolerances permitted in Table provided that this one measurement shall not exceed by more than mm the tolerance for the course concerned .
For the final road surface the tolerance given in Table shall apply to any point on that surface .
Surface Regularity The longitudinal regularity of the surfaces of surface courses binder courses and concrete slabs shall be such that the number of surface irregularities is within the relevant limits stated in Table .
An irregularity is a variation of not less than mm or not less mm of the profile of the road surface as measured by the rolling straightedge set at mm or mm as appropriate or equivalent apparatus capable of measuring irregularities within the same magnitudes over a m length .
No irregularity exceeding mm shall be permitted .
Prior to checking any final road surface binder course or top surface of base in pavements without binder course for level regularity or macrotexture depth it shall be cleaned of loose or extraneous materials .
These operations shall be carried out without damaging the surface of the pavement as soon as possible and within days of construction of the pavement .
Compliance with Table shall be checked by the rolling straightedge along any line or lines parallel to the edge of pavement on sections of m at regular intervals as stated in contract specific Appendix whether or not it is constructed in shorter lengths .
Sections shorter than m forming part of a longer pavement shall be assessed using the number of irregularities for a m length prorata to the nearest whole number .
Where the total length of pavement is less than m the measurements shall be taken on m lengths .
Pavements shall be measured transversely for irregularities at regular intervals as stated in contract specific Appendix by a m long straightedge in accordance with BS placed at right angles to the centre line of the road .
The maximum allowable difference between the pavement surface and the straightedge shall be mm .
A straightedge metres long shall be used to check longitudinal surface regularity in the following cases i for lengths of less than m of surface course binder course and concrete slabs ii where use of the rolling straightedge or equivalent apparatus is impracticable iii for all lengths of subbase under concrete pavement slabs laid full thickness in one operation by machine with surface compaction .
The maximum allowable difference between the surface and the underside of the straightedge when placed parallel with or at right angles to the centre line of the road shall be for pavement surfaces mm for binder courses mm for subbases under concrete pavements as in iii above mm Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements General TABLE Maximum Permitted Number of Surface Irregularities Surfaces of each lane of carriageway each hard strip and each hard shoulder for each irregularity limit Surfaces of each lane of bituminous binder courses for carriageway hard strip and hard shoulder for each irregularity limit Surfaces of laybys service areas and associated bituminous binder courses for each irregularity limit Irregularity Limits mm mm mm mm mm mm Length m Category A Roads Category B Roads The Category of each section of road is described in contract specific Appendix .
Rectification Where any pavement area does not comply with the specification for regularity surface tolerance thickness macrotexture depth material properties or compaction the full extent of the area which does not comply with the specification shall be made good and the surface of the pavement course shall be rectified in the manner described below i Unbound and hydraulically bound materials The top mm shall be scarified reshaped with material added or removed as necessary and re compacted .
The area treated shall be not less than m long and m wide .
For hydraulically bound materials all rectification shall be completed within hours of the binder being added to the material .
ii Cement bound subbases and bases The method of correction will depend on the period which has elapsed between detection of the error and the time of mixing of the material .
If this is less than hours the surface shall be scarified to a depth of not less than mm surplus material removed or freshly mixed material added as necessary and recompacted in accordance with the specification .
If the period is hours or more the full depth of the layer shall be removed from the pavement and replaced with material in accordance with the specification .
In either case the area treated shall be at least m long and the full width of the paving laid in one operation .
If the Contractor proposes rectification within days of laying he shall comply with Clause .
Alternatively for subbases under concrete pavements the Contractor may make up low areas to a level within the tolerances of this Clause with a cement and sand mortar or with an AC fine surface course complying with Clause .
iii Bituminous bases With coated macadam or asphalt bases the full depth of the top layer as laid shall be removed and be replaced with fresh material laid and compacted in accordance with the specification .
Any area so treated shall be at least m long and the full width of the paving laid in one operation .
Alternatively for low areas in bituminous bases the Contractor may make up the level with additional binder course material .
iv Surface courses and binder courses These shall have the full depth of the course removed and replaced with fresh material laid and compacted in accordance with the specification .
The area rectified shall be the full width of the paving laid in one operation and at least m long if binder course or m if surface course .
Where the number of surface irregularities exceeds the limits in Table the area to be rectified shall be m or m long as appropriate and the full width of the lanes affected or such lesser length as necessary to make the number of surface irregularities conform with the limits and shall be the full width of the lanes affected .
Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements General Checking of the surface course for compliance with this Clause shall be carried out as soon as possible after completion of the surfacing and remedial works completed before the road is opened to traffic .
Where the macrotexture depth requirement is not met for a a section m in lane length or b the full lane length of a section less than m long as the balance of a complete scheme or c the full lane length of a scheme less than m long then sufficient m lengths shall be replaced starting with that length having the least macrotexture depth until the average requirement for the section length is complied with .
A minimum length of m and the full lane width shall be removed and replaced either a to the full depth of the surface course or b to a depth of mm when replaced by the repave method process in compliance with Clause .
Areas to be removed shall be delineated both longitudinally and transversely by saw cutting prior to the material being removed .
Joints shall be formed either by coating the exposed sawn face with hot bitumen or heating by a suitable heater .
The heater shall raise the temperature of the full depth of the course immediately before laying the new material to a figure within the range of minimum rolling temperature and maximum temperature at any stage specified for the material and for a width of not less than mm .
v Concrete slabs Concrete slabs shall be rectified by planing grinding or bump cutting .
Large depressions which can not be dealt with in this way shall be rectified by cutting out the surface and replacing by a thin bonded surface repair complying with Clause .
Retexturing of hardened concrete shall be carried out by sawing grooves in accordance with the specification .
Texturing of replaced surfaces shall be by brushing in accordance with the specification .
Where the slab can not be rectified as above the full depth of slab shall be removed and replaced with a slab constructed in compliance with Clause to the extent required to obtain compliance with the specification .
Remedial works involving the placing of fresh concrete shall be completed in sufficient time for the concrete strength to have developed as required in Clause before that section of pavement is opened to traffic .
to Not used Excavation Trimming and Reinstatement of Existing Surfaces General The Contractor shall not excavate pits trenches or other openings in paved areas which have been constructed as part of the permanent works in order to construct other parts of the works including Statutory Undertakers and other service works except with the prior approval of the Overseeing Organisation .
Where excavation and trimming of existing paved areas and highways not constructed as part of the permanent works are required in contract specific Appendix they shall be carried out and reinstated in compliance with this Clause and with any additional requirements described in contract specific Appendix .
Excavations shall be carried out to the dimensions described in contract specific Appendix or if not so described to the minimum dimensions subject to subClause of this Clause necessary to carry out the work .
Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements General Excavations Excavations in existing pavements and other paved areas except those described in subClause of this Clause including surfacing base and subbase shall be cut to neat lines to dimensions at least mm greater on each side than the dimensions of any further excavation below formation level .
Excavations in capping shall be taken at least mm outside the dimensions of any excavation below .
Road surfacing of bituminous material shall be cut back by sawing or planing to a further mm on each side .
Planing shall be carried out in accordance with Clause .
Concrete surfacing and concrete bases except CBM shall be cut back by sawing by at least mm on each side to the level of any reinforcement in reinforced slabs and to the full depth of the slab in unreinforced slabs .
If excavations are required to inspect the condition of lower layers each layer shall be excavated separately and cleaned of debris to permit inspection .
Concrete blocks clay pavers and precast concrete flags kerbs and channels shall be lifted without cutting to the nearest joint satisfying subClause of this Clause and carefully stored for reuse or dealt with as described in contract specific Appendix .
In situ kerbs and channels shall be broken out to at least mm beyond the excavation .
Reinstatement of Paved Areas For roads designed to carry traffic loading of msa or less reinstatements of openings in highways shall comply with the Specification for the Reinstatement of Openings in Highways issued by the Highway Authorities and Utilities Committee .
The same requirements shall apply for roads designed to carry traffic loading of more than msa except where otherwise stated in the appropriate Clauses of the Specification for Highway Works including the contract specific requirements of Appendix .
Where foamed concrete is used for the reinstatement of openings in roads carrying more than msa the requirements of the foamed concrete shall comply with Clause .
Immediately before bituminous layers are reinstated the edges of the existing material shall be cleaned of all loose material and be coated with an appropriate hot bituminous binder or equivalent treatment .
Where joints in concrete slabs are affected by the excavation they shall be reinstated by cutting back to at least .
m on each side of a transverse joint and forming an expansion joint on one side of the excavation and a contraction joint on the other and provide longitudinal joints where necessary in the same line before reinstatement in compliance with Series to match the existing construction .
Reinstatement of Other Areas Where the excavation affects grassed areas unpaved footpaths footways verges and bridleways they shall be reinstated to match the existing surface after backfilling with acceptable material described in contract specific Appendix to a depth of not less than mm below the finished surface .
Junctions Between New Pavement Construction and Existing Pavement or Other Paved Areas Where new pavement construction abuts an existing bituminous pavement which has to be reduced in level or overlaid to match alignment and levels the existing surface shall be trimmed by the minimum amount of coldmilling planing to a depth which will allow the specified thickness of new construction to be laid the edge being trimmed and treated in compliance with this Clause .
Where the difference in level makes it necessary a regulating course as described in contract specific Appendix and specified in Clause shall be provided .
The locations of areas to be trimmed are given in contract specific Appendix .
Junctions between concrete pavements and between concrete and bituminous pavements shall be constructed as described in contract specific Appendix .
Junctions in porous asphalt surfacing shall comply also with Clause .
Junctions between porous asphalt surfacing and other pavement surfaces shall be constructed as described in contract specific Appendix .
Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements General Compressed Air When compressed air is used to clean dust dirt and debris from prepared faces of existing concrete or bituminous pavements which are otherwise ready for reinstatement only oilfree compressed air shall be used and this shall be at a pressure of not less than .
Nmm .
Breaking Up or Perforation of Redundant Pavement Where redundant pavement construction is to be perforated or broken up the pavement shall be treated as described in contract specific Appendix .
Not used Coldmilling Planing of Bituminous Bound Flexible Pavement Where coldmilling of bituminous bound flexible pavement is required the area of carriageway to be milled shall be removed by a suitable milling machine to the requirements specified in contract specific Appendix .
The process shall be carried out so as not to produce excessive quantities of dust which shall be minimised by damping with water sprays .
The cut edges shall be left neat vertical and in straight lines .
The Contractor shall brush and sweep the milled surface by mechanical means to produce a clean and regular running surface with a groove depth not greater than mm and with a uniform texture .
Carriageways shall be milled to the tolerance of mm .
If the tolerances in this Clause are exceeded the full extent of the area which does not comply shall be rectified by further milling or by regulating with materials in accordance with Clause .
Existing ironwork shall not be disturbed by the milling action .
Where necessary surfacing in the vicinity of ironwork and in small or irregular areas shall be cut out by pneumatic tools or other suitable methods and removed .
Where milling is carried out on a carriageway open to traffic temporary ramping to ensure the safe passage of vehicles shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of contract specific Appendix .
If the milled surface profile varies by more than mm when measured transversely or longitudinally by a metre straightedge adjustments or replacements shall be made to the cutting teeth on the milling drum before work continues .
Any discontinuity between adjacent milling passes exceeding mm when measured transversely by a metre straightedge shall be rectified by further milling or regulating before placing bituminous materials .
Where milling is required over extensive areas the Contractor shall programme the work to allow removal of full lane widths unless this is impracticable .
The Contractor shall notify his proposed programme of milling to the Overseeing Organisation prior to commencement of the work .
Immediately after milling surplus materials shall be removed by a machine of suitable and efficient design and the milled surface swept to remove all dust and loose debris .
The material removed from the carriageway shall be removed from site unless otherwise described in contract specific Appendix .
No stockpiling shall be allowed on site unless the material is to be used in the works .
Carriageways which are closed to traffic to permit milling shall be resurfaced after milling prior to reopening the carriageway to traffic unless otherwise agreed by the Overseeing Organisation .
Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements General When specified in contract specific Appendix hours prior to coldmilling the Contractor shall carry out a sweep of the areas to locate any buried metalwork within the layer to be coldmilled .
The sweep shall be carried out with electronic detection equipment suitable for the purpose .
The surface shall be clearly marked above all objects to show their detected extent .
The objects shall be referenced and their location and depth reported to the Overseeing Organisation within hours of discovery .
Surfacing in the vicinity of such objects shall be excavated using pneumatic tools or other suitable methods .
Testing for Constituent Materials in Recycled Aggregate and Recycled Concrete Aggregate Scope This Clause specifies the basic procedure and test methods for the examination of recycled aggregate and recycled concrete aggregate for the purpose of identifying and quantifying constituent materials .
Quality Control Procedure The quality control procedure shall be in accordance with the Quality Protocol for the production of aggregates from inert waste and the Producers compliance checklist published by Waste and Resources Action Programme WRAP .
The results of all quality control checks carried out by the Contractor shall be compiled in accordance with the procedure set down in the above document and with those in this Clause .
These shall be delivered promptly to the Overseeing Organisation on request .
Test Method The constituents of a sample of recycled aggregate shall be classified by handsorting the coarse aggregate particles in accordance with BS EN .
The test shall be carried out by a suitably trained laboratory technician who has demonstrated competence in classifying the constituent classes in accordance with the test method .
Overband and Inlaid Crack Sealing Systems Overbanding and inlaid crack sealing systems shall have current HAPAS Roads and Bridges Certificates or equivalent .
If no HAPAS or equivalent certificates have been issued then in the interim only overbanding and inlaid crack sealing systems approved by the Overseeing Organisation shall be used .
A crack sealing system with a current HAPAS or equivalent certificate shall only be installed by a contractor approved by the Certificate Holder as an Approved Installer for that system .
Overbanding Crack Sealing Systems The installed width and nominal thickness of overbanding sealants applied on the road surface shall not exceed mm and mm respectively .
Inlaid Crack Sealing Systems The inlaid crack sealing system HAPAS Grade Classification or equivalent required for each location shall be as specified in contract specific Appendix .
Chippings The minimum polished stone value of the source aggregate for chippings applied to the surface of overbanding and inlaid crack sealing systems determined in accordance with BS EN shall be as specified in contract specific Appendix .
Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements General Installation and Quality Control Procedures The installation and quality control procedures for overbanding and inlaid crack sealing systems shall be in accordance with the HAPAS or equivalent Certificate for each system and the current Method Statement .
The results of all quality control checks carried out on site by the Contractor and quality assurance information compiled in accordance with the requirements of the HAPAS Certificate including results from surveillance visits shall be made available to the Overseeing Organisation on request .
Initial Skid Resistance The minimum wet Skid Resistance value of overbanding and inlaid crack sealing systems when newly installed shall not be less than when determined using the portable skid resistance tester pendulum in accordance with BS EN except that for sealant widths less than mm the narrow slider shall be used over the full mm sliding length utilising the normal slider scale C. Maintenance of Arrester Beds The locations and maintenance requirements of arrester beds are given in contract specific Appendix .
Generally the arrester beds comprise an area of ground excavated and replaced with a granular material and having a paved approach .
The Contractor shall provide advance signing indicating that an arrester bed is closed and shall temporarily cover the permanent signing while this work is carried out .
The maintenance work shall comprise i clearance of debris litter and weed growth from granular material and removal off site ii sweeping of loose granular material from channel or paved approach replacement on bed and raking over and levelling the granular material on bed .
Where there is a series of arrester beds the Contractor shall restrict access to only one bed at a time .
Sawcut and Seal Bituminous Overlays on Existing Jointed Concrete Pavements General Where shown on the drawings listed in contract specific Appendix a bituminous overlay or inlay as specified in contract specific Appendix shall be laid over the existing concrete pavement which has been either treated or prepared as specified in Clause .
The overlay or inlay shall then be sawcut and sealed above existing transverse joints .
Prior to the commencement of any preparatory work under subClause of this Clause any and all existing bituminous binder course surfacing and the like shall be removed from the area to be treated as defined in subClause of this Clause .
This requirement shall not apply to work to this Clause to correct reflection cracking to existing bituminous surfacing exceeding mm thickness in rigid composite pavements where so specified in contract specific Appendix .
Preparatory work to the existing concrete pavement including joints shall comply with Clause .
Before any tack or bond coating commences the Contractor shall ensure that there are adequate stable accurate reference marks delineating all existing transverse pavement joints or sawcuts and that they have been clearly marked and agreed with the Overseeing Organisation for purposes of accurately locating the positions of sawcuts after overlaying to subClause of this Clause .
The marking procedure and the nature and location of offsets and the means of their establishment shall be agreed in advance with the Overseeing Organisation in a method statement .
The accuracy of such markings shall be compatible with the specified accuracy of subsequent sawcutting operations to this Clause .
Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements General Bituminous Overlay Including Tack Coat and Bond Coat Bituminous overlay shall comply with contract specific Appendix and the relevant Clauses of Series .
For the purposes of this Clause bituminous overlay shall include all specified regulating course base binder course and surfacing .
Tack or bond coating shall be as specified in contract specific Appendix .
Sawcutting of Grooves Cleaning and Sealing Sawcutting of grooves cleaning application of bondbreaker tape and sealing of grooves shall be carried out in one continuous operation and shall be completed in its entirety before the surface is opened to site traffic .
This trafficking restriction shall not apply to Contractors vehicles and plant necessary to complete the bituminous overlay .
Sawcutting of Grooves As soon as practicable following the completion of the bituminous overlay in a given area transverse sawcutting of grooves shall be carried out at each of the premarked locations defined in subClause of this Clause .
The positions and dimensions of all such sawcut grooves shall be to the tolerance specified in contract specific Appendix .
The crosssection of sawcut grooves shall comply with Figure .
The sawcut groove shall comprise both the sealant slot and the crackinitiation slot .
The centre line of the crackinitiation slot in the overlay shall be aligned with each existing joint in the underlying concrete pavement to within the tolerance specified in contract specific Appendix .
Sealing The area at sawcut grooves in the bituminous overlay at which the sealing material is to be laid shall have been thoroughly cleaned and shall be dry and free from dust detritus or other debris .
The ambient temperature and the temperature of the adjacent bituminous material shall be neither less than C nor greater than C .
Suitable measures shall be taken to prevent the sealant from entering the crackinitiation slot .
Sealing at sawcut grooves shall not commence until the line direction and dimensions of each sawcut groove has been verified by the Overseeing Organisation and the Contractor has received written agreement that sealing may commence .
The sawcut grooves shall be sealed to the requirements of Clause with a hotapplied material to Clause .
A sample of the proposed sealant together with the manufacturers certificate and recommendations for its use shall be supplied to the Overseeing Organisation before any sawcutting commences .
The sealant shall fill the sealant slot to the surface level within the tolerance stated in Figure .
The sealant level and tolerance will be verified within hours of the application of the sealant .
The sealing processes shall be completed after the surfacing course has been completed and before the surface is opened to traffic .
Preparation of Jointed Concrete Pavements Prior to Overlaying and Sawcut and Seal of the Bituminous Overlays General Where specified in contract specific Appendix and shown on the drawings the existing jointed un reinforced or reinforced cementitious pavement shall be prepared in accordance with this Clause before receiving a bituminous overlay which will then be sawcut and sealed in accordance with Clause .
Acceptance of the Main Work Once the preparation work to this Clause has been accepted by the Overseeing Organisation for a specified portion of the total area the bituminous overlay including any tack or bond coating may proceed .
Then the sawcutting and sealing shall be carried out and accepted solely in accordance with the requirements of Clause .
Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements General Checking and Repair of Joints All joints arrises and temporary repairs shall be checked and repaired in accordance with contract specific Appendix .
Removal of Debris Brushing and Cleaning before Overlay Before work to this Clause commences the area shall be cleared of all debris and detritus and then be thoroughly brushed clean .
Similar cleaning shall be carried out on completion of work to this Clause and prior to tack or bond coating in preparation for overlaying with the specified bituminous material .
Sawcut Crack and Seat Existing Jointed Reinforced Concrete Pavements General Where shown on the drawings listed in contract specific Appendix the existing reinforced concrete pavement layers shall be sawcut and cracked and seated with plant and equipment to which the Overseeing Organisations consent has been given and shall comply with this Clause .
The treated surface shall then be prepared in accordance with Clause and tack or bond coated in accordance with contract specific Appendix prior to overlaying in the locations specified in contract specific Appendix .
FIGURE Detail of Sawcut and Seal Groove with Sealant in Bituminous Overlay Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements General Prior to the commencement of any sawcutting operations any existing asphalt overlay and surfacing shall be removed from the area to be treated under this Clause to the full width of each lane up to the adjoining longitudinal joints unless directed otherwise by the Overseeing Organisation .
Removal of any overlay shall be completed ahead of the works at a distance of not less than m from the sawcutting operation .
The Contractor shall also ensure that adequate reference location marks based on the Overseeing Organisations chainage have been clearly marked and agreed with the Overseeing Organisation for purposes of accurately recording progress and the locations of changes to equipment settings .
Before any of the main sawcut and crack and seat work is commenced a main trial shall be carried out as specified in subClause of this Clause .
After the main trial the Contractor shall locate all bay joints repair joints and any existing transverse cracks and shall preplan and mark the positions of the intended transverse saw cuts using the transverse sawcut spacing determined from the main trial .
If the Contractor foresees any difficulty in complying with this subClause he shall immediately inform the Overseeing Organisation and shall not proceed with sawcutting in such areas until he has received appropriate instructions from the Overseeing Organisation .
Unless directed otherwise by the Overseeing Organisation cracking and seating operations shall not take place unless there is adequate side restraint in place from the adjacent verges and central reserve assisted by any temporary works which may be necessary .
Compliance with this Clause shall be assessed by i examining the concrete surface for spalling ii examining the depth and severity of cracking and the depth of sawcuts by means of core extraction iii measuring the spacing of sawcuts and iv recording the number of passes of the seating roller .
Where required in contract specific Appendix the effective stiffness modulus andor joint efficiency of the cracked concrete layer or layers will be calculated from Falling Weight Deflectometer FWD measurements .
The Overseeing Organisation may then instruct any variation required in the spacing of sawcuts andor method and pattern of cracking andor subsequently confirm or otherwise the thickness of overlay required .
The sequence of operations shall be i preplanning and marking of the positions of intended transverse sawcuts ii sawcutting of the concrete pavement at the spacing and depths specified in contract specific Appendix iii verification of sawcut depths iv inducing transverse cracks v extracting cores and vi seating .
The observation of the surface crack pattern and examination of the cores shall be carried out in daylight or under sufficient artificial light provided by the Contractor to the satisfaction of the Overseeing Organisation .
Where FWD measurements are specified in contract specific Appendix these will follow the seating operation and shall be made by the Contractor in accordance with Clause unless stated otherwise in contract specific Appendix .
Processing and analysis of the FWD results shall be performed by the Contractor in accordance with Clause unless stated otherwise in contract specific Appendix .
The road shall be neither overlaid nor reopened to highway traffic without the Overseeing Organisations written confirmation that his interpretation of the FWD measurements is complete and that the condition of the treated pavement is in accordance with the design requirements .
If for reasons other than those in subClauses and of this Clause it either i becomes necessary for the Contractor to change any plant equipment andor method or ii the Contractor makes unplanned use of different or additional plant he shall carry out a Special Trial which shall be so named but otherwise shall be in accordance with subClauses to of this Clause .
Sawcutting of Concrete Pavement Transverse sawcutting of the concrete pavement shall be carried out to comply with this Clause including the particular requirements in contract specific Appendix .
The position of all sawcuts shall be clearly marked by the Contractor on the surface of the concrete prior to cutting .
The spacing of sawcuts to be used for the main trial in subClauses to of this Clause shall be as specified in contract specific Appendix .
No sawcuts shall be made within the distance stated in contract specific Appendix from an existing transverse joint or crack .
The sawcuts shall be made at the marked positions and shall be transverse to the longitudinal axis of the carriageway and within the tolerances specified in contract specific Appendix .
Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements General The depth of all sawcuts shall be measured from the top surface of the concrete pavement slab .
The minimum depth of sawcuts shall be just sufficient to cut completely through the longitudinal steel reinforcement but this depth shall in no circumstances exceed of the nominal depth of the concrete pavement layer .
When such a sawcut fails to fully cut through the reinforcing steel the cracking operation shall not proceed within m of the incompletely cut bar .
This fact shall be recorded by the Contractor who shall report it to the Overseeing Organisation as soon as practicable .
This report shall be confirmed within hours .
Sawcutting shall also cease immediately and not recommence on the same slab until so instructed by the Overseeing Organisation .
If there has been any overcutting this shall be remedied in accordance with subClause of this Clause .
Each sawcut and the carriageway surface adjacent to it shall be thoroughly cleaned of the slurry produced by sawing and any other detritus prior to cracking .
Cracking Induced cracking of existing pavement layer or layers shall be carried out to comply with this Clause including the particular requirements in contract specific Appendix .
Transverse cracks at the positions of the sawcuts shall be induced by suitable plant with a guillotine action capable of delivering controlled variable preset impact loads to the concrete surface .
The plant used to crack the concrete pavement layer or layers shall be selfpropelled and have all wheels fitted with rubber tyres .
The compressive strength of the existing concrete shall be provided by the Overseeing Organisation in contract specific Appendix .
The Contractor shall keep records of i the settings to his plant and equipment ii the chainage and iii the time at which each and every adjustment is made to the plant and equipment .
Such records shall be in accordance with the pro forma in contract specific Appendix for the Cracking Plant and Equipment Progress Record and shall be available on demand for inspection by the Overseeing Organisation .
Cracks shall be induced in the concrete underlying the sawcut by one strike of the impacting head of such plant .
The Contractor shall take suitable measures to ensure that the plant and impact head are of sufficient mass and geared to prevent both head bounce and any associated surface damage arising therefrom .
The impact force shall be adjustable to achieve the cracking specified and the minimum force consistent with no damage to either the sawcut or to the adjoining concrete surface .
Excessive impact forces which cause multiple cracking or shattering of the underside of the concrete slab or to the underlying or adjacent layers shall not be permitted .
If such damage does occur the Contractor shall carry out remedial measures in accordance with subClause of this Clause .
The induced cracks shall extend from the bottom of the concrete slab to the base of the sawcut and shall be predominantly vertical .
They shall extend the full width of each concrete bay .
The generation of longitudinal cracks is undesirable and those produced within the highway traffic wheel track zones of length greater than the longitudinal spacing of the sawcuts specified in contract specific Appendix or derived from a Main Trial shall constitute a failure under subClause of this Clause .
Where the full width of any existing pavement layer can not be cracked transversely with one pass of the crack inducing plant further parallel passes shall be made as necessary so that all subsequent transverse cracks are aligned with those from the preceding pass within the tolerances specified in contract specific Appendix .
The Contractor shall adjust his equipment and methods so that i full depth fine vertical cracks in the concrete layer or layers are obtained ii shattering of the concrete at the surface andor at the bottom of the slab is avoided and iii treated areas are rendered suitable for overlaying to the satisfaction of the Overseeing Organisation .
The cracking operation shall not proceed more than metres beyond the last accepted core in the assessment under subClause of this Clause .
Cracking shall not commence on a given sawcut until it has been cut over its entire width to the appropriate depth in accordance with this Clause .
Coring The Contractor shall take cores in accordance with subClauses and of this Clause and with contract specific Appendix at locations selected by the Overseeing Organisation .
All holes from which core samples have been extracted shall be filled with new hydraulically bound material equivalent to that in the surrounding pavement and adequately compacted in layers each not exceeding mm thickness .
Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements General Seating Following cracking all the cracked pavement layer shall be seated with a multiwheeled pneumatic tyred roller with a weight of not less than tonnes compliant with contract specific Appendix and with the number of passes specified in contract specific Appendix .
The load including any ballast shall be distributed uniformly over all the wheels .
The drive gear shall provide a progressive variable speed forward and reversing capability .
Such compaction plant shall have articulating wheels on both front and rear axles .
The wheel arrangement shall provide an overlap of not less than mm with the adjacent wheels .
The internal pressure of the tyres shall be adjustable to provide variable ground contact pressure GCP .
The Contractor shall certify in an agreed form on a daily basis the exact extent of work completed under this subClause and shall deliver each such certificate to the Overseeing Organisation before noon the next day .
Where voids under the pavement permit rocking at the ends of the slabs that is not remedied by the seating operation under subClause of this Clause this shall be deemed to be unstable seating .
This shall require additional parallel sawcuts followed by cracking at suitable positions sufficient to enable stable seating to be achieved to the satisfaction of the Overseeing Organisation .
Once sawcutting and cracking and seating and any remedial work under subClause of this Clause have been completed the pavement shall be prepared to Clause before overlay .
Main Trial Area The Contractor shall demonstrate that the plant equipment and method that he proposes for the saw cut and cracking and seating of the existing concrete layer or layers are capable of producing the required depth of sawcut and required type of cracks .
This shall be demonstrated by first executing a main trial over an area neither less than m nor greater than m of existing pavement .
The location and area of the trial shall be as directed by the Overseeing Organisation and shall include a length of the most heavily trafficked lane .
The Contractor shall demonstrate that the sawcutting and cracking operation can achieve consistent compliance with this subClause and with subClauses and of this Clause and with contract specific Appendix .
If the road pavement to be treated contains known areas where there are significant differences in the concrete thickness or the concrete strength or in the conditions of the reinforcement or foundations then a main trial shall be conducted in each such area .
The locations of preexisting transverse cracks within the Main Trial shall be recorded by the Contractor .
The work on the main trial length shall proceed as follows i Sawcutting and cracking shall proceed in stages as directed by the Overseeing Organisation .
Each Stage that is cracked and seated shall be assessed in accordance with subClause of this Clause .
ii Stage of the main trial shall be on no .
slab .
The Contractor shall set up his plant and equipment and demonstrate that he can produce the required pattern and quality of sawcuts and transverse cracks in accordance with this Clause including contract specific Appendix .
This shall be assessed in accordance with subClause of this Clause .
iii In Stage and any subsequent Stage of the main trial a length encompassed by no .
sawcuts shall be cracked starting from one end to produce transverse cracks at the sawcut spacing stated in contract specific Appendix .
For each Stage the settings of the cracking plant and equipment shall be recorded in accordance with the pro forma in contract specific Appendix .
The cracked pavement shall then be seated in accordance with the method in subClauses and v of this Clause .
iv Seating After cracking the pavement shall be seated with the number of passes of the roller specified in contract specific Appendix as described in subClause of this Clause .
Assessment of Main Trial Compliance with the sawcutting and the cracking and seating requirements for the main trial shall be assessed as follows i The depths of the sawcutting shall be checked by the Contractor before cracking .
ii The spacing of transverse sawcuts will be checked by the Contractor before cracking .
Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements General iii The surface cracking patterns shall be checked by the Overseeing Organisation either before or after seating by the Contractor .
iv The depth of the sawcut and the depth and vertical direction of cracking shall be determined by coring through the full depth of the concrete pavement layer or layers symmetrically at any transverse position along the length of the sawcut .
Core diameter shall be in accordance with contract specific Appendix .
In Stage the Contractor may select the number and position of cores to be taken .
In Stage and in subsequent Stages of the main trial the number of cores shall be in accordance with Table with not less than one core taken from alternate sawcuts .
These shall be at locations selected by the Overseeing Organisation .
If the depth of sawcut exceeds the specified depth or if any shattering or multiple cracking is present in the extracted core then it is deemed to require remedial work in accordance with subClause of this Clause .
v The Contractors seating certificates required under subClause of this Clause will be checked by the Overseeing Organisation .
If the number of roller passes required for seating is not in accordance with subClause of this Clause the Contractor shall roll the entire area again in accordance with subClause of this Clause with not less than the number of passes of the roller specified in contract specific Appendix .
Where required in contract specific Appendix FWD testing of effective stiffness modulus shall be performed before sawcutting and after seating in Stage and any subsequent Stages of the main trial .
The FWD testing shall be performed by the Contractor in accordance with Clause unless stated otherwise in contract specific Appendix both i before cracking and ii after seating in accordance with this Clause .
Unless stated otherwise in contract specific Appendix the Contractor shall perform the processing and analysis of the FWD measurements in accordance with Clause and will present the results to the Overseeing Organisation for interpretation and instruction .
The Contractor shall remove all debris from the cracked pavement in the main trial lengths before FWD measurements are made .
Sawcutting of Stage or subsequent Stages of the Main Trial shall not commence until the Overseeing Organisation has interpreted the analysed FWD measurements undertaken before cracking and has confirmed or otherwise the suitability of the area selected for the Main Trial .
Consent to the Method and Acceptance of the Main Trial The Contractor shall not proceed with the main work until the Overseeing Organisation has given its consent that the plant equipment and methods used in the main trial length comply with the requirements in Table .
Consent to use the plant equipment and methods of sawcutting and cracking and seating will be given by the Overseeing Organisation following a successful demonstration in the main trial that the sawcutting and the cracking and seating complies with the requirements of this Clause and that the effective stiffness modulus of the cracked and seated pavement andor underlying foundation derived from FWD testing meets the design criteria .
When consent by the Overseeing Organisation to the method has been given the plant equipment and methods shall not be changed thereafter without the prior consent of the Overseeing Organisation except for normal adjustment and maintenance of plant .
Should it be necessary for the Contractor to otherwise change any plant equipment andor method the Contractor may be required to carry out a further main trial Stage .
Main Production Work The sawcutting and cracking operation for the main production work shall proceed using the parameters as determined from the Main Trial or from any relevant subsequent Sawcutting and Cracking ReAssessment Trial .
The seating operation shall be completed by rolling the pavement with the number of passes specified in contract specific Appendix .
The main work shall be assessed in accordance with subClause of this Clause .
As required in contract specific Appendix the Contractor shall make allowance in his programme for FWD measurements of effective stiffness modulus which will be made by the Contractor according to Clause after seating in accordance with this Clause unless stated otherwise in contract specific Appendix .
The Contractor will perform the processing and analysis of the FWD measurements in accordance with Clause unless stated otherwise in contract specific Appendix and will present the results to the Overseeing Organisation for interpretation and instruction .
The Contractor shall remove all debris from the cracked pavement before FWD measurements are made .
Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements General The Contractor shall be responsible for the continuous observation of the operation .
The location of preexisting transverse cracks shall be recorded by the Contractor .
Should the results vary from those to which consent was given in the main trial or from any relevant subsequent Sawcutting and Cracking ReAssessment Trail with the consent of the Overseeing Organisation the Contractor shall adjust the plant and equipment andor sawcut depth in order to produce the agreed results .
The new settings of the plant and equipment shall be recorded by the Contractor together with the location at which it was changed .
These particulars shall be delivered to the Overseeing Organisation within hours of the changes being completed .
If the agreed surface crack pattern is not restored within m production cracking shall cease in accordance with subClause of this Clause .
A Sawcutting and Cracking ReAssessment Trial shall then be carried out in accordance with subClauses to of this Clause before any further production sawcutting and cracking and seating work is executed .
The depth of sawcutting shall be measured before cracking .
If the depth is not within the depth as specified in contract specific Appendix the sawcutting shall cease .
If the sawcut is too shallow it shall be re cut until it is within tolerance .
If the sawcut is too deep it shall be deemed noncompliant under subClause iv of this Clause .
The sawcut depth shall be brought within tolerance for subsequent cuts .
The depth of the sawcutting and the depth and quality of the induced cracks shall be monitored by inspection of extracted cores .
If there has been any noncompliance with subClause iv of this Clause production sawcutting and cracking shall cease immediately .
The extent of the area affected shall be determined as specified in subClause of this Clause .
Assessment of the Main Production Work Compliance with the sawcutting and the cracking and seating requirements shall be assessed during the main work in accordance with the following criteria i The spacing and depths of transverse sawcuts will be monitored by the Overseeing Organisation .
ii The surface pattern of cracking of all areas that have been cracked and seated shall be checked by the Contractor and will be monitored by the Overseeing Organisation .
iii The depth of sawcut and the depth and the vertical direction of cracking through the full depth of the concrete pavement layer or layers shall be determined symmetrically at the sawcut position .
Core diameter shall be in accordance with contract specific Appendix .
The minimum frequency for coring of sawcut and cracked and seated concrete is specified in contract specific Appendix .
iv The seating shall be assessed in accordance with subClause v of this Clause .
Acceptance of the Main Production Work The main work under this Clause shall be accepted when it complies fully with the requirements of this clause and Table .
Failure to Comply and Remedial Work The results of the sawcut and crack and seat operations of any m length of jointed reinforced concrete shall be rejected if they fail to comply with any of the criteria in subClause of this Clause .
If i shattering or multiple cracking of concrete material occurs within the extracted core or ii excessive spall damage is caused to be arrises of the sawcuts or iii the length of any longitudinal cracks in the highway traffic wheel tracks are in excess of the spacing of the induced transverse cracks or iv the spacing of the transverse sawcuts is outside the tolerance specified in contract specific Appendix or v the depth of the transverse sawcuts is greater than the depth specified in contract specific Appendix Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements General or any combination of these then the following remedial measures shall be taken .
The size of the affected area shall be determined and the rejected sections shall be broken out excavated to full depth and reinstated with equivalent material unless otherwise instructed by the Overseeing Organisation .
The positions of the highway traffic wheel tracks to which reference is made in this Clause shall be as defined in subClause ..
If the number of roller passes required for seating is less than the number of passes specified in contract specific Appendix at each and every point on the pavement then the Contractor shall roll the entire area again with not less than the number of passes of the roller specified in contract specific Appendix unless otherwise instructed by the Overseeing Organisation .
The extent of shattering or multiple cracking or the extent to which the depth of the sawcut is outside the specified tolerance shall be determined by extracting and inspecting cores .
Such cores shall be taken through a sawcut within the area between the position of the crackinducing plant and the last core in which the sawcutting and cracking complied with the requirements of subClause of this Clause .
The extent of longitudinal cracking in the highway traffic wheel tracks shall be determined by visual inspection .
Sawcutting and Cracking Reassessment Trial When in the opinion of the Overseeing Organisation the conditions so require a sawcut and cracking reassessment trial shall take place .
The reassessment trial described in this subClause and in subClauses and of this Clause shall require the Contractor to demonstrate that the plant equipment and method to which consent was given by the Overseeing Organisation for use in the main production work are capable of producing the required effective stiffness modulus in the existing concrete layer or layers by executing this trial over an area of neither less than m nor greater than m of existing pavement .
The location of the trial shall be as directed by the Overseeing Organisation .
The sawcut spacings shall be as directed by the Overseeing Organisation within the tolerances specified in contract specific Appendix .
The Contractor shall demonstrate that the sawcutting and the cracking operations can achieve consistent compliance with subClause of this Clause .
The sawcutting and cracking reassessment trial length shall be seated with the number of roller passes specified in contract specific Appendix .
Where FWD measurements are required by contract specific Appendix the Contractor shall make programme allowance for these which shall be made by the Contractor according to Clause before sawing and after cracking in accordance with this Clause unless stated otherwise in contract specific Appendix .
Unless stated otherwise in contract specific Appendix the Contractor shall perform the processing and analysis of the FWD measurements in accordance with Clause and shall present the results to the Overseeing Organisation for interpretation and instruction .
The Contractor shall remove debris from the cracked pavement in the reassessment trial length before FWD measurements are made .
The production cracking reassessment trial length shall be seated with the number of passes of the roller specified in contract specific Appendix .
Assessment of Sawcutting and Cracking Reassessment Trial Compliance with the sawcutting and cracking and seating requirements for the sawcutting and cracking reassessment trial shall be assessed in accordance with subClauses and above .
Consent to Use the Method and Acceptance of the Sawcutting and Cracking Reassessment Trial The Contractor shall not resume the main work until the Overseeing Organisation has given its consent that the plant equipment and methods used in the sawcutting and cracking reassessment trial comply with the requirements given in Table .
Consent to the plant equipment and methods will be given by the Overseeing Organisation following a successful demonstration in the sawcutting and cracking reassessment trial that the sawcutting and cracking and seating complies with the requirements of this Clause .
When consent to the method by the Overseeing Organisation has been given the plant equipment and methods shall not be changed thereafter without the prior consent of the Overseeing Organisation except for normal adjustment and maintenance of plant .
Should it be necessary for the Contractor to otherwise change any plant equipment andor method the Contractor shall carry out a further saw cutting and cracking reassessment trial .
Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements General TABLE Sawcut Crack and Seat Existing Jointed Reinforced Concrete Pavements Assessment Criteria for Acceptance of Trials and for the Main Production Work TYPE OF TRIAL OR WORK CATEGORY CRITERIA Transverse spacings and depths of sawcuts Crack quality and extent Coring to determine depth of sawcut and severity depth and vertical direction of cracking Seating FWD monitoring where required not part of the assessment of Contractors work Main trial Stage i As specified in contract specific Appendix ii Checked by the Contractor .
i No longitudinal crack length sawcut spacing ii Monitored by the Contractor .
i Cores shall be taken through sawcuts at locations chosen by the Contractor .
i Monitored by the Contractor ii Roll with the number of passes of the roller specified in contract specific Appendix .
None required .
May be done for by the Overseeing Organisation at his request .
Main trial Stage and subsequent stages i As specified in contract specific Appendix ii Monitored by the Overseeing Organisation .
i No wheeltrack longitudinal crack length sawcut spacing ii Monitored by the Overseeing Organisation .
i Cores shall be taken at locations chosen by the Overseeing Organisation ii Not less than cores in each Stage with not less than core per alternate transverse sawcut .
i Monitored by the Overseeing Organisation ii Roll with the number of passes of the roller specified in contract specific Appendix .
The Contractor to either a Determine and record the minimum effective stiffness modulus from FWD measurements and core details provided by the Contractor or b Determine vertical movement at joints before and after treatment .
Acceptance of main trial Stage and subsequent stages i Required tolerance on transverse spacing and depth of sawcutting achieved .
i Crack pattern complies with i above .
i No multiple cracks or shattering within the core ii Cores shall have a single crack from the bottom of the sawcut to the full depth of the concrete iii Cracks shall be predominantly vertical iv Depths of sawcut to be within specified tolerances v Depth of each sawcut depth to bottom of local transverse steel .
i Certification by the Contractor that each point has been rolled with the number of passes of the roller specified in contract specific Appendix .
The Contractor to either a Produce a record of the measured effective stiffness modulus for i the concrete pavement and ii the foundation combination after the saw cutting and cracking andor seating or b Produce a record of measurements of vertical movement at joints before and after treatment .
Main production work i As specified in contract specific Appendix ii Monitored by the Contractor .
i No wheeltrack longitudinal crack length sawcut spacing ii Monitored by the Contractor .
i Cores shall be taken at locations chosen by the Overseeing Organisation ii Not less than core per area specified in contract specific Appendix iii Monitored by the Contractor .
i Roll each point with the number of passes of the roller specified in contract specific Appendix .
ii Monitored by the Contractor .
The Contractor to either a Determine and record the effective stiffness modulus from FWD measurements and core details provided by the Contractor on every m length after cracking andor seating or b Determine the vertical movement at joints after treatment .
Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements General TYPE OF TRIAL OR WORK CATEGORY CRITERIA Transverse spacings and depths of sawcuts Crack quality and extent Coring to determine depth of sawcut and severity depth and vertical direction of cracking Seating FWD monitoring where required not part of the assessment of Contractors work Acceptance of the main production work i Required tolerance on transverse spacing of saw cutting achieved .
i Crack pattern complies with i above .
i No multiple cracks or shattering within the core ii Cores shall have a single crack from the bottom of the sawcut to the full depth of the concrete iii Cracks shall be predominantly vertical iv Depths of sawcut to be within specified tolerances v Depth of each saw cut depth to bottom of local transverse steel .
i Certification by the Contractor that each point has been rolled with not less than the number of passes specified in contract specific Appendix .
i Not required for compliance monitoring ii Required for confirmation of structural design .
Sawcutting and cracking reassessment trial i Sawcut spacing as specified by the Overseeing Organisation to the tolerance specified in contract specific Appendix ii Monitored by the Overseeing Organisation .
i No wheeltrack longitudinal crack length transverse crack spacing ii Monitored by the Overseeing Organisation .
i Cores shall be taken at locations chosen by the Overseeing Organisation ii Not less than cores with not less than core per alternate transverse sawcut iii Monitored by the Overseeing Organisation .
i Roll each point with not the number of passes of the roller specified in contract specific Appendix ii Monitored by the Overseeing Organisation .
The Contractor to either a Determine and record the minimum effective stiffness modulus on every m length after seating from FWD measurements and core details provided by the Contractor or b Determine vertical movement at joints before and after treatment .
Acceptance of a saw cutting and cracking reassessment trial i Required tolerance on transverse sawcutting achieved .
i Crack pattern complies with i above .
i No multiple cracks or shattering within the core ii Cores shall have a single crack to the full depth of the concrete iii Cracks shall be predominantly vertical iv Depths of sawcut to be within specified tolerances v Depth of each saw cut depth to bottom of local transverse steel .
i Certification by the Contractor that each point has been rolled with not less than the number of passes specified in contract specific Appendix .
The Contractor to either a Produce a record of the measured effective stiffness modulus for i the concrete pavement and ii the foundation combination both before and after the sawcutting and cracking and or seating or b Produce a record of measurements of vertical movement at joints before and after treatment .
TABLE Sawcut Crack and Seat Existing Jointed Reinforced Concrete Pavements Assessment Criteria for Acceptance of Trials and for the Main Production Work continued Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements General Cracking and Seating of Existing Jointed Unreinforced Concrete Pavements and Hydraulically Bound Mixture HBM Bases General Where shown on the drawings listed in contract specific Appendix the existing unreinforced hydraulically bound pavement layer or layers shall be cracked and seated with plant and equipment to which the Overseeing Organisations consent has been given and shall comply with this Clause .
The treated surface shall be then be prepared in accordance with Clause and tack or bond coated in accordance with contract specific Appendix prior to overlaying where specified in contract specific Appendix .
Prior to the commencement of any operations to induce cracks any existing asphalt overlay and surfacing shall be removed from the area to be treated for the full width of each lane up to the adjacent longitudinal joints unless directed otherwise by the Overseeing Organisation .
Removal of any overlay shall be completed ahead of the works at a distance of not less than m from the cracking operation .
The Contractor shall also ensure that adequate reference marks based on the Overseeing Organisations chainage have been clearly marked and agreed with the Overseeing Organisation for purposes of accurately recording progress and locations of changes to equipment settings .
Before any of the main crack and seat work is commenced a main trial shall be carried out in accordance with subClauses to of this Clause .
After the main trial the Contractor shall locate all bay joints and repair joints or existing cracks in the concrete pavement or HBM and shall preplan and mark the positions of the intended induced cracks at these locations using the transverse crack spacing determined from the main trial .
If the Contractor foresees any difficulty in complying with this subClause he shall immediately draw this to the attention of the Overseeing Organisation and shall not proceed with cracking in such areas until he has received appropriate instructions from the Overseeing Organisation .
Cracking and seating operations shall not take place unless there is adequate side restraint in place from the adjacent verges and central reserve assisted by any temporary works which may be necessary .
All cracking and seating operations shall be completed before the commencement of any excavation which in the opinion of the Overseeing Organisation would remove adequate side restraint in the adjacent verges andor central reserve .
Compliance with this Clause shall be assessed by i examining the generated crack pattern on the surface of the jointed concrete or HBM base layer ii examining the depth and severity of cracking by means of core extraction iii measuring the spacing of the induced cracks and iv recording the number of passes of the seating roller .
The effective stiffness modulus of the cracked hydraulically bound layer or layers and underlaying foundation will be calculated from Falling Weight Deflectometer FWD measurements .
The Overseeing Organisation may then instruct any variation required in the method and pattern of cracking or subsequently confirm or otherwise the thickness of overlay required .
The sequence of operations for the main production work shall be i where necessary preplanning and marking of the positions of induced transverse cracks ii application of clean water to assist examination of the crack pattern iii inducing transverse cracks iv observation of the surface crack pattern v extracting cores and vi seating .
The observation of the surface crack pattern and examination of the cores shall be carried out in daylight or under sufficient artificial light provided by the Contractor to the satisfaction of the Overseeing Organisation .
FWD measurements will follow the seating operation and shall be performed by the Contractor in accordance with Clause unless stated otherwise in contract specific Appendix .
Processing and analysis of the FWD results shall be performed by the Contractor in accordance with Clause unless stated otherwise in contract specific Appendix .
The road shall be neither overlaid nor reopened to highway traffic without the Overseeing Organisations written confirmation that the Overseeing Organisation has completed its interpretation of the FWD measurements and that the condition of the treated pavement is in accordance with the design requirements .
Once the main crack and seat operation has commenced its efficacy shall be kept under review by the Contractor in accordance with subClauses to of this Clause .
If due to variations in the strength or other physical characteristics of the hydraulically bound pavement layer or of the foundation or otherwise the crack pattern varies from that confirmed in the main trial the equipment shall be adjusted as described in subClauses and of this Clause to produce the required crack pattern .
If the crack pattern obtained in the main trial is not Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements General reestablished within bays for jointed unreinforced concrete pavements or within m for HBM bases then production cracking shall stop immediately .
The Contractor shall report such circumstances to the Overseeing Organisation orally within hour and confirm it in writing within hours .
A production cracking reassessment trial shall then be carried out in accordance with subClauses to of this Clause before any further cracking and seating work is executed at the relevant area .
If for reasons other than those in subClause of this Clause it either i becomes necessary for the Contractor to change any plant equipment andor method or ii the Contractor makes unplanned use of different or additional plant he shall carry out a Special Trial which shall be so named but otherwise shall be in accordance with subClauses to of this Clause .
Cracking Induced cracking of existing pavement layer or layers shall be carried out to comply with this Clause including the particular requirements in contract specific Appendix .
Transverse cracks at the required spacing shall be induced by suitable plant with a guillotine action capable of delivering variable preset impact loads to the concrete surface .
The plant used to crack the hydraulically bound pavement layer or layers shall be selfpropelled and have all wheels fitted with rubber tyres .
The compressive strength of the existing concrete shall be provided by the Overseeing Organisation in contract specific Appendix .
The required spacing of cracks for the main trial in subClauses to of this Clause shall be as specified in contract specific Appendix .
The required spacing thereafter shall be as confirmed by the Overseeing Organisation on completion of the main trial .
The Contractor shall keep records of i the settings to his plant and equipment ii the crack spacing iii the chainage and iv the time at which each and every adjustment is made to the plant and equipment .
Such records shall be in accordance with the pro forma in contract specific Appendix for the Cracking Plant and Equipment Progress Record and shall be available on demand for inspection by the Overseeing Organisation .
Cracks shall be induced by one strike of the impacting head of such plant without producing undue surface shatter .
The plant and impact head shall be of sufficient mass and geared to prevent both head bounce and any associated surface damage arising therefrom .
The impact force shall be adjustable to achieve the cracking specified using the minimum force consistent with no surface shatter .
Excessive impact forces which cause multiple cracking or shattering of the underside of the concrete slab or to the underlying or adjacent layers shall not be permitted .
If such damage does occur the Contractor shall carry out remedial measures in accordance with subClauses or of this Clause as appropriate .
The induced cracks shall be predominantly vertical and shall be transverse to the direction of the road .
They shall extend the full width of each concrete bay or the lane width of a HBM base .
The generation of longitudinal cracks is undesirable and those produced within the highway traffic wheel track zones of length greater than the spacing of the induced transverse cracks shall constitute a failure under Clause of this Clause .
Where the full width of any existing pavement layer can not be cracked transversely with one pass of the crack inducing plant further parallel passes shall be made as necessary so that all subsequent transverse cracks are aligned with those from the preceding pass within the tolerances specified in contract specific Appendix .
The Contractor shall be responsible for i adjusting his equipment and methods so that the requisite crack pattern is maintained ii producing full depth fine vertical cracks in the hydraulically bound layer or layers and iii rendering treated areas suitable for overlaying to the satisfaction of the Overseeing Organisation .
For all trials and for all production cracking operations the Contractor shall provide clean water and shall saturate the surface area of the pavement which is to be cracked .
The surface shall be allowed to dry naturally or shall be dried artificially so that it becomes surface dry before visual inspection is made of the induced crack pattern .
The cracking operation shall not proceed more than metres beyond the last accepted core in the assessment under subClause of this Clause .
Coring The Contractor shall take cores in accordance with subClauses and of this Clause and with contract specific Appendix at locations selected by the Overseeing Organisation .
All holes from which core samples have been extracted shall be filled with new hydraulically bound material equivalent to that in the surrounding pavement and adequately compacted in layers each not exceeding mm thickness .
Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements General Seating Following cracking all of the cracked pavement layer shall be seated with a multiwheeled pneumatic tyred roller with a weight specified in contract specific Appendix and with the number of passes specified in contract specific Appendix .
The load including any ballast shall be distributed uniformly over all the wheels .
The drive gear shall provide a progressive variable speed forward and reversing capability .
Such compaction plant shall have articulating wheels on both front and rear axles .
The wheel arrangement shall provide an overlap of not less than mm with the adjacent wheels .
The internal pressure of the tyres shall be adjustable to provide variable ground contact pressure GCP .
The Contractor shall certify in an agreed form on a daily basis the exact extent of work completed under this subClause and shall deliver each such certificate to the Overseeing Organisation before noon the next day .
Once cracking and seating and any remedial work under subClause of this Clause have been completed the pavement shall be prepared to Clause before overlay .
Main Trial The Contractor shall demonstrate that the plant equipment and method that he proposes for the cracking and seating of the existing hydraulically bound layer or layers are capable of producing the required type and pattern of cracks .
This shall be demonstrated by first executing a main trial over an area of neither less than m nor greater than m of existing pavement .
The location of the trial shall be as directed by the Overseeing Organisation and shall include a length of the most heavily trafficked lane .
The Contractor shall demonstrate that the cracking operation can achieve consistent compliance with this subClause and with subClauses and of this Clause and with contract specific Appendix .
If the road pavement to be treated contains known areas where there are differences in the concrete thickness or strength or in the foundation conditions then a main trial shall be conducted in each such area .
The locations of preexisting transverse cracks within the area of the Main Trial shall be recorded by the Contractor .
The work on the main trial length shall proceed as follows i Cracking shall proceed in stages as directed by the Overseeing Organisation in groups of four to six bays in jointed concrete pavements or in lengths of m for HBM bases .
Each group that is cracked and seated shall be assessed in accordance with subClause of this Clause .
ii In Stage of the main trial the Contractor shall set up his plant and equipment and demonstrate that he can produce the required pattern and quality of transverse cracks in accordance with this Clause including contract specific Appendix .
This shall be assessed in accordance with subClause of this Clause .
iii In Stage and each subsequent Stage of the main trial a group of four bays in jointed concrete pavements or a length of m for HBM bases shall be cracked starting from one end to produce transverse cracks at each of the spacings stated in item i of contract specific Appendix .
For each Stage the settings of the cracking plant and equipment shall be recorded in accordance with the pro forma in contract specific Appendix .
iv Seating After cracking in both Stage and Stage the pavement shall be seated with the number of roller passes specified in contract specific Appendix and as described in subClause of this Clause .
Assessment of Main Trial Compliance with the cracking and seating requirements for the main trial shall be assessed as follows i The surface pattern of cracking shall be checked before seating but after applying clean water and allowing to dry as specified in subClause of this Clause .
ii In Stage of the main trial the induced crack pattern shall be inspected by the Contractor .
In Stage and in subsequent Stages visual inspection of the crack pattern shall be made by the Overseeing Organisation .
Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements General iii In Stage and in subsequent Stages of the main trial the spacing of transverse cracks will be monitored by the Overseeing Organisation .
iv The depth and the vertical direction of cracking shall be determined by coring through the full depth of the hydraulically bound pavement layer symmetrically at the crack position .
Core diameter shall be in accordance with contract specific Appendix .
In Stage and in subsequent Stages of the main trial the number of cores shall be in accordance with Table .
In cases where cracks are not visible in the surface the locations of cores will be generally within the impact points and transversely in line with the impact points .
If any shattering or multiple cracking is present in the extracted core then there is deemed to have been shattering failure .
v The Contractors certificates required under subClause of this Clause will be checked by the Overseeing Organisation .
If the number of roller passes required for seating is not in accordance with subClause of this Clause the Contractor shall roll again the entire area in accordance with sub Clause of this Clause and with not less than the number of roller passes specified in contract specific Appendix .
The Contractor shall make allowance in his programme for the undertaking of FWD measurements which will be performed by the Contractor in accordance with Clause unless stated otherwise in contract specific Appendix both i before cracking and ii after seating in accordance with this Clause .
Unless stated otherwise in contract specific Appendix the Contractor shall perform the processing and analysis of the FWD measurements in accordance with Clause and shall present them to the Overseeing Organisation for interpretation and instruction .
The Contractor shall remove all debris from the cracked pavement in the main trial lengths before FWD measurements are made .
Cracking of Stage or subsequent Stages of the Main Trial shall not commence until the Overseeing Organisation has interpreted the analysed FWD measurements undertaken before cracking and has confirmed or otherwise the suitability of the area selected for the Main Trial .
Consent to the Method and Acceptance of the Main Trial The Contractor shall not proceed with the main crack and seat work until the Overseeing Organisation has given its consent that the plant equipment and methods used in the main trial length comply with the requirements in Table .
Consent to the plant equipment and methods of cracking and seating will be given by the Overseeing Organisation following a successful demonstration in the main trial that the cracking and seating complies with the requirements of this Clause and that the effective stiffness modulus of the cracked and seated pavement andor underlying foundation derived from FWD testing meets the design criteria .
When consent by the Overseeing Organisation to the method has been given the plant equipment and methods shall not be changed thereafter without the prior consent of the Overseeing Organisation except for normal adjustment and maintenance of plant .
Should it be necessary for the Contractor to otherwise change any plant equipment andor method the Contractor may be required to carry out a further main trial Stage .
Main Production Work The cracking operation for the main production work shall proceed at the crack spacing determined after the main trial or from any relevant subsequent production cracking reassessment trial .
The seating operation shall be completed by rolling the pavement for the number of passes specified in contract specific Appendix .
The main production work shall be assessed in accordance with subClause of this Clause .
The Contractor shall make allowance in his programme for FWD measurements which will be made by the Contractor according to Clause after seating in accordance with this Clause unless stated otherwise in contract specific Appendix .
The Contractor will perform the processing and analysis of the FWD measurements in accordance with Clause unless stated otherwise in contract specific Appendix and will present the results to the Overseeing Organisation for interpretation and instruction .
The Contractor shall remove all debris from the cracked pavement before FWD measurements are made .
The surface pattern of cracking shall be checked after applying water as specified in subClause of this Clause .
The Contractor shall be responsible for the continuous observation of the crack pattern .
The location of preexisting transverse cracks shall be recorded by the Contractor .
If without the prior agreement of the Overseeing Organisation the crack spacing on the main work is shorter than that specified following the Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements General main trial the Contractor shall so notify the Overseeing Organisation in not less than hours .
Should the crack pattern vary from that to which consent was given in the main trial or from any relevant subsequent production cracking reassessment trial with the consent of the Overseeing Organisation the Contractor shall adjust the plant and equipment in order to produce the agreed crack pattern .
The new settings of the plant and equipment shall be recorded by the Contractor together with the chainage at which the settings were changed .
These particulars shall be delivered to the Overseeing Organisation within not more than hours of the changes being completed .
If the agreed crack pattern is not restored within bays in jointed concrete pavements or within m in HBM bases production cracking shall cease in accordance with subClause of this Clause .
A production cracking re assessment trial shall then be carried out in accordance with subClauses to of this Clause before any further production cracking and seating work is executed .
The depth and quality of the induced cracks shall be monitored by inspection of extracted cores .
If there has been shattering failure in accordance with subClause iv of this Clause production cracking shall cease immediately .
The extent of the area affected shall be determined as specified in subClause of this Clause .
Assessment of the Main Production Work Compliance with the cracking and seating requirements shall be assessed during the main work in accordance with the following criteria i The spacing of transverse cracks shall be checked by the Contractor and will be monitored by the Overseeing Organisation .
ii The surface pattern of cracking of all areas that have been cracked shall be checked after applying water as specified in subClause of this Clause .
iii The depth and the vertical direction of cracking shall be determined through the full depth of the hydraulically bound pavement layer or layers symmetrically at the crack position .
Core diameter shall be in accordance with contract specific Appendix .
Not less than one core shall be extracted in every m of cracked concrete at locations selected by the Overseeing Organisation .
In cases where cracks are not visible in the surface the locations of cores will be generally in line with the impact points .
iv The seating shall be assessed in accordance with subClause v of this Clause .
Acceptance of the Main Production Work The main production work under this Clause shall be accepted when it complies fully with the requirements of this Clause and with Table .
Failure to Comply and Remedial Work The results of the crack and seat operations for any jointed unreinforced concrete slab or any m length of HBM base shall be rejected if it fails to comply with any of the criteria in subClause of this Clause .
If i shattering or multiple cracking of hydraulically bound material occurs within the extracted core or ii the length of any longitudinal cracks in the highway traffic wheel track zones are in excess of the specified crack spacing of the induced transverse cracks iii the transverse crack spacing determined for the particular portion of the work is outside the tolerance specified in contract specific Appendix or any combination of these then the following remedial measures shall be taken .
The size of the affected area shall be determined and the rejected sections shall be broken out excavated to full depth and reinstated with equivalent material unless otherwise instructed by the Overseeing Organisation .
The positions of the wheel track zones to which reference is made in this Clause shall be as defined in subClause .. Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements General TABLE Sawcut Crack and Seat of Existing Jointed Unreinforced Concrete Pavements and CBM Bases Assessment Criteria for Acceptance of Trials and for the Main Production Work TYPE OF TRIAL OR WORK CATEGORY CRITERIA Surface crack pattern Transverse crack spacing Coring to determine severity depth and vertical direction of cracking Seating FWD monitoring required by contract specific Appendix Not part of the assessment of Contractors work Main trial Stage i Fine i.e .
.mm wide ii In a transverse direction iii No wheeltrack longitudinal crack length transverse crack spacing iv Monitored by the Contractor .
As specified in contract specific Appendix .
Cores shall be taken at locations chosen by the Contractor .
i Monitored by the Contractor ii Roll with the number of passes of the roller specified in contract specific Appendix .
None required .
May be done by the Contractor if desired .
Main trial Stage and subsequent stages i Fine i.e .
.mm wide ii In a transverse direction iii No longitudinal crack length transverse crack spacing iv Monitored by the Overseeing Organisation .
i Each stage at one crack spacing as specified in contract specific Appendix ii Monitored by the Overseeing Organisation .
i Cores shall be taken at locations chosen by the Overseeing Organisation ii Not less than cores in each Stage with not less than core from each bay or from a m length in HBM bases as appropriate .
i Monitored by the Overseeing Organisation ii Roll with the number of passes of the roller specified in contract specific Appendix .
Unless stated otherwise in contract specific Appendix the Contractor to determine and record the minimum effective stiffness modulus from FWD measurements and core details provided by the Contractor .
Acceptance of main trial Stage and subsequent stages i Crack pattern complies with i to iii above .
i Required tolerance on transverse crack spacing achieved .
i No multiple cracks or shattering within the core ii Cores shall have a single crack to the full depth of the concrete iii Cracks shall be predominantly vertical .
Certification by the Contractor that each point has been rolled with not the number of passes of the roller specified in contract specific Appendix .
Unless stated otherwise in contract specific Appendix the Contractor to produce a record of the measured effective stiffness moduli for i the concrete pavement and ii the foundation both before and after cracking andor seating .
Main production work i Fine i.e .
.mm wide ii In a transverse direction iii No wheeltrack longitudinal crack length transverse crack spacing iv Monitored by the Contractor .
i Crack spacing determined from the main trial or from the reassessment trial as appropriate to the tolerance specified in contract specific Appendix ii Monitored by the Contractor .
i Cores shall be taken at locations chosen by the Overseeing Organisation ii Not less than core every sq m iii Monitored by the Contractor .
i Monitored by the Contractor ii Roll each point with not the number of passes of the roller specified in contract specific Appendix .
Unless stated otherwise in contract specific Appendix the Contractor to determine and record the effective stiffness modulus from FWD measurements and core details provided by the Contractor on every bay or m length of HBM base after cracking andor seating .
Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements General TYPE OF TRIAL OR WORK CATEGORY CRITERIA Surface crack pattern Transverse crack spacing Coring to determine severity depth and vertical direction of cracking Seating FWD monitoring required by contract specific Appendix Not part of the assessment of Contractors work Acceptance of the main production work i Crack pattern complies with i to iii above .
i Required tolerance on transverse crack spacing achieved i No multiple cracks or shattering within the core ii Cores shall have a single crack to the full depth of the hydraulically bound layer iii Cracks shall be predominantly vertical .
i Certification by the Contractor that each point has been rolled with not the number of passes of the roller specified in contract specific Appendix .
i Not required for compliance monitoring ii Required for confirmation of structural design .
Production cracking reassessment trial i Fine i.e .
.mm wide ii In a transverse direction iii No wheeltrack longitudinal crack length transverse crack spacing iv Monitored by the Overseeing Organisation .
i Crack spacing as specified by the Overseeing Organisation to the tolerance specified in contract specific Appendix ii Monitored by the Overseeing Organisation .
i Cores shall be taken at locations chosen by the Overseeing Organisation ii Not less than cores with not less than core from each bay or m length in HBM bases as appropriate iii Monitored by the Overseeing Organisation .
i Monitored by the Overseeing Organisation ii Roll each point with not the number of passes of the roller specified in contract specific Appendix .
Unless stated otherwise in contract specific Appendix the Contractor to determine and record the minimum effective stiffness modulus on every bay or m length of HBM base after cracking andor seating from FWD measurements and core details provided by the Contractor .
Acceptance of a production cracking reassessment trial i Crack pattern complies with i to iii above .
i Required tolerance on transverse crack spacing achieved .
i No multiple cracks or shattering within the core ii Cores shall have a single crack to the full depth of the hydraulically bound layer iii Cracks shall be predominantly vertical .
i Certification by the Contractor that each point has been rolled with not the number of passes of the roller specified in contract specific Appendix .
Unless stated otherwise in contract specific Appendix the Contractor to produce a record of the measured effective stiffness moduli for i the concrete pavement and ii the foundation combination both before and after cracking and seating .
TABLE Sawcut Crack and Seat of Existing Jointed Unreinforced Concrete Pavements and CBM Bases Assessment Criteria for Acceptance of Trials and for the Main Production Work continued Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements General If the number of roller passes required for seating is less than the specified minimum at each and every point on the pavement or less than such other increased number of passes which has been specified by the Overseeing Organisation following a trial or otherwise then the Contractor shall roll the entire area again with not less than the number of passes specified in contract specific Appendix unless otherwise instructed by the Overseeing Organisation .
The extent of shattering or multiple cracking shall be determined by extracting and inspecting cores .
Such cores shall be taken at the location of induced transverse cracks within the area between the position of the crackinducing plant and the last core in which the cracking complied with the requirements of subClause of this Clause .
The extent of longitudinal cracking in the wheel track zones shall be determined by visual inspection .
Production Cracking Reassessment Trial When in the opinion of the Overseeing Organisation the conditions so require a Production Re assessment Trial shall take place .
The Production Cracking Reassessment Trial described in this subClause and in subClauses and of this Clause shall require the Contractor to demonstrate that the plant equipment and method to which consent was given by the Overseeing Organisation for use in the main work are capable of producing the required type and pattern of cracks in the existing hydraulically bound layer or layers by executing this trial over an area of neither less than m nor greater than m of existing pavement .
The location of the trial shall be as directed by the Overseeing Organisation .
The crack spacings shall be as directed by the Overseeing Organisation within the tolerances specified in contract specific Appendix .
The Contractor shall demonstrate that the cracking operation can achieve consistent compliance with subClause of this Clause .
The Contractor shall make programme allowance for FWD measurements which shall be made by the Contractor according to Clause before cracking and after seating in accordance with this Clause unless stated otherwise in contract specific Appendix .
Unless stated otherwise in contract specific Appendix the Contractor shall perform the processing and analysis of the FWD measurements in accordance with Clause and shall present the results to the Overseeing Organisation for interpretation and instruction .
The Contractor shall remove all debris from the cracked pavement in the reassessment trial length before FWD measurements are made .
The production cracking reassessment trial length shall be seated with the number of passes of the roller specified in contract specific Appendix .
Assessment of Production Cracking Reassessment Trial Compliance with the cracking and seating requirements for the production cracking reassessment trial shall be assessed in accordance with subClauses and above .
Consent to the Method and Acceptance of the Production Cracking Reassessment Trial The Contractor shall not resume the main work until the Overseeing Organisation has given its consent that the plant equipment and methods used in the production cracking reassessment trial comply with the requirements given in Table .
Consent to the plant equipment and methods will be given by the Overseeing Organisation following a successful demonstration in the Production Cracking Reassessment Trial that the cracking and seating complies with the requirements of this Clause .
When consent to the method has been given by the Overseeing Organisation the plant equipment and methods shall not be changed thereafter without the prior consent of the Overseeing Organisation except for normal adjustment and maintenance of plant .
Should it be necessary for the Contractor to otherwise change any plant equipment andor method the Contractor shall carry out a further Production Cracking Re assessment Trial .
Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements General Monitoring of Cracked and Seated Jointed Unreinforced Concrete Pavements and HBM Bases using the Falling Weight Deflectometer FWD General This Clause specifies the procedures to be followed when the Falling Weight Deflectometer FWD is to be used to acquire the measurements required to determine the loadspreading properties of cracked and seated concrete as required by Clause .
Specifically the FWD shall be used to validate whether the effective stiffness modulus of the cracked and seated hydraulically bound layer or layers exceeds the threshold value determined from the structural design calculations .
The type of equipment is specified together with the procedures for its use on site and the parameters to be used to acquire the deflection data .
The effective stiffness moduli of the cracked and seated hydraulically bound layer or layers and of the underlying foundation shall be calculated by the Contractor using backanalysis of the FWD measurements obtained by the Contractor in accordance with Clause .
FWD measurements shall be made on the surface of the concrete after the removal of any existing asphalt overlay or surfacing from the area to be tested .
Removal of overlay shall be completed ahead of the FWD testing at a distance of not less than m from the FWD equipment .
The cracking and seating operation shall be completed ahead of the FWD testing at a distance of not less than m from the FWD equipment in order to minimise the effect of pavement vibration .
FWD measurements shall follow the seating operation .
The Contractor shall ensure that a sufficient frequency of clearlymarked locational reference markers have been put in place to the satisfaction of the Overseeing Organisation for the purpose of accurately recording the locations of the FWD measurements and therefore correlating the results with the settings used by the cracking plant .
The Overseeing Organisation will use the effective stiffness moduli obtained from the main trial in accordance with Clause in conjunction with the other criteria specified in subClause of Clause to determine the required transverse crack spacing to be used in the main production work .
The Overseeing Organisation may instruct any variation required in the method and pattern of cracking or subsequently confirm or otherwise the suitability of the proposed thickness of overlay required as a result of the effective stiffness modulus of the cracked and seated hydraulically bound layer or layers determined from FWD measurements .
The road shall be neither overlaid nor reopened to highway traffic without the Overseeing Organisations written confirmation that the FWD measurements have been assessed and any required remedial action taken .
Measuring Equipment Any FWD used to monitor the effectiveness of the cracking and seating operation as specified in this Clause and in Clause shall have the current appropriate certification before it can be used on the Overseeing Organisations network .
Evidence of a satisfactory absolute calibration by the equipment manufacturer and consistency checks by the operator shall be provided as required by the Overseeing Organisation .
The absolute calibration of the deflection sensors load cell and system processor shall be carried out annually .
Consistency checks of the dynamic response of the machine as a whole should take place at intervals of six weeks or less during periods of operation and after any major service involving replacement parts .
For the monitoring of the crack and seat operation on jointed unreinforced concrete pavements and on HBM bases the load level shall be set at kN .
The load pulse shall be applied through a mm diameter plate and have a rise time from start of pulse to peak of between and milliseconds .
Most FWDs have a Hz smoothing filter option which has been shown to improve the agreement between machines .
Where available the smoothing filter shall be activated .
Deflections shall be measured to a resolution of at least micron over the range mm by a minimum of sensors situated at radii up to a distance of .m from the centre of the loading plate at positions shown in Table .
While more than geophones can be fitted to an FWD Clause requires that the data input to the approved backanalysis software program shall contain measurements only from the geophones located at the positions shown in Table .
Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements General Operation on Site FWD testing shall not be performed while standing water is present on the surface to be tested .
The Contractor shall ensure that there is no detritus on the road surface prior to the FWD testing .
Care shall be taken to ensure that the whole area of the FWD loading plate is in contact with the pavement surface .
A minimum of drops plus a small initial drop for settling the load plate should be made at each test point .
The Contractor shall make checks for machine consistency during the survey and before analysis .
TABLE Deflection Sensor Positions for Monitoring Cracking and Seating Type of Pavement Distance mm from Centre of Loading Plate Geophone number d d d d d d d Jointed unreinforced concrete or HBM base During FWD testing it is essential for subsequent analysis that the deflection values for d to d decrease as the distance from the applied load increases .
Should the deflection measured by a geophone of a higher number see Table be greater than the deflection measured by a geophone of lower number then the FWD shall be moved forwards or backwards by a small distance and the measurement cycle repeated .
If it is not possible to obtain a decreasing deflection bowl after two shifts of position then the measurement should be discarded and the Overseeing Organisation informed of the location of the test position for possible further investigation .
Measurements of pavement temperature at mm depth should be recorded at no less than hourly intervals .
Main Trial Area Testing In Stage and subsequent Stages of a Main Trial FWD measurements shall be made both before and after cracking to determine the reduction in the effective stiffness modulus of the concrete produced by the cracking and seating operation .
Stage and subsequent Stages shall consist of an area as described in subClause of Clause .
The area of concrete to be tested shall be adequately marked to enable FWD testing to be performed on the same locations both before and after cracking and seating .
On jointed concrete pavements FWD measurements shall be made along the centre line of the bays .
For each crack spacing specified in contract specific Appendix the location of the centre of the loading plate for the first measurement shall be m beyond the transverse joint at the start of a bay with all the geophones located within the bay .
Subsequent measurements shall be made at intervals of .
m along the centre line of the slab up to and including the centre of the slab .
Test positions coincident with transverse cracks shall be omitted and the location of the crack recorded by the Contractor .
For each measurement the location of the FWD loading plate shall be adequately recorded so that the position of each measurement can be clearly identified .
On HBM bases FWD measurements shall be made along the centre line of each traffic lane unless this alignment coincides with a longitudinal shrinkage or construction crack in which case the measuring line shall be shifted towards the nearside wheelpath until the FWD test plate is not located within .
m of a longitudinal crack .
The location of the centre of the loading plate for the first measurement shall be m past the start of the test area for the Stage .
Subsequent measurements shall be made at intervals of m along the centre line of the lane until the outer geophone d see Table is outside the other end of the test area for the Stage .
Test positions coincident with transverse cracks shall be omitted and the location of the crack recorded by the Contractor .
For each measurement the location of the FWD loading plate shall be adequately recorded such that the position of each measurement can be clearly identified .
After completion of the FWD measurements on the Main Trial the deflection data and layer thickness details derived from cores taken in accordance with Clause and supplemented by Ground Penetrating Radar GPR measurements when required by contract specific Appendix shall be used by the Contractor to calculate effective stiffness moduli of the pavement layers in accordance with Clause .
The moduli values shall be supplied to the Overseeing Organisation who will determine the required transverse crack spacing to be used in the main production with reference to the other criteria specified in subClause of Clause .
For jointed unreinforced concrete pavements the analysis will also provide the location on each bay where FWD measurements shall be made following production cracking and seating in the main works .
Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements General Consent to the Results of the FWD Measurements on the Main Trial The Contractor shall not proceed with the main production cracking works until the Overseeing Organisation has specified the transverse crack spacing and given its consent that the effective stiffness modulus of the cracked and seated concrete exceeds the threshold value required by the structural design .
Consent to the plant equipment and methods will be given by the Overseeing Organisation following a successful demonstration in the main trial that the cracking and seating complies with the requirements of Clause and this Clause .
When consent by the Overseeing Organisation to the method has been given the plant equipment and methods shall not be changed thereafter without the prior consent of the Overseeing Organisation except for normal adjustment and maintenance of plant .
Should it be necessary for the Contractor to otherwise change any plant equipment andor method the Contractor shall carry out a further main trial Stage .
Main Production Work Testing The cracking operation for the main production work shall proceed at the crack spacing determined from the main trial or from any relevant subsequent production cracking reassessment trial .
The main production work shall be assessed in accordance with subClause of Clause with reference to subClause of this Clause .
FWD measurements shall be made along the centre line of every bay of jointed concrete pavement after cracking and seating at the bay location determined by the Overseeing Organisation from the results of the main trial .
For HBM bases the FWD measurements shall be made every m along the centre line of each traffic lane and shifting by .
m where necessary to avoid the location of preexisting transverse cracks .
If the crack characteristics or patterns vary from those to which consent was given in the main trial or from any relevant subsequent production cracking reassessment trial and are not restored within bays in jointed concrete pavements or within m in HBM bases production cracking shall cease in accordance with subClause of Clause .
A production cracking reassessment trial shall then be carried out in accordance with subClause of Clause before any further production cracking and seating work is executed .
After completion of the FWD measurements on the Main Production Work the deflection data and layer thickness details derived from cores taken in accordance with Clause and supplemented by Ground Penetrating Radar GPR measurements when required by contract specific Appendix shall be used by the Contractor to calculate effective stiffness moduli of the pavement layers in accordance with Clause .
The moduli values shall be supplied to the Overseeing Organisation within hours of the cracking operations .
Acceptance of the Main Production Work Testing The effective stiffness moduli of the cracked and seated concrete calculated in accordance with Clause from the FWD measurements collected in accordance with this Clause shall be assessed by the Overseeing Organisation in conjunction with the other criteria specified in subClause of Clause .
The Overseeing Organisation shall instruct or otherwise on any remedial actions that may be required .
The road shall be neither overlaid nor reopened to highway traffic without the Overseeing Organisations written confirmation that he has completed his interpretation of the FWD measurements and that all required remedial actions have been completed .
Production Cracking Reassessment Trial Should a production cracking reassessment trial be required for the reasons specified in subClause of Clause then FWD measurements will be required for assessment of the trial .
These measurements shall be made by the Contractor in accordance with subClauses to of this Clause both before and after cracking and seating .
Assessment of Production Cracking Reassessment Trial After completion of the FWD measurements on the reassessment trial the deflection data and layer thickness details derived from cores taken in accordance with Clause shall be used by the Contractor to calculate effective stiffness moduli of the pavement layers in accordance with Clause .
The Overseeing Organisation will use these moduli values in conjunction with the other criteria specified in subClause of Clause to determine the transverse crack spacing to be used in the main production work .
For jointed Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements General unreinforced concrete pavements the analysis will also provide the location on individual bays where FWD measurements will be made following cracking and seating in the main works .
Consent to the Method and Acceptance of the Production Cracking Reassessment Trial The Contractor shall not resume the main crack and seat works until the Overseeing Organisation has given his consent that the plant equipment and methods used in the production cracking reassessment trial comply with the requirements given in Table of Clause and subClauses and of this Clause .
Monitoring of Sawcut Cracked and Seated Jointed Reinforced Concrete Pavements Using the Falling Weight Deflectometer FWD General This Clause specifies the procedures to be followed when the Falling Weight Deflectometer FWD is to be used to acquire the measurements used to determine the loadspreading properties of sawcut cracked and seated reinforced concrete as required by Clause .
Specifically the FWD shall be used to validate whether the effective stiffness modulus of the sawcut cracked and seated hydraulically bound layer or layers exceeds the threshold value determined from the structural design calculations .
The type of equipment is specified together with the procedures for its use on site and the parameters required to acquire the deflection data .
The effective stiffness moduli of the sawcut cracked and seated hydraulically bound layer or layers and of the underlying foundation shall be calculated by the Contractor using backanalysis of the FWD measurements obtained by the Contractor in accordance with Clause .
FWD measurements shall be made on the surface of the concrete after the removal of any existing asphalt overlay or surfacing from the area to be tested .
Removal of overlay shall be completed ahead of the FWD testing at a distance of not less than m from the FWD equipment .
The cracking and seating operation shall also be completed ahead of the FWD testing at a distance of not less than m from the FWD equipment in order to minimise the effect of pavement vibration .
FWD measurements shall follow the seating operation .
The Contractor shall ensure that a sufficient frequency of clearlymarked locational reference markers have been put in place to the satisfaction of the Overseeing Organisation for the purpose of accurately recording the locations of the FWD measurements and therefore correlating the results with the settings used by the cracking plant .
The Overseeing Organisation will use the effective stiffness moduli obtained from the main trial in accordance with Clause in conjunction with the other criteria specified in subClause of Clause to determine the required transverse crack spacing to be used in the main production work .
The Overseeing Organisation may instruct any variation required in the method and pattern of saw cutting andor cracking or subsequently confirm or otherwise the suitability of the proposed thickness of overlay required as a result of the effective stiffness modulus of the sawcut cracked and seated hydraulically bound layer or layers determined from FWD measurements .
The road shall be neither overlaid nor reopened to highway traffic without the Overseeing Organisations written confirmation that the FWD measurements have been assessed and any required remedial action taken .
Measuring Equipment Any FWD used to monitor the effectiveness of the sawcut cracking and seating operation as specified in this Clause and in Clause shall have the current appropriate certification before it can be used on the Overseeing Organisations network .
Evidence of a satisfactory absolute calibration by the equipment manufacturer and consistency checks by the operator shall be provided as required by the Overseeing Organisation .
The absolute calibration of the deflection sensors load cell and system processor shall be carried out annually .
Consistency checks of the dynamic response of the machine as a whole should take place at intervals of six weeks or less during periods of operation and after any major service involving replacement parts .
Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements General For the monitoring of the sawcut crack and seat operation the load level shall be set at kN .
The load pulse shall be applied through a mm diameter plate and have a rise time from start of pulse to peak of between and milliseconds .
Most FWDs have a Hz smoothing filter option which has been shown to improve the agreement between machines .
Where available the smoothing filter shall be activated .
Deflections shall be measured to a resolution of at least micron over the range mm by a minimum of sensors situated at radii up to a distance of .m from the centre of the loading plate at positions shown in Table .
While more than geophones can be fitted to an FWD Clause requires that the data input to the approved backanalysis software program shall contain measurements only from the geophones located at the positions shown in Table .
TABLE Deflection Sensor Positions for Monitoring Cracking and Seating Type of Pavement Distance mm from Centre of Loading Plate Inner Geophone number Outer d d d d d d d Jointed reinforced concrete Operation on site FWD testing shall not be performed while standing water is present on the surface to be tested .
The Contractor shall ensure that there is no detritus on the road surface prior to the FWD testing .
Care shall be taken to ensure that the whole area of the FWD loading plate is in contact with the pavement surface .
A minimum of drops plus a small initial drop for settling the load plate should be made at each test point .
The Contractor shall make checks for machine consistency during the survey and before analysis .
During FWD testing it is essential for subsequent analysis that the deflection values for d to d reduce as the distance from the applied load increases .
Should the deflection measured by a geophone of a higher number see Table be greater than the deflection measured by a geophone of a lower number then the FWD shall be moved forwards or backwards by a small distance and the measurement cycle repeated .
If it is not possible to obtain a decreasing deflection bowl after two shifts of position then the measurement should be discarded and the location of the test position noted for further investigation by the Overseeing Organisation .
Main Trial Area Testing In Stage and subsequent Stages of the Main Trial the Contractor shall make FWD measurements both before sawcutting and then after cracking and seating in order to determine the reduction in the effective stiffness modulus of the concrete produced by the sawcut cracking and seating operation .
Stage and subsequent Stages shall consist of an area as described in subclause of Clause .
The area of concrete to be tested shall be adequately marked to enable FWD testing to be performed on the same locations both before sawcutting and after cracking .
FWD measurements shall be made along the centre line of the reinforced slabs .
For each sawcut spacing the location of the centre of the loading plate for the first measurement shall be at the midpoint between the first two sawcuts .
Subsequent measurements shall be made directly on the sawcuts and at the midpoint between adjacent sawcuts .
Test positions coincident with transverse cracks should be omitted and the location of the crack recorded by the Contractor .
The location of the FWD loading plate shall be adequately recorded so that the location of each measurement can be clearly identified .
After completion of the FWD measurements on the main trial the deflection data and layer thickness details derived from cores taken in accordance with Clause and supplemented by Ground Penetrating Radar GPR measurements when required by contract specific Appendix shall be used by the Contractor to calculate effective stiffness moduli of the pavement layers in accordance with Clause .
The moduli values shall be supplied to the Overseeing Organisation who will determine the required transverse sawcut spacing to be used in the main production work with reference to the other criteria specified in subClause of Clause .
Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements General Consent to the Results of the FWD Measurements on the Main Trial The Contractor shall not proceed with the main sawcut crack and seat works until the Overseeing Organisation has specified the transverse sawcut spacing and given its consent that the effective stiffness modulus of the cracked and seated concrete exceeds the threshold value required by the structural design .
Consent to the plant equipment and methods will be given by the Overseeing Organisation following a successful demonstration in the main trial that the sawcut cracking and seating complies with the requirements of Clause and this Clause .
When consent by the Overseeing Organisation to the method has been given the plant equipment and methods shall not be changed thereafter without the prior consent of the Overseeing Organisation except for normal adjustment and maintenance of plant .
Should it be necessary for the Contractor to otherwise change any plant equipment andor method the Contractor shall carry out a further main trial Stage .
Main Production Work Testing The cracking operation for the main production work shall proceed using the sawcut spacing determined from the main trial or from any relevant subsequent production cracking reassessment trial .
The main production work shall be assessed in accordance with subClause of Clause with reference to subClause of this Clause .
FWD measurements shall be made every m along the centre line of the slabs in each traffic lane and shifting by .
m where necessary to avoid the location of preexisting transverse cracks .
If the crack characteristics or patterns vary from those to which consent was given in the main trial or from any relevant subsequent production cracking reassessment trial and are not restored within m production cracking shall cease in accordance with subClause of Clause .
A production cracking reassessment trial shall then be carried out in accordance with subClause of Clause before any further production sawcut and cracking and seating work is executed .
After completion of the FWD measurements on the Main Production Work the deflection data and layer thickness details derived from cores taken in accordance with Clause and supplemented by Ground Penetrating Radar GPR measurements when required by contract specific Appendix shall be used by the Contractor to calculate effective stiffness moduli of the pavement layers in accordance with Clause .
The moduli values shall be supplied to the Overseeing Organisation within hours of the cracking operations .
Assessment of the Main Production Work Testing The effective stiffness moduli of the cracked and seated concrete calculated by the Contractor in accordance with Clause from the FWD measurements collected in accordance with this Clause shall be assessed by the Overseeing Organisation in conjunction with the other criteria specified in subClause of Clause .
The Overseeing Organisation shall instruct or otherwise on any remedial actions that may be required .
The road shall be neither overlaid nor reopened to highway traffic without the Overseeing Organisations written confirmation that he has completed his interpretation of the FWD measurements and that all required remedial actions have been completed .
Production Cracking Reassessment Trial Should a production cracking reassessment trial be required as specified in subClause of Clause then FWD measurements will be required for assessment of the trial .
These measurements shall be made by the Contractor in accordance with subClauses to of this Clause both before sawcutting and after cracking and seating .
Assessment of Production Cracking Reassessment Trial After completion of the FWD measurements on the reassessment trial the deflection data and layer thickness details derived from cores taken in accordance with Clause shall be used by the Contractor to calculate effective stiffness moduli of the pavement layers in accordance with Clause .
The Overseeing Organisation will use these moduli values in conjunction with the other criteria specified in subClause of Clause to determine the transverse crack spacing to be used in the main production work .
Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements General Consent to the Method and Acceptance of the Production Cracking Reassessment Trial The Contractor shall not resume the main sawcut crack and seat works until the Overseeing Organisation has given its consent that the plant equipment and methods used in the production cracking re assessment trial comply with the requirements given in Table of Clause and subClauses and of this Clause .
Backanalysis of Falling Weight Deflectometer FWD Measurements Made on Concrete Pavements Treated by Fractured Slab Techniques General For the purposes of this Clause Fractured Slab techniques shall comprise the following i Crack and seat of jointed unreinforced concrete pavements and HBM bases in accordance with Clause .
ii Sawcut and crack and seat of jointed reinforced concrete pavements in accordance with Clause .
The Contractor shall produce the FWD deflection measurements to be used in this Clause in accordance with Clause for crack and seat or Clause for sawcut crack and seat .
The effective stiffness modulus of the fractured concrete together with that of the foundation shall be derived from the backanalysis of FWD deflection bowl measurements by means of a recognised analysis package .
Highways England recognises the MODULUSHA computer program any alternative package proposed must be proven to provide the same output values as MODULUSHA .
MODULUSHA or an approved equivalent shall be used for all backanalysis of FWD measurements performed in accordance with Clause for crack and seat or Clause for sawcut crack and seat .
Detailed instructions for the use of this program are contained in its accompanying MODULUSHA User Guide .
The backanalysis procedure to be used utilises a twolayer model and therefore only the thickness of the bound layers is required .
The unbound layers are modelled as a single layer of infinite depth .
Thickness information for the bound layers is obtained from core samples obtained from the assessment of the cracking operations in accordance with Clause or Clause and may be supplemented by Ground Penetrating Radar measurements when required by contract specific Appendix for crack and seat or contract specific Appendix for sawcut crack and seat .
The pavement deflection data to be backanalysed shall be divided into uniform sections with similar total thicknesses of hydraulically bound material for the purposes of backanalysis .
The mean total thickness of hydraulically bound material present shall be calculated for each section .
The measured boundlayer thicknesses within a uniform section should lie within per cent of the boundlayer thickness used for that section .
The Overseeing Organisation may instruct any variation required in the method and pattern of cracking or subsequently confirm or otherwise the suitability of the proposed thickness of overlay required as a result of the effective stiffness modulus of the fractured hydraulically bound layer or layers determined from FWD measurements .
Following submission of the electronic tables and graphs produced in accordance with subClauses and of this Clause the Contractor shall allow the period of time set out in contract specific Appendix for the Overseeing Organisation to carry out his assessment and interpretation of the results .
The pavement shall be neither overlaid nor reopened to highway traffic without the Overseeing Organisations written confirmation that he has completed his assessment of the FWD measurements and that any required remedial action has been completed .
Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements General Processing and Backanalysis Using MODULUSHA The Contractor shall use MODULUSHA or an approved equivalent to create .OUT files with the required format from standard .F or .FWD output files in accordance with Chapter of the MODULUSHA Users Guide .
Deflection measurements from a maximum of seven geophones shall be used .
The additional parameters required by MODULUSHA or an approved equivalent shall be as specified in contract specific Appendix .
If the FWD deflection measurement data is not output in .F or .FWD file formats then the Contractor shall produce suitable .OUT files containing the measured FWD data with the required structure by an alternative method of his own devising .
Following production of a suitable .OUT file the Contractor shall backanalyse the FWD deflection data obtained from a length of pavement defined in accordance with subClause of this Clause .
The backanalysis shall be performed in accordance with the procedure set out in Chapter of the MODULUSHA Users Guide .
The additional parameters required by MODULUSHA or an approved equivalent shall be as specified in contract specific Appendix .
The Contractor shall save the backanalysed data as an ASCII data file in accordance with the procedure set out in Chapter of the MODULUSHA Users Guide .
The structure of the data contained within the output data files shall be as specified in Appendix F of the MODULUSHA Users Guide .
The Contractor shall compile and present the backanalysed data created by MODULUSHA or an approved equivalent to the Overseeing Organisation in tabulated form in accordance with the electronic spreadsheet format specified in contract specific Appendix .
For each FWD test point the presented data shall include as a minimum the i Station identification eg carriageway lane and chainage .
ii Magnitude of the applied load in kN .
iii Absolute measured deflections at each geophone position in microns .
iv Backanalysed effective stiffness modulus of the hydraulically bound layer in MPa .
v Backanalysed effective stiffness modulus of the foundation layer in MPa .
vi Calculated thickness of hydraulically bound material used in the backanalysis in mm .
vii Root Mean Square Deviation RMS .
viii Absolute Mean Deviation AMD in microns .
ix Estimated depth to a stiff layer bedrock in mm .
The tabulated data shall also contain the actual measured core thicknesses and their locations relative to the FWD test positions .
Backanalysis and Presentation of Results of FWD Monitoring of Main Trial The Contractor shall backanalyse and present the results of his FWD testing of the Main Trial carried out in accordance with Clause for crack and seat or Clause for sawcut crack and seat in accordance with subClauses to of this Clause .
The results shall also be presented graphically .
The layout of the graphs shall display the relationships specified in contract specific Appendix in a format acceptable to the Overseeing Organisation .
Backanalysis and Presentation of Results of FWD Monitoring of Main Production Works The Contractor shall backanalyse and present the results of his FWD testing of the Main Production Works carried out in accordance with Clause for crack and seat or Clause for sawcut crack and seat in accordance with subClauses to of this Clause .
The results shall also be presented graphically .
The layout of the graphs shall display the relationships specified in contract specific Appendix in a format acceptable to the Overseeing Organisation Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements General F Backanalysis and Presentation of Results of FWD Monitoring of Production Cracking Reassessment Trials The Contractor shall backanalyse and present the results of his FWD testing of any Production Cracking Reassessment Trial carried out in accordance with Clause for crack and seat or Clause for sawcut crack and seat in accordance with subClauses to of this Clause .
The results shall also be presented graphically .
The layout of the graphs shall display the relationships specified in contract specific Appendix in a format acceptable to the Overseeing Organisation .
Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements General N NATIONAL ALTERATIONS OF THE OVERSEEING ORGANISATION OF NORTHERN IRELAND NI Horizontal Alignments Surface Levels and Surface Regularity of Pavement Courses Horizontal Alignments Horizontal alignments shall be determined from one edge of the pavement surface as described in contract specific Appendix .
The edge of the pavement as constructed and all other parallel alignments shall be correct within a tolerance of mm therefrom except for kerbs and channel blocks which shall be laid with a smooth alignment within a tolerance of mm .
Longitudinal road markings lateral tolerances shall be in accordance with subClause .NI .
Surface Levels of Pavement Courses The design levels of pavement courses shall be calculated from the vertical profile crossfalls and the pavement course thicknesses described in contract specific Appendix .
The level of any point on the constructed surface of the pavement courses shall be the design level subject to the appropriate tolerances stated in Table NI .
TABLE NI Tolerances in Surface Levels of Pavement Courses Road surfaces general adjacent to a surface water channel mm mm Binder course mm Top surface of base in pavements without binder course mm Base mm Subbase under concrete pavement surface slabs laid full thickness in one operation by machines with surface compaction mm Subbases other than above mm Where a surface water channel is laid before the adjacent road pavement layer the top of that layer measured from the top of the adjacent edge of the surface water channel shall be to the tolerances given in Table NI Notwithstanding the tolerances permitted in surface levels of pavement courses the cumulative tolerance shall not result in a reduction in thickness of the pavement excluding the subbase and filter layer by more than mm from the specified thickness nor a reduction in the thickness of the bituminous surface course by more than mm from that specified .
For checking compliance with subClause of this Clause measurements of the surface levels of all courses will be taken on a grid of points located as described in contract specific Appendix .
In any length of pavement compliance shall be deemed to be met for all surfaces other than the final road surface when not more than one of ten consecutive measurements taken longitudinally or one in any transverse line exceeds the tolerances permitted in Table NI provided that this one measurement shall not exceed by more than mm the tolerance for the course concerned .
For the final road surface the tolerance given in Table NI shall apply to any point on that surface .
Surface Regularity The longitudinal regularity of the surfaces of surface courses binder courses and concrete slabs shall be such that the number of surface irregularities is within the relevant limits stated in Table NI .
Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements General N An irregularity is a variation of not less than mm or not less mm of the profile of the road surface as measured by the rolling straightedge set at mm or mm as appropriate or equivalent apparatus capable of measuring irregularities within the same magnitudes over a m length .
No irregularity exceeding mm shall be permitted .
Prior to checking any final road surface binder course or top surface of base in pavements without binder course for level regularity or macrotexture depth it shall be cleaned of loose or extraneous materials .
These operations shall be carried out without damaging the surface of the pavement as soon as possible and within days of construction of the pavement .
Compliance with Table NI shall be checked by the rolling straightedge along any line or lines parallel to the edge of pavement on sections of m at regular intervals as stated in contract specific Appendix whether or not it is constructed in shorter lengths .
Sections shorter than m forming part of a longer pavement shall be assessed using the number of irregularities for a m length prorata to the nearest whole number .
Where the total length of pavement is less than m the measurements shall be taken on m lengths .
Pavements shall be measured transversely for irregularities at regular intervals as stated in contract specific Appendix by a m long straightedge to BS placed at right angles to the centre line of the road .
The maximum allowable difference between the pavement surface and the straightedge shall be mm .
A straightedge metres long shall be used to check longitudinal surface regularity in the following cases i for lengths of less than m of surface course binder course and concrete slabs ii where use of the rolling straightedge or equivalent apparatus is impracticable iii for all lengths of subbase under concrete pavement slabs laid full thickness in one operation by machine with surface compaction .
The maximum allowable difference between the surface and the underside of the straightedge when placed parallel with or at right angles to the centre line of the road shall be for pavement surfaces mm for binder courses mm for subbases under concrete pavements as in iii above mm TABLE NI Maximum Permitted Number of Surface Irregularities Surfaces of each lane of carriageway each hard strip and each hard shoulder for each irregularity limit Surfaces of each lane of bituminous binder courses for carriageway hard strip and hard shoulder for each irregularity limit Surfaces of laybys service areas and associated bituminous binder courses for each irregularity limit Irregularity Limits mm mm mm mm mm mm Length m Category A Roads Category B Roads The Category of each section of road is described in contract specific Appendix .
Rectification Where any pavement area does not comply with the specification for regularity surface tolerance thickness macrotexture depth material properties or compaction the full extent of the area which does not comply with the specification shall be made good and the surface of the pavement course shall be rectified in the manner described below Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements General N i Unbound and Hydraulically bound materials The top mm shall be scarified reshaped with material added or removed as necessary and re compacted .
The area treated shall be not less than m long and m wide or such area as necessary to obtain compliance with the specification .
ii Cement bound subbases and bases The method of correction will depend on the period which has elapsed between detection of the error and the time of mixing of the material .
If this is less than hours the surface shall be scarified to a depth of not less than mm surplus material removed or freshly mixed material added as necessary and recompacted in accordance with the specification .
If the period is hours or more the full depth of the layer shall be removed from the pavement and replaced with material in accordance with the specification .
In either case the area treated shall be at least m long and the full width of the paving laid in one operation .
If the Contractor proposes rectification within days of laying he shall comply with Clause .
Alternatively for subbases under concrete pavements the Contractor may make up low areas to a level within the tolerances of this Clause with a cement and sand mortar or with an AC fine surface course complying with Clause .
iii Bituminous bases With coated macadam or asphalt bases the full depth of the top layer as laid shall be removed and be replaced with fresh material laid and compacted in accordance with the specification .
Any area so treated shall be at least m long and the full width of the paving laid in one operation .
Alternatively for low areas in bituminous bases the Contractor may make up the level with additional binder course material .
iv Surface courses binder courses These shall have the full depth of the course removed and replaced with fresh material laid and compacted in accordance with the specification .
The area rectified shall be the full width of the paving laid in one operation and at least m long if binder course or base on pavements without binder course or m if surface course .
Where the number of surface irregularities exceeds the limits in Table NI the area to be rectified shall be m or m long as appropriate and the full width of the lanes affected or such lesser area as necessary to make the number of surface irregularities conform with the limits .
Checking of the surface course for compliance with this Clause shall be carried out as soon as possible after completion of the surfacing and remedial works completed before the road is opened to traffic .
Where the macrotexture depth requirement is not met for a a section m in lane length or b the full lane length of a section less than m long as the balance of a complete scheme or c the full lane length of a scheme less than m long then sufficient m lengths shall be replaced starting with that length having the least macrotexture depth until the average requirement for the section length is complied with .
A minimum length of m and the full lane width shall be removed and replaced either a to the full depth of the surface course or b to a depth of mm when replaced by the repave method process in compliance with Clause .
Areas to be removed shall be delineated both longitudinally and transversely by saw cutting prior to the material being removed .
Joints shall be formed either by coating the exposed sawn face with hot bitumen or heating by suitable heater .
The heater shall raise the temperature of the full depth of the course immediately before laying the new material to a figure within the range of minimum rolling temperature and maximum temperature at any stage specified for the material and for a width of not less than mm .
Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements General N v Concrete slabs Concrete slabs shall be rectified by planing grinding or bump cutting .
Large depressions which can not be dealt with in this way shall be rectified by cutting out the surface and replacing by a thin bonded surface repair complying with Clause .
Retexturing of hardened concrete shall be carried out by sawing grooves in accordance with the specification .
Texturing of replaced surfaces shall be by brushing in accordance with the specification .
Where the slab can not be rectified as above the full depth of slab shall be removed and replaced with a slab constructed in compliance with Clause to the extent required to obtain compliance with the specification .
Remedial works involving the placing of fresh concrete shall be completed in sufficient time for the concrete strength to have developed as required in Clause before that section of pavement is opened to traffic .
NI Excavation Trimming and Reinstatement of Existing Surfaces General The Contractor shall not excavate pits trenches or other openings in paved areas which have been constructed as part of the permanent works in order to construct other parts of the works including Statutory Undertakers and other service works except with the prior approval of the Overseeing Organisation .
Where excavation and trimming of existing paved areas and highways not constructed as part of the permanent works are required in contract specific Appendix they shall be carried out and reinstated in compliance with this Clause and with any additional requirements described in contract specific Appendix .
Excavations shall be carried out to the dimensions described in contract specific Appendix or if not so described to the minimum dimensions subject to subClause of this Clause necessary to carry out the work .
Excavations Excavations in existing pavements and other paved areas except those described in subClause of this Clause including surfacing base and subbase shall be cut to neat lines to dimensions at least mm greater on each side than the dimensions of any further excavation below formation level .
Excavations in capping shall be taken at least mm outside the dimensions of any excavation below .
Road surfacing of bituminous material shall be cut back by sawing or planing to a further mm on each side .
Planing shall be carried out in accordance with Clause .
Concrete surfacing and concrete roadbases except CBM shall be cut back by sawing by at least mm on each side to the level of any reinforcement in reinforced slabs and to the full depth of the slab in unreinforced slabs .
If excavations are required to inspect the condition of lower layers each layer shall be excavated separately and cleaned of debris to permit inspection .
Concrete blocks clay pavers and precast concrete flags kerbs and channels shall be lifted without cutting to the nearest joint satisfying subClause of this Clause and carefully stored for reuse or dealt with as described in contract specific Appendix .
In situ kerbs and channels shall be broken out to at least mm beyond the excavation .
All excavations shall be carried out in compliance with the specification and adequately supported at all times .
Support shall be withdrawn as backfilling proceeds .
Backfilling Backfilling of excavations shall be carried out as quickly as possible after completion of the work for which the excavation is required to formation or subformation in compliance with the appropriate Clauses in Series and or as otherwise described in contract specific Appendix using fill material and compaction described therein .
Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements General N Reinstatement of Paved Areas The layers of capping and pavement and other paved area materials shall be reinstated consecutively as soon as possible in compliance with the appropriate Clauses in the and Series to match the thicknesses and constituents of the existing material or as otherwise described in contract specific Appendix .
They shall be laid and compacted in compliance with the appropriate Clauses in the above Series within the tolerances given in Table .
To allow for settlement in backfill under concrete pavements temporary repairs to the pavement shall be carried out using bituminous materials .
Alternatively foamed concrete shall be used up to the base of the slab and the slab reinstated as soon as possible .
The reinstatement of the concrete slab shall be carried out as described in contract specific Appendix .
Block and flag paving and precast and in situ kerbs and channels shall be reinstated in compliance with Series to match the existing construction .
Where settlement of the reinstatement occurs the surface level shall be brought to correct levels and surface regularity .
Where an existing pavement has been trimmed for a new pavement to abut it regulating layers for changes in crossfall or level shall comply with the requirements for the appropriate subbase base or surface layer .
Immediately before bituminous layers are reinstated the edges of the existing material shall be cleaned of all loose material and be coated with an appropriate hot bituminous binder or equivalent treatment .
Where joints in concrete slabs are affected by the excavation they shall be reinstated by cutting back to at least .
m on each side of a transverse joint and forming an expansion joint on one side of the excavation and a contraction joint on the other and provide longitudinal joints where necessary in the same line before reinstatement in compliance with Series to match the existing construction .
Reinstatement of Unpaved Areas and Other Surfaced Highways Where the excavation affects verges grassed areas footpaths and bridleways they shall be reinstated to match the existing surface after backfilling in compliance with subClause of this Clause to a depth of mm below the existing surface .
The reinstatement shall be completed by topsoil and seeding or turfing in compliance with the specification in both cases reusing any topsoil or turves cut and stored for reuse or when surfaced with material matching the existing foundation and surface .
Levels between existing and newly constructed footpaths footways verges and bridleways shall be matched by removing the minimum area of existing material necessary to enable the total thickness of surfacing material to be laid abutting the existing surface .
Where settlement of the reinstatement occurs the levels shall be brought up to existing levels .
Surfaces may be left proud of the adjacent existing surfaces by an amount not exceeding mm adequately ramped to avoid sharp changes in level to cater for subsequent settlement .
Junctions Between New Pavement Construction and Existing Pavement or Other Paved Areas Where new pavement construction abuts an existing bituminous pavement which has to be reduced in level or overlaid to match alignment and levels the existing surface shall be trimmed by the minimum amount of coldmilling planing to a depth which will allow the specified thickness of new construction to be laid the edge being trimmed and treated in compliance with this Clause .
Where the difference in level makes it necessary a regulating course as described in contract specific Appendix and specified in Clause shall be provided .
The locations to be trimmed are given in contract specific Appendix .
Junctions between concrete pavements and between concrete and bituminous pavements shall be constructed as described in contract specific Appendix .
Junctions in porous asphalt shall comply also with Clause .
Junctions between porous asphalt surfacing and other pavement surfaces shall be constructed as described in contract specific Appendix .
Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements General NF Compressed Air When compressed air is used to clean dust dirt and debris from prepared faces of existing concrete or bituminous pavements which are otherwise ready for reinstatement only oilfree compressed air shall be used and this shall be at a pressure of not less than .
Nmm .
MANUAL OF CONTRACT DOCUMENTS FOR HIGHWAY WORKS VOLUME SPECIFICATION FOR HIGHWAY WORKS Amendment February SERIES ROAD PAVEMENTS UNBOUND CEMENT AND OTHER HYDRAULICALLY BOUND MIXTURES Contents Clause Title Page Unbound Mixtures for Subbase General General Requirements for Unbound Mixtures Transport Laying Compaction and Trafficking of Unbound Mixtures Type Unbound Mixtures Type Unbound Mixtures Type open graded Unbound Mixtures Category B close graded Unbound Mixtures Type asphalt arisings Unbound Mixtures Not Used Cement and Other Hydraulically Bound Mixtures General Requirements for Cement and Other Hydraulically Bound Mixtures Binder Constituents Storage of Constituents General Requirements for Production and Layer Construction MixinPlant Method of Construction Using Batching by Mass MixinPlant Method of Construction Using Volume Batching MixinPlace Method of Construction Method Statement and Demonstration Area Induced Cracking of HBM Not Used Aggregates Clause Title Page Cement Bound Granular Mixtures A CBGM A Cement Bound Granular Mixtures B CBGM B Cement Bound Granular Mixtures C CBGM C to Not Used Fly Ash Bound Mixture FABM and Hydraulic Road Binder Bound Mixture HRBBM Slag Bound Mixture B SBM B Fly Ash Bound Mixture FABM and Hydraulic Road Binder Bound Mixture HRBBM Slag Bound Mixture B SBM B Fly Ash Bound Mixture FABM and Hydraulic Road Binder Bound Mixture HRBBM Not Used Fly Ash Bound Mixture FABM Slag Bound Mixtures B B B and B SBM B to Not Used Soil Treated by Cement SC Soil Treated by Slag SS Soil Treated by Fly Ash SFA and Soil Treated by Hydraulic Road Binder SHRB to Not Used Testing Control and Checking of HBM Determination of the Coefficient of Linear Thermal Expansion to Not Used F Laboratory Mixture Design Procedure F Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Unbound Cement and Other Hydraulically Bound Mixtures Amendment February ROAD PAVEMENTS UNBOUND CEMENT AND OTHER HYDRAULICALLY BOUND MIXTURES General This Series is part of the Specification for Highway Works .
Whilst this Series is particularly relevant to the subject matter in its title it must be read in conjunction with the general requirements in Series and and with all other Series relevant to the specification for the particular works to be undertaken .
Unbound Mixtures for Subbase General Requirements for Unbound Mixtures Unbound mixtures shall be made and constructed to conform to BS EN the requirement categories in Table and Clauses to .
The permitted alternatives for each part of the permanent works shall be as described in contract specific Appendix .
TABLE Mixture and Grading Requirement Categories for Unbound Mixtures Unbound mixture Type Type Type open graded Category B close graded Type asphalt arisings Clause Standard BS EN Categories for unbound mixture properties Mixture requirement category Designation Maximum fines UF UF UF UF UF Oversize OC OC OC OC OC Grading requirement category Overall grading GP GE GO GB GP Unbound mixtures placed within mm or any other distances described in contract specific Appendix of concrete cement bound materials other cementitious mixtures or stabilised capping forming part of the permanent works shall conform to requirements A and B below .
A Mixtures shall conform to the following two criteria i Watersoluble sulfate WS content determined in accordance with BS EN clause shall not exceed mg of sulfate as SO per litre ii Total sulfur TS content determined in accordance with BS EN clause expressed as S shall not exceed for aggregates other than air cooled blast furnace slag or for air cooled blast furnace slag .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Unbound Cement and Other Hydraulically Bound Mixtures Amendment February B Mixtures shall conform to at least one of the following two options i When described in accordance with BS EN and BS EN Annex A limestone chalk dolomite blast furnace slag steel slag or crushed concrete are predominant or ii The sulfide content of the mixture determined in accordance with BS EN clause is less than .
as SO .
When determining WS TS or sulfide content at least five samples of each material shall be tested .
The mean of the highest two values shall be used for comparison with the limiting values .
This also applies if six to nine results are available .
If ten or more results are available the mean of the highest of the results shall be used for comparison with the limiting values .
The pH of the mixture shall be reported .
Unbound mixtures placed within mm or any other distances described in contract specific Appendix of metallic structural elements forming part of the permanent works shall conform to requirements C and D below .
C Mixtures shall conform to the following two criteria i Watersoluble sulfate WS content determined in accordance with BS EN clause shall not exceed mg of sulfate as SO per litre ii Total sulfur TS content determined in accordance with BS EN clause expressed as S shall not exceed for aggregates other than air cooled blast furnace slag or for air cooled blast furnace slag .
D Mixtures shall conform to at least one of the following two options i When described in accordance with BS EN and BS EN Annex A limestone chalk dolomite blast furnace slag steel slag or crushed concrete are predominant or ii The sulfide content of the mixture determined in accordance with BS EN clause is less than .
as SO .
When determining WS TS or sulfide content at least five samples of each material shall be tested .
The mean of the highest two values shall be used for comparison with the limiting values .
This also applies if six to nine results are available .
If ten or more results are available the mean of the highest of the results shall be used for comparison with the limiting values .
The pH of the mixture shall be reported .
The requirements in i and ii above shall not apply to metallic items protected by concrete and ancillary metallic items such as the tops of chambers and gullies .
The properties of aggregates used in unbound mixtures shall comply with the selected requirements of BS EN listed in Table .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Unbound Cement and Other Hydraulically Bound Mixtures Amendment February TABLE Requirements for Aggregates Used in Unbound Mixtures Unbound mixture Type Type Type open graded Category B close graded Type asphalt arisings Clause Standard BS EN Categories for aggregate properties Crushed or broken and totally rounded particles crushed rock crushed manufactured and crushed recycled aggregates see NOTE crushed gravel C C C C C see NOTE CNR no requirement Not permitted Not permitted Resistance to fragmentation Los Angeles test LA LA LA LA Resistance to wear micro Deval test MDENR no requirement .
The supplier shall state the value for the aggregate used .
Resistance to freezing and thawing magnesium sulfate soundness MS Water absorption WANR no requirement .
The supplier shall state the value for the aggregate used .
Volume stability of blast furnace slags Free from dicalcium silicate and iron disintegration .
Volume stability of steel BOF and EAF slags V Not permitted V All other BS EN aggregate requirements Category NR no requirement .
NOTES .
BS EN assumes that crushed rock aggregates comply with category C without further testing. . Where permitted by contract specific Appendix .
Where recycled coarse aggregate or recycled concrete aggregate is used in unbound mixtures in accordance with Clauses to as appropriate it shall have been tested in accordance with Clause .
Recycled coarse aggregate and recycled concrete aggregate used in unbound mixtures in accordance with Clauses and shall also comply with the additional requirements of Table .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Unbound Cement and Other Hydraulically Bound Mixtures Amendment February TABLE Additional Requirements for Recycled Coarse Aggregate and Recycled Concrete Aggregate Used in Type Type and Type Unbound Mixtures Unbound Mixture Type Type Type asphalt arisings Component Identified by Clause Maximum Permitted Content by mass Asphalt Class Ra Glass Class Rg Other materials Class X including wood plastic and metal When required by contract specific Appendix and Clauses and as appropriate the unbound mixture shall satisfy the minimum CBR requirement of contract specific Appendix when tested in accordance with clause of BS with surcharge discs .
The specimens shall be tested in a soaked condition .
The mixture shall be tested at the density and moisture content likely to develop in equilibrium field conditions which shall be taken as being the density relating to the uniform air voids content of and the value of optimum water content declared when tested as required by BS EN .
Frost Heave Subject to the tolerances given in Table and unless otherwise stated in contract specific Appendix material shall not be frost susceptible if it is used within mm of the designed final surface of a road or paved central reserve or mm if the Mean Annual Frost Index MAFI of the site is less than .
Material shall be classified as nonfrostsusceptible if the mean heave is mm or less when tested in accordance with BS .
Comparator specimens in accordance with Annex B of BS shall be used .
Transport Laying Compaction and Trafficking of Unbound Mixtures Transporting Unbound mixtures shall be protected from drying out and segregation both during transit to the point where it is to be laid and whilst awaiting tipping .
Laying Unbound mixtures in a frozen condition shall not be incorporated in the works but may be used if acceptable when thawed .
Unbound mixtures shall not be laid on any surface which is frozen or covered with ice .
All unbound mixtures shall be placed and spread evenly .
Spreading shall be undertaken either concurrently with placing or without delay .
Unbound mixtures shall be spread using a paving machine or a suitable spreader box and operated with a mechanism which levels off the material to an even depth .
Except where otherwise stated in contract specific Appendix material up to mm compacted thickness shall be spread in one layer so that after compaction the total thickness is as specified .
Material of compacted thickness greater than mm shall be laid in two or more layers and the minimum compacted thickness of any such layer shall be mm .
Where the layers of unbound mixtures are of unequal thickness the lowest layer shall be the thickest layer .
Compaction Compaction shall be completed as soon as possible after the mixture has been spread and in accordance with the requirements for the individual mixtures .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Unbound Cement and Other Hydraulically Bound Mixtures Amendment February Full compaction shall be obtained over the full area including in the vicinity of both longitudinal and transverse joints .
Compaction of unbound mixtures shall be carried out by a method specified in Table unless the Contractor demonstrates at site trials that a state of compaction achieved by an alternative method is equivalent to or better than that using the specified method .
The surface of any layer of material shall on completion of compaction and immediately before overlaying be well closed free from movement under construction plant and from ridges cracks loose material pot holes ruts or other defects .
All loose segregated or otherwise defective areas shall be removed to the full thickness of the layer and new material laid and compacted .
For the purposes of Table the following shall apply i The number of passes is the number of times that each point on the surface of the layer being compacted shall be traversed by the item of compaction plant in its operating mode or struck in the case of power rammers .
ii The compaction plant in Table is categorised in terms of static mass .
The mass per metre width of roll is the total mass on the roll divided by the total roll width .
Where a smoothwheeled roller has more than one axle the category of the machine shall be determined on the basis of the axle giving the highest value of mass per metre width .
iii For pneumatictyred rollers the mass per wheel is the total mass of the roller divided by the number of wheels .
In assessing the number of passes of pneumatictyred rollers the effective width shall be the sum of the widths of the individual wheel tracks together with the sum of the spacings between the wheel tracks provided that each spacing does not exceed mm .
Where the spacings exceed mm the effective width shall be the sum of the widths of the individual wheel tracks only .
iv Vibratory rollers are selfpropelled or towed smoothwheeled rollers having means of applying mechanical vibration to one or more rolls a The requirements for vibratory rollers are based on the use of the lowest gear on a self propelled machine with mechanical transmission and a speed of .. kmh for a towed machine or a selfpropelled machine with hydrostatic transmission .
If higher gears or speeds are used an increased number of passes shall be provided in proportion to the increase in speed of travel .
b Where the mechanical vibration is applied to two rolls in tandem the minimum number of passes shall be half the number given in Table for the appropriate mass per metre width of one vibrating roll but if one roll differs in mass per metre width from the other the number of passes shall be calculated as for the roll with the smaller value .
Alternatively the minimum number of passes may be determined by treating the machine as having a single vibrating roll with a mass per metre width equal to that of the roll with the higher value .
c Vibratory rollers operating without vibration shall be classified as smoothwheeled rollers .
d Vibratory rollers shall be operated with their vibratory mechanism operating at the frequency of vibration recommended by the manufacturer .
All such rollers shall be equipped or provided with devices indicating the frequency at which the mechanism is operating and the speed of travel .
Both devices shall be capable of being safely read by an inspector alongside the machine .
v Vibratingplate compactors are machines having a baseplate to which is attached a source of vibration consisting of one or two eccentricallyweighted shafts a The mass per square metre of baseplate of a vibratingplate compactor is calculated by dividing the total mass of the machine in its working condition by its area in contact with compacted material .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Unbound Cement and Other Hydraulically Bound Mixtures Amendment February b Vibratingplate compactors shall be operated at the frequency of vibration recommended by the manufacturer .
They shall normally be operated at travelling speeds of less than kmh but if higher speeds are necessary the number of passes shall be increased in proportion to the increase in speed of travel .
vi Vibrotampers are machines in which an engine driven reciprocating mechanism acts on a spring system through which oscillations are set up in a baseplate .
vii Power rammers are machines which are actuated by explosions in an internal combustion cylinder each explosion being controlled manually by the operator .
One pass of a power rammer shall be considered to have been made when the compacting shoe has made one strike on the area in question .
viii Combinations of different types of plant or different categories of the same plant will be permitted in which case the number of passes for each shall be such proportion of the appropriate number in Table as will together produce the same total compactive effort as any one operated singly in accordance with Table .
TABLE Compaction Requirements for Unbound Mixtures Type of Compaction Plant Category Number of passes for layers not exceeding the following compacted thicknesses mm mm mm Smoothwheeled roller or vibratory roller operating without vibration Mass per metre width of roll over kg up to kg over g unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable Pneumatictyred roller Mass per wheel over kg up to kg over kg up to kg over kg up to kg over kg unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable Vibratory roller Mass per metre width of vibrating roll over kg up to kg over kg up to kg over kg up to kg over kg up to kg over kg up to kg over kg up to kg over kg up to kg over kg unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable Vibratingplate compactor Mass per square metre of base plate over kgm up to kgm over kgm up to kgm over kgm unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable Vibrotamper Mass over kg up to kg over kg up to kg over kg unsuitable Power rammer Mass kg kg over kg unsuitable Use of Surfaces by Construction Plant and Other Traffic Construction plant and other traffic used on pavements under construction shall be suitable in relation to the material condition and thickness of the courses it traverses so that damage is not caused to the subgrade or the pavement courses already constructed .
The wheels or tracks of plant moving over the various pavement courses shall be kept free from deleterious materials .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Unbound Cement and Other Hydraulically Bound Mixtures Amendment February Where the Contractor proposes to use the unbound mixture layers for construction plant he shall improve these layers where necessary to accommodate the method of construction and the type of plant and vehicles which he proposes to use in order to avoid damage to the laid layers any capping and the subgrade .
Any permanent thickening shall be across the whole width of the pavement .
Temporary thickening shall not impede drainage of any layer or the subgrade .
Trafficking Trial When required by contract specific Appendix the Contractor shall undertake a Trafficking Trial incorporating the unbound mixture proposed for use in the permanent works .
A trial area shall be constructed trafficked and assessed in accordance with the procedure described in subClauses to of this Clause .
The mean vertical deformation after equivalent standard axles shall be less than mm when measured in accordance with the procedure stated in subClause of this Clause .
Proposals for trafficking trials shall be submitted to the Overseeing Organisation for review and acceptance five days in advance of construction .
Trial Procedure The trial area shall be located on a formation prepared in accordance with the specification .
The trial area may be located so that it can be incorporated within the permanent works if the resistance to wheel track rutting is demonstrated to comply with subClause of this Clause .
The trial area shall be at least m long and of sufficient width that when trafficked the wheel paths of the test vehicle shall be at least m from either edge of the top of the unbound mixture layer .
The unbound mixture layer shall be compacted to the thickness specified in contract specific Appendix .
The formation shall extend for a further m either side of the unbound mixture layer .
A sufficient run offrun on area shall be constructed at each end of the trial area of the same width and compacted to the same level as the trial area to ensure correct tracking by the test vehicle and minimise dynamic effects of the vehicle bouncing on its springs .
Suitable guidance shall be given to assist the driver in maintaining the same track in each pass and to achieve channelled trafficking .
Examples of suitable guides would be a string or painted line .
Mixtures The unbound mixture used in the trial shall be transported laid and compacted using the equipment proposed for use in the works .
Maximum vertical deformation shall be measured in both wheel tracks using optical or laser levels at predetermined monitoring points on five transverse lines spaced equally along the length of the trial bay .
The transverse lines at the ends of the trial area shall be at least m from the run offrun on areas .
The average deformation of the two wheel tracks after standard axles shall be recorded .
Reporting and Acceptance of Trafficking Trial Area The Contractor shall provide the Overseeing Organisation for acceptance with a report on the Trafficking Trial stating how the use of the unbound mixture was validated .
The main construction of the permanent works shall not start until the Trafficking Trial area has been accepted by the Overseeing Organisation within two working days of receiving the Trafficking Trial area report .
Type Unbound Mixtures Type unbound mixture shall be made from crushed rock crushed slag crushed concrete recycled aggregates or well burnt nonplastic shale and may contain up to by mass of natural sand that passes the mm test sieve .
Where permitted by contract specific Appendix crushed gravel complying with subClause .
may be used .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Unbound Cement and Other Hydraulically Bound Mixtures Amendment February The mixture shall comply with BS EN and the requirements of Table .
The grading requirements for the mixture are summarised in Table .
TABLE Summary Grading Requirements for Type and Type Unbound Mixtures Percentage by mass passing Sieve size mm Overall grading range Supplier declared value grading range Tolerance on the supplier declared value . . Grading of individual batches differences in values passing selected sieves Retained sieve size mm Passing sieve size mm Percentage by mass passing Not less than Not more than The properties of aggregates used in the mixture shall be in accordance with BS EN and the requirements of Table .
The size fraction of the unbound mixture passing the .
mm size test sieve shall be nonplastic as defined by BS and tested in compliance therewith .
Where the mixture contains recycled coarse aggregate or recycled concrete aggregate it shall comply with subClause ..
The mixture shall be transported laid and compacted without drying out or segregation .
Additional Requirements for Mixtures Containing Crushed Gravel For the purposes of this Clause gravel is defined as aggregate derived from a natural unconsolidated coarsegrained sedimentary deposit consisting of waterworn rock fragments .
Crushed gravel aggregate shall be derived from natural cobbles retained on the mm test sieve and comply with the crushed broken and totally rounded particles requirement in Table .
Where required by contract specific Appendix mixtures containing crushed gravel coarse aggregate shall comply with the minimum CBR requirement in subClause .. Where required by contract specific Appendix mixtures containing crushed gravel coarse aggregate shall be assessed using a trafficking trial complying with subClause ..
Type Unbound Mixtures Type unbound mixture shall be made from natural sands gravels crushed rock crushed slag crushed concrete recycled aggregates or well burnt nonplastic shale .
The mixture shall comply with BS EN and the requirements of Table .
The grading requirements for the mixture are summarised in Table .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Unbound Cement and Other Hydraulically Bound Mixtures Amendment February TABLE Summary Grading Requirements for Type Unbound Mixtures Percentage by mass passing Sieve size mm Overall grading range Supplier declared value grading range Tolerance on the supplier declared value . . No requirement No requirement Grading of individual batches differences in values passing selected sieves Retained sieve size mm Passing sieve size mm Percentage by mass passing Not less than Not more than The properties of aggregates used in the mixture shall be in accordance with BS EN and the requirements of Table .
The size fraction of the unbound mixture passing the .
mm size test sieve when tested in compliance with BS shall have a plasticity index of less than .
Where the mixture contains recycled coarse aggregate or recycled concrete aggregate it shall comply with subClause .. Where required by contract specific Appendix the mixture shall satisfy the minimum CBR requirement when tested in accordance with subClause ..
The mixture shall be transported laid and compacted without drying out or segregation at a moisture content within the range above to below the declared value of optimum water content when tested as required by BS EN .
Type open graded Unbound Mixtures Type open graded unbound mixture shall be made from crushed rock crushed blast furnace slag or recycled concrete aggregate .
When tested in accordance with Clause recycled concrete aggregate used in Type open graded unbound mixtures shall not contain more than asphalt Class Ra and not more than other materials Class X .
The mixture shall comply with BS EN and the requirements of Table .
The grading requirements for the mixture are summarised in Table .
The properties of aggregates used in the mixture shall be in accordance with BS EN and the requirements of Table .
The size fraction of the unbound mixture passing the .
mm size test sieve shall be nonplastic as defined by BS and tested in compliance therewith .
The mixture shall be transported laid and compacted without drying out or segregation .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Unbound Cement and Other Hydraulically Bound Mixtures Amendment February TABLE Summary Grading Requirements for Type open graded Unbound Mixtures Percentage by mass passing Sieve size mm Overall grading range Supplier declared value grading range Tolerance on the supplier declared value . . Grading of individual batches differences in values passing selected sieves Retained sieve size mm Passing sieve size mm Percentage by mass passing Not less than Not more than Category B close graded Unbound Mixtures Category B close graded unbound mixture shall be made from crushed rock crushed blast furnace slag or recycled concrete aggregate .
When tested in accordance with Clause recycled concrete aggregate used in Category B close graded unbound mixtures shall not contain more than asphalt Class Ra and not more than other materials Class X .
The mixture shall comply with BS EN and the requirements of Table .
The grading requirements for the mixture are summarised in Table .
TABLE Summary Grading Requirements for Category B close graded Unbound Mixtures Percentage by mass passing Sieve size mm Overall grading range Supplier declared value grading range Tolerance on the supplier declared value .
. . Grading of individual batches differences in values passing selected sieves Retained sieve size mm Passing sieve size mm Percentage by mass passing Not less than Not more than Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Unbound Cement and Other Hydraulically Bound Mixtures Amendment February The properties of aggregates used in the mixture shall be in accordance with BS EN and the requirements of Table .
The size fraction of the unbound mixture passing the .
mm size test sieve shall be nonplastic as defined by BS and tested in compliance therewith .
The mixture shall be transported laid and compacted without drying out or segregation .
Type asphalt arisings Unbound Mixtures Type unbound mixture shall be made from recycled aggregates containing asphalt arisings and may contain crushed rock crushed slag crushed concrete or well burnt nonplastic shale and up to by mass of natural sand that passes the mm size test sieve .
Asphalt arisings shall be either asphalt road planings or granulated asphalt but excluding materials contaminated with tar or tarbitumen binders .
Asphalt planings are defined as materials derived from the asphalt layers of the pavement using a mobile machine fitted with milling cutters .
Granulated asphalt is defined as asphalt bound material recycled from roads under reconstruction or surplus asphalt material destined for bound pavement layers but unused which has been granulated .
Type unbound mixture shall have an asphalt Class Ra content greater than when tested in accordance with Clause and the recovered bitumen content of the asphalt shall be not more than when tested in accordance with BS EN .
Type unbound mixture shall comply with BS EN and the requirements of Table .
The grading requirements for the mixture are summarised in Table .
The properties of aggregates used in the mixture shall be in accordance with BS EN and the requirements of Table .
The size fraction of the unbound mixture passing the .
mm size test sieve shall be nonplastic as defined by BS and tested in compliance therewith .
Where the mixture contains recycled coarse aggregate or recycled concrete aggregate it shall comply with subClause ..
The mixture shall be transported laid and compacted without drying out or segregation at a moisture content within the range above to below the declared value of optimum water content when tested as required by BS EN .
The moisture content shall be determined by oven drying at a reduced temperature setting of C to C .
Where required by contract specific Appendix Type unbound mixtures shall be assessed using a trafficking trial complying with subClause .. and Not Used Cement and Other Hydraulically Bound Mixtures General Requirements for Cement and Other Hydraulically Bound Mixtures Cement and other hydraulically bound mixtures HBM shall be produced constructed and tested in accordance with the following Clauses .
The permitted alternatives for each part of the works shall be as described in contract specific Appendix .
Attributes shall be deemed to have a No requirement classification unless stated otherwise .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Unbound Cement and Other Hydraulically Bound Mixtures Amendment February The terms listed below shall apply to the HBM Clauses of this specification ASS air cooled steel slag CBGM cement bound granular mixture CBR California bearing ratio CFA cement treated fly ash E modulus of elasticity FA fly ash also known as pulverized fuel ash FABM fly ash bound mixture Gvxx volumetric expansion category GBS granulated blast furnace slag ggbs ground granulated blast furnace slag HBM hydraulically bound mixture HRB hydraulic road binder factory blended hydraulic binder for road use HRBBM hydraulic road binder bound mixture IBI immediate bearing index Immxx immersion category IPIxx immediate bearing index category LA Los Angeles coefficient LFA lime treated fly ash MCV moisture condition value NR no requirement OWC optimum water content PTR Pneumatic tyred roller Pulvxx pulverisation category Rc compressive strength Rt direct tensile strength Rit indirect tensile strength RtE method of performance classification based on the combination Rt and E. Classes of RtE are designated T to T in BS EN where T designates RtE and the number indicates the performance class SBM slag bound mixture SC soil treated by cement SFA soil treated by fly ash SHRB soil treated by hydraulic road binder SS soil treated by slag t time hours at constant temperature in defining maturity for calculating the construction period TC ambient air temperature in defining maturity for calculating construction period Wxx water content category Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Unbound Cement and Other Hydraulically Bound Mixtures Amendment February HBM shall be tested in accordance with Clause and the test methods specified in the following Clauses .
Before work commences the Contractor shall submit a statement to the Overseeing Organisation that includes i The information detailed in the Designation and Description clause of the relevant BS EN Standard for the specified HBM confirming compliance with the requirements of this Series and contract specific Appendix .
ii Target proportions of constituents including water .
iii Mixture design details and results in accordance with Clause .
iv Method statement for the demonstration area and the main works in accordance with Clause .
When required by contract specific Appendix the coefficient of linear expansion of the mixture shall be determined in accordance with Clause .
Binder Constituents Binder constituents shall comply with BS EN except that unless otherwise agreed by the Overseeing Organisation i fly ash shall be siliceous fly ash complying with BS EN ii quicklime shall comply with BS EN and have a grading that complies with particle size Category .
The binder content shall comply with Table unless otherwise agreed by the Overseeing Organisation .
The mixture proportions used for production shall be based on a laboratory mixture design procedure in accordance with Clause .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Unbound Cement and Other Hydraulically Bound Mixtures Amendment February TABLE Minimum Binder or Binder Constituent Additions for HBM Binder or binder constituent Application Minimum addition for mixin plant method of construction using batching by mass by dry mass of mixture Minimum addition for mixin plant method of construction using volume batching and for mixinplace construction by dry mass of mixture Lime quicklime or hydrated lime when used with another binder constituent .
when used as the only binder in FABM Cement when used with another binder constituent when used as the only binder constituent in CBGM The appropriate value from BS EN Table the appropriate value from BS EN Table when used as the only binder constituent in soil treated by cement SC Ground granulated blast furnace slag ggbs when used with cement when used with lime Aircooled steel slag ASS when used with GBS see Note .
Dry fly ash FA when used with cement when used with lime Granulated blast furnace slag GBS when used with lime when used with ASS see Note .
Wet conditioned fly ash FA All applications Hydraulic road binder All applications NOTE When GBS and ASS are used in combination the sum of the two shall be not less than .
Storage of Constituents Aggregates shall be stored on a firm and clean substrate avoiding contamination with other constituents .
Fine aggregate shall be stored at the production location for at least hours before use .
Lime cement ggbs HRB and dry FA shall be stored in silos .
Wet conditioned FA shall have no agglomerations greater than mm size .
This shall be determined by sieving samples through a mm size test sieve using not more than seconds of gentle agitation by hand .
Wet conditioned fly ash shall be stored at the source or at the production location for at least hours before use and have a minimum water content of .
GBS and ASS shall be stored as specified in subClause .
and used within months of delivery to the production location .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Unbound Cement and Other Hydraulically Bound Mixtures Amendment February General Requirements for Production and Layer Construction HBM shall be produced and laid using one of the following methods as specified in the following mixture Clauses i mixinplant method of construction using batching by mass in accordance with Clause ii mixinplant method of construction using volume batching in accordance with Clause iii mixinplace method of construction in accordance with Clause .
Construction of layers including multiple lift layers and any reworking and reuse shall be completed within the lesser of hours the construction period specified in Table or the mixture setting time .
The time shall be measured from the addition event defined in Table to completion of compaction .
The construction period in degree hours shall be the summation of the products of the average air temperature above C T C and time for each period t hours i.e .
construction period limit T.t .
The air temperature during the interval t shall not fluctuate by more than C .
TABLE Construction Period for HBM Layers Binder Addition event defining the start time for calculating maximum construction period Maximum construction period C hours Cement cement with FA or cement with ggbs Addition of cement Lime with GBS or FA Addition of lime Lime and gypsum for FABM Addition of lime and gypsum GBS ASS Addition of ASS and GBS Lime with ggbs Addition of ggbs if ggbs added after lime if ggbs added before lime HRB Addition of HRB Workability Period at C determined in accordance with BS EN multiplied by Mixtures used in base layers shall be batched by mass and paver laid in a single lift .
Construction of bases by other methods shall only be permitted in confined spaces where it is impracticable for a paver to operate when agreed by the Overseeing Organisation .
When quicklime is used full hydration shall be complete prior to final compaction .
Laying shall be carried out in a way that avoids segregation and drying of the surface .
The temporary intermediate surfaces within a multiple lift layer shall be sprayed with water to prevent surface drying .
The minimum compacted lift thickness in a multiple lift layer shall be mm .
Makingup of level after initial compaction shall not be permitted for single lift working or the uppermost lift of multiple lift working .
The edge of previously compacted HBM or other material shall be vertical and straight before fresh HBM is laid against it .
Compaction of HBM layers including the intermediate lifts of multiple lift working shall be completed without drying out and before setting of any part of the layer and shall meet the requirements for density in Clause .
Compaction of HBM other than FABM shall be carried out by vibrating roller andor pneumatic tyred roller PTR .
Where vibrating roller compaction is used on mixtures specified in Clauses to it shall be followed by at least passes of a PTR with a wheel loading of not less than kN .
Only PTR compaction with a wheel loading of not less than kN shall be applied to FABM .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Unbound Cement and Other Hydraulically Bound Mixtures Amendment February On completion of compaction the surface shall be closed free from ridges cracks loose material visible voids ruts shear planes and other defects .
All defective areas shall be rectified within the time period specified in subClause ..
If rectification is not completed within the specified time period the defective area shall be removed to the full thickness of the layer and new mixture laid and compacted .
Cold and Wet Weather Working During cold weather i the temperature of HBM shall not be less than C at the time of laying ii HBM shall not be laid on a frozen surface iii laying of HBM shall cease when the air temperature falls below C and laying shall not be resumed until the rising air temperature reaches C iv the laying of HBM using binders containing less than of CEM cement by dry mass of mixture shall be restricted in use to the period from May to September unless otherwise agreed by the Overseeing Organisation .
In the case of heavy or persistent rain production shall cease and any laid material shall be compacted immediately .
Curing Protection and Trafficking On completion of compaction the layer shall be cured to prevent loss of moisture by i application of a bitumen emulsion spray complying with Class CB as specified in the National Foreword to BS EN to produce an even and complete coverage of at least .
kgm of residual bitumen .
Before spraying commences the surface shall be free of all loose material and standing water .
The curing membrane shall be protected from any damage until the construction of the overlaying layer ii application of a mistfoglight spray of water sufficient to keep the surface continuously wet until the specified strength of the HBM has been developed or the layer is overlaid .
Trafficking of HBM layers shall comply with the requirements set out in Table and subClause .. Should any HBM layer exhibit signs of damage trafficking shall cease immediately and shall only be resumed once the layer has gained sufficient stability to resist damage .
TABLE Trafficking of HBM Layers HBM Designation Clause reference Trafficking CBGM and SubClause .. HBM and Not restricted .
Not restricted provided that the IBI requirement of sub Clause .
is satisfied .
FABM with cement Not permitted for days unless overlaid by at least mm of bound material within the construction period .
FABM with lime Only the minimum amount of traffic required to construct the next layer is permitted .
SC SS SHRB and SFA Not restricted provided that the IBI requirements of Table are satisfied .
For mixtures containing cohesive soil or chalk the test specimens made at the same time as the specimens required in Clause but cured under the same conditions as the insitu treated soil shall also have achieved an average strength of at least Class C Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Unbound Cement and Other Hydraulically Bound Mixtures Amendment February CBGM shall not be trafficked for days unless the layer complies with the following i the layer is compacted by both vibrating roller and PTR in accordance with subClause .
to comply with the requirements of subClause .
ii the mixture contains at least by mass of coarse aggregate complying with BS EN Category C for crushed or broken particles iii test specimens made at the same time as the specimens required in Clause but cured under the same conditions as the insitu CBGM have achieved an average strength of at least Class C. Surface contamination shall be avoided as far as is practicable and any unavoidable contamination shall be removed prior to overlaying .
Reworking and recompaction of the layer shall only be permitted within the construction period set out in Table .
Reworking shall only be permitted when the water content requirements of the reworked material are maintained within the limits stated in the method statement .
Before overlaying any loose material shall be removed and replaced to the full depth of the layer or if within the construction period set out in Table reworked as specified in subClause .. Daily record sheets complying with subClause .
shall be submitted to the Overseeing Organisation by start of work on the next working day detailing i spread ratebatching record results ii depth measurements iii density test measurements iv sample and test locations v construction period records showing the times of mixing water addition completion of compaction and application of curing membrane .
MixinPlant Method of Construction Using Batching by Mass The HBM shall be produced in a stationary mixing plant that batches by mass and mixes in a forced action mixer allowing sufficient time in the mixer to produce a homogenous mixture .
The mixing plant shall have an automated surveillance and data collection system .
HBM shall be transported directly to the point where it is to be laid and protected from the weather during transit and whilst awaiting tipping unless otherwise agreed by the Overseeing Organisation .
MixinPlant Method of Construction Using Volume Batching The HBM shall be produced in a stationary mixing plant that batches by volume and mixes in a forced action mixer allowing sufficient time in the mixer to produce a homogenous mixture .
HBM shall be transported directly to the point where it is to be laid and protected from the weather during transit and whilst awaiting tipping unless otherwise agreed by the Overseeing Organisation .
Dispensing accuracy shall be verified by reconciliation between constituent deliveries and the area and depth of completed layer for each m of work or part thereof during each days operations .
MixinPlace Method of Construction Mixedinplace HBM shall be produced by an insitu pulverizingmixing process with the added mixing water injected directly into the mixture during the mixing process .
The pulverizingmixing process shall be repeated until a homogenous mixture is produced .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Unbound Cement and Other Hydraulically Bound Mixtures Amendment February When binder constituents are dispensed onto the surface to be pulverizedmixed the rate of spread shall be confirmed by site checks carried out in accordance with Clause .
For each group of readings the mean rate of spread of material shall be within of the stated target rate and each individual value shall be within of the mean value of the group of readings .
The accuracy of the system used to dispense binder constituents shall be verified by reconciliation between constituent deliveries and the area and depth of completed layer for each m of work or part thereof during each days operations .
Mixing of fresh material shall ensure a minimum overlap of mm with previously mixed material .
Where lime is used to granulate cohesive soils it shall be added and mixed with the soil using at least two passes of the pulverizermixer between and hours before the subsequent addition of cement FA HRB or ggbs .
The surface of the layer shall be sealed by rolling immediately after adding and mixing lime .
The MCV during this period known as the mellowing period shall comply with Clause .
Method Statement and Demonstration Area Method Statement At least days prior to constructing the demonstration area specified in subClause .
the Contractor shall provide a full method statement for the approval of the Overseeing Organisation .
The statement shall detail the operatives plant materials and procedures for the construction of demonstration areas and of the works including procedures .
The statement shall also include procedures for induced cracking if required by contract specific Appendix and the procedures to be applied during inclement weather plant breakdowns and other unscheduled events .
The method statement shall include the intended mixture proportions with supporting data from trial mix results andor historic records to justify the proportions the water content or MCV limits and if applicable spread rates for all stages of the work .
Where multiple lift working is used the method statement shall detail the methods used to assure that bond between the individual lifts is achieved .
The method statement shall also detail the procedures to be used to confirm that bond has been achieved in the demonstration area and in the works .
The method statement shall include a sample record sheet for the submission of the data required by subClause ..
Demonstration Area Prior to the commencement of the main works the Contractor shall construct a demonstration area of at least m conforming to the submitted method statement .
The demonstration area shall include a transverse end ofday joint and if appropriate multiple lift working .
The demonstration area may be accepted into the permanent works where agreed by the Overseeing Organisation .
Where the Contractor can produce documentary evidence of similar work carried out to this specification during the previous months the Overseeing Organisation may allow the works to proceed without the demonstration area .
Where multiple lift working is used the demonstration area shall confirm the effectiveness of the procedures used to assure that bond between the individual lifts can be achieved .
Where induced cracking is required the demonstration area shall include crack induction at the specified spacing .
The effectiveness of the procedure used shall be checked within days of construction by recovering four evenly spaced mm dia cores from the line of the induced cracks and assessing each core for compliance with subClause ..
The mixture constituents proportions laying and compaction plant and construction procedures used for the demonstration area shall not be changed unless the Contractor lays a further demonstration area or the changes are agreed by the Overseeing Organisation .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Unbound Cement and Other Hydraulically Bound Mixtures Amendment February Induced Cracking of HBM Where required by contract specific Appendix transverse cracks shall be formed at the specified spacing with a tolerance of mm .
Where the pavement is made up of two or more layers of HBM with induced cracks the cracks in the overlying HBM layer shall align with the induced cracks in the layer below with a tolerance of mm .
Cracks shall be induced in fresh material after initial compaction .
The transverse cracks shall be induced by grooving the fresh material to form straight vertical grooves not more than mm wide to a depth of between one half and two thirds of the layer thickness over the full width of the pavement .
Bitumen emulsion shall be poured or sprayed into the grooves prior to final compaction to form a crack inducing membrane .
The bitumen emulsion shall comply with Class CB as specified in the National Foreword to BS EN .
During final compaction of the mixture the surface of the groove shall be fully closed throughout its full length .
The bitumen in the groove shall be fully encased and remain continuous with not less than of the sides of the groove coated with bitumen .
Where required by contract specific Appendix longitudinal cracks shall be induced using the procedure specified in subClause .. Not Used Aggregates The aggregates used in HBM shall comply with BS EN and the selected requirements listed in Table .
Where recycled coarse aggregate or recycled concrete aggregate is used in HBM it shall also be tested in accordance with Clause and comply with the additional requirements for the proportion of the components listed in Table .
When required by contract specific Appendix an existing pavement layer that is to used to produce HBM shall be tested to confirm compliance with subClause .. Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Unbound Cement and Other Hydraulically Bound Mixtures Amendment February TABLE Aggregate Requirements for HBM Clause reference HBM designation CBGM A CBGM B CBGM C FABM HRBBM SBM B FABM HRBBM SBM B FABM HRBBM SBM B B B B Categories for aggregate properties BS EN Crushed or broken particles and totally rounded particles in coarse aggregate CNR Note CNR unless otherwise specified in contract specific Appendix C or C as specified in contract specific Appendix Note CNR Note C or C as specified in contract specific Appendix Resistance to fragmentation of coarse aggregate LANR LA or LA as specified in contract specific Appendix LA LA or LA as specified in contract specific Appendix LA LANR LA Acidsoluble sulfate content Note Aircooled blastfurnace slag AS Other aggregates AS Total sulfur content Note Aircooled blastfurnace slag S Other aggregates S Other requirements BS Fines quality Note NR Note Nonplastic NR Note Nonplastic Proportion of components Clause Maximum glass content ClassRgG Maximum impurities content Class X NOTES .
The suffix NR denotes that the No requirement category applies. . CNR if FABM contains at least CEM cement by dry mass of the mixture and trafficking is prevented for days. . Where the Contractor is able to provide evidence of mixture stability over an extended period then the Overseeing Organisation may consider the use of higher limits. . Where required the size fraction of the aggregate passing the .
mm size test sieve shall be nonplastic as defined by and tested in compliance with BS .
Cement Bound Granular Mixtures A CBGM A Cement bound granular mixtures A CBGM A shall comply with BS EN and have binder constituent proportions complying with the requirements of Clause .
Aggregate shall comply with the requirements of Clause and shall have a combined grading that complies with Envelope A from BS EN Figure .
The strength after immersion shall be at least of the nonimmersed strength when tested in accordance with the laboratory mixture design requirements specified in Clause .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Unbound Cement and Other Hydraulically Bound Mixtures Amendment February The method of construction shall be in accordance with Clause and either Clause Clause or Clause .
The laboratory mechanical performance shall comply with the requirements of contract specific Appendix when sampled and tested in accordance with Clause .
Cement Bound Granular Mixtures B CBGM B Cement bound granular mixtures B CBGM B shall comply with BS EN and have binder constituent proportions complying with the requirements of Clause .
Aggregates shall comply with the requirements of Clause and shall have a combined grading that complies with Envelope B from BS EN Figure .
Alternatively the total mixture grading shall comply with the grading envelope Category G from BS EN Annex B Figure B .
The strength after immersion shall be at least of the nonimmersed strength when tested in accordance with the laboratory mixture design requirements specified in Clause .
The method of construction shall be in accordance with Clause and Clause .
The laboratory mechanical performance shall comply with the requirements of contract specific Appendix when sampled and tested in accordance with Clause .
Cement Bound Granular Mixtures C CBGM C Cement bound granular mixtures C CBGM C shall comply with BS EN and have binder constituent proportions complying with the requirements of Clause .
Aggregates shall comply with the requirements of Clause and shall have a total mixture grading that complies with grading envelope Category G from BS EN Annex B Figure B for size mixtures Figure B for mm size mixtures or Figure B for mm size mixtures .
The compacity of the mixture shall be at least .
when calculated in accordance with BS EN Annex C. The maximum dry density value used for the calculation shall be determined in accordance with BS EN using the modified Proctor .
kg rammer procedure from BS EN .
The strength after immersion shall be at least of the nonimmersed strength when tested in accordance with the laboratory mixture design requirements specified in Clause .
The method of construction shall be in accordance with Clause and Clause .
The laboratory mechanical performance shall comply with the requirements of contract specific Appendix when sampled and tested in accordance with Clause .
to Not Used Fly Ash Bound Mixture FABM and Hydraulic Road Binder Bound Mixture HRBBM The mixture shall comply with the requirements of BS EN for Fly Ash Bound Mixture or the requirements of BS EN for Hydraulic Road Binder Bound Mixture as specified in contract specific Appendix and have binder constituent proportions complying with the requirements of Clause .
Aggregate shall comply with the requirements of Clause .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Unbound Cement and Other Hydraulically Bound Mixtures Amendment February The strength after immersion shall be at least of the nonimmersed strength when tested in accordance with the laboratory mixture design requirements specified in Clause .
The method of construction shall comply with Clause and Clause .
The laboratory mechanical performance shall comply with the contract specific requirements of Appendix when sampled and tested in accordance with Clause .
Slag Bound Mixture B SBM B Fly Ash Bound Mixture FABM and Hydraulic Road Binder Bound Mixture HRBBM The mixture shall comply with the requirements of BS EN for Slag Bound Mixture B or the requirements of BS EN for Fly Ash Bound Mixture or the requirements of BS EN for Hydraulic Road Binder Bound Mixture as specified in contract specific Appendix and have binder constituent proportions complying with the requirements of Clause .
Aggregate shall comply with the requirements of Clause .
SBM B shall have a total mixture grading that complies with grading envelope Category G or G from BS EN Figure for size mixtures Figure for mm size mixtures or Figure for mm size mixtures .
FABM shall have a total mixture grading that complies with grading envelope Category G or G from BS EN Figure for size mixtures Figure for mm size mixtures or Figure for mm size mixtures .
HRBBM shall have a total mixture grading that complies with grading envelope Category G or G from BS EN Figure for mm size mixtures Figure for mm size mixtures and Figure for mm size mixtures The strength after immersion shall be at least of the nonimmersed strength when tested in accordance with the laboratory mixture design requirements specified in Clause .
The method of construction shall be in accordance with Clauses and .
The laboratory mechanical performance shall comply with the requirements of contract specific Appendix when sampled and tested in accordance with Clause .
Slag Bound Mixture B SBM B Fly Ash Bound Mixture FABM and Hydraulic Road Binder Bound Mixture HRBBM The mixture shall comply with the requirements of BS EN for Slag Bound Mixture B or the requirements of BS EN for Fly Ash Bound Mixture or the requirements of BS EN for Hydraulic Road Binder Bound Mixture as specified in contract specific Appendix and have binder constituent proportions complying with the requirements of Clause .
Aggregate shall comply with the requirements of Clause .
The strength after immersion shall be at least of the nonimmersed strength when tested in accordance with the laboratory mixture design requirements specified in Clause .
The method of construction shall be in accordance with Clause and either Clause Clause or Clause .
The laboratory mechanical performance shall comply with the requirements of contract specific Appendix when sampled and tested in accordance with Clause .
The mixture design procedures specified in Clause shall include the determination of the immediate bearing at the target water and binder content .
The mixture shall comply with Immediate Bearing Index Category IPI .
When approved by the Overseeing Organisation and where the mixture is not subject to direct trafficking the mixture shall comply with Immediate Bearing Index Category IPI .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Unbound Cement and Other Hydraulically Bound Mixtures Amendment February The requirements of Clause .
shall not apply if the mixture contains at least cement by mass of the dry mixture and traffic is not permitted to use the layer for the first days .
Not Used Fly Ash Bound Mixture FABM The mixture shall comply with BS EN for Fly Ash Bound Mixture and have binder constituent proportions complying with the requirements of Clause .
The strength after immersion shall be at least of the nonimmersed strength when tested in accordance with the laboratory mixture design requirements specified in Clause .
For limetreated fly ash mixtures with gypsum added as an additional constituent the method of construction shall be in accordance with Clause and .
For other mixtures the method of construction permitted shall comply with Clause and either Clause Clause or Clause .
The laboratory mechanical performance shall comply with the requirements of contract specific Appendix when sampled and tested in accordance with Clause .
Slag Bound Mixtures B B B and B SBM B The mixture shall comply with BS EN for SBM B SBM B SBM B or SBM B as specified in contract specific Appendix and have binder constituent proportions complying with the requirements of Clause .
Aggregates shall comply with the requirements of Clause .
The strength after immersion shall be at least of the nonimmersed strength when tested in accordance with the laboratory mixture design requirements specified in Clause .
The method of construction shall be in accordance with Clause and .
The laboratory mechanical performance shall comply with the requirements of contract specific Appendix when sampled and tested in accordance with Clause .
to Not Used Soil Treated by Cement SC Soil Treated by Slag SS Soil Treated by Fly Ash SFA and Soil Treated by Hydraulic Road Binder SHRB The mixture shall be as specified in contract specific Appendix and comply with the appropriate requirements selected from Table and the following i BS EN for soil treated by cement SC ii BS EN for soil treated by slag SS iii BS EN for soil treated with hydraulic road binder SHRB iv BS EN for soil treated by fly ash SFA .
The mixture shall also have binder constituent proportions complying with the requirements of Clause .
Not less than of the soil shall pass the mm size test sieve when tested in accordance with BS EN and the maximum particle size of the soil shall not exceed of the layer depth .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Unbound Cement and Other Hydraulically Bound Mixtures Amendment February When tested in accordance with BS EN clause soil with a total potential sulfate TPS content less than .
sulfate as SO shall be deemed suitable for treatment if the laboratory mixture design procedure confirms that the mixture complies with the resistance to water requirements specified in Table .
Soil with a total potential sulfate TPS equal to or greater than .
sulfate as SO shall only be deemed suitable for treatment where agreed by the Overseeing Organisation .
The method of construction shall be in accordance with Clause and either Clause Clause or Clause .
The laboratory mechanical performance shall comply with the requirements of contract specific Appendix when sampled and tested in accordance with Clause .
TABLE Requirements for Soil Treated by Cement SC Slag SS and Fly Ash SFA Mixture parameter Requirement Category BS EN reference Noncohesive soil mixtures Cohesive soil mixtures and chalk mixtures Minimum water content Expressed as a proportion of the optimum water content determined in accordance with BS EN Vibrating hammer method W WNR Note Table W for mixtures containing quicklime Degree of Pulverization Determined in accordance with BS EN PulvNR Note Pulv Table Immediate Bearing Index Note Determined in accordance with Clause IPI Note IPI Table Moisture Condition Value Determined in accordance with BS EN MCVNR Note MCV at final mixing and compaction Note Table Laboratory mechanical performance Compressive strength or tensile strength Rc or RtE as specified in contract specific Appendix Table for Rc Figure for RtE Resistance to water strength after immersion RiR ratio determined in accordance with Clause I Table Resistance to water volumetric swelling Determined in accordance with BS EN NR Note SC GV Table BS EN SS SRB and SFA GV to be not greater than Clause .. BS EN and NOTES .
The suffix NR denotes that the No requirement category applies. . Where SC is not to be trafficked within days IPINR may be used. . IPI where the mixture is not subject to direct trafficking. . For cohesive soil mixtures the requirement also applies during the mellowing period .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Unbound Cement and Other Hydraulically Bound Mixtures Amendment February to Not Used Testing Control and Checking of HBM General Tests controls and checks shall be carried out in accordance with the requirements in Table and the following subClauses at locations determined by the Overseeing Organisation unless otherwise stated in contract specific Appendix .
Where the Overseeing Organisation is satisfied that a consistent quality of work is being achieved it may order the frequency of testing to be reduced to half that required in Table .
Where a test reference is shown in Table the testing shall be carried out in compliance with the requirements of Clause and be undertaken by an organisation accredited in accordance with BS EN ISOIEC for the test method .
Sampling Sampling shall be in accordance with BS .
Where a bulk sample of HBM is taken from a layer it shall be taken from the full depth of the layer used without further mixing and not combined with other bulk samples .
Spread Checks for the MixinPlace Method of Construction The rate of spread of added constituents shall be determined by weighing the amount of material retained on five trays or mats of known area laid in the path of the spreading machine .
The trays or mats shall be positioned at points equally spaced along a diagonal bisecting line the area of coverage so as to assess the full width of discharge from the spreading machine .
Depth of Mixing for the MixinPlace Method of Construction The depth of mixing shall be checked by excavation and inspection on completion of each stage of the pulverizingmixing process .
The depth of mixing shall be referenced to the design levels for the pavement by precise leveling of the stabilized soil interface or other techniques approved by the Overseeing Organisation to ensure that the level at the underside of the stabilized layer is in accordance with the specified requirements .
Standardisation of Nuclear Density Gauges and Measurement of Insitu Wet Density The insitu wet density of a compacted mixture shall be measured using a calibrated nuclear density gauge in accordance with BS and the following subClauses except that each test shall consist of at least measurements at degrees to each other using the same source rod hole and the density taken as the average of the higher results .
The operation warmingup period if any and standardisation of the gauge shall be carried out in compliance with the manufacturers recommendations .
The gauge shall be calibrated in accordance with BS immediately prior to the construction of the demonstration area and at least once every days thereafter .
The gauge shall be used in the direct transmission mode of operation with the source rod lowered to within mm of the bottom surface of the layer .
The insitu wet density shall be determined within two hours of completing compaction .
The insitu wet density of a subbase layer shall be taken as the average value of five determinations equally spaced along a line that bisects each m or part thereof laid each day .
The first and fifth positions shall be located mm from the edges of the laid area or other positions agreed by the Overseeing Organisation .
For a subbase layer the average insitu wet density of the area specified in subClause .
shall be not less than of the average wet density of the test specimens taken to determine the laboratory mechanical performance of the same area .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Unbound Cement and Other Hydraulically Bound Mixtures Amendment February For a base layer the average insitu wet density of the area specified in subClause .
shall be not less than of the wet density of the HBM at its optimum moisture content measured using the vibrating hammer method detailed in BS EN .
The result of each single determination of insitu wet density shall be not less than of the wet density of the HBM at its optimum moisture content .
Laboratory Mechanical Performance A bulk sample of HBM shall be taken from each of the locations in subClause .
after the insitu wet density has been determined .
Test specimens used to determine laboratory mechanical performance shall be made using vibratory hammer compaction in accordance with BS EN .
Where cubes are used for the determination of compressive strength the specimens shall be mm size unless agreed otherwise by the Overseeing Organisation .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Unbound Cement and Other Hydraulically Bound Mixtures Amendment February TABLE Requirements for Testing Control and Checking of HBM Testcontrolcheck Test frequency Test reference Water content of aggregate or soil sources on site per m BS Clause .
Grading of aggregate or soil sources on site per m Aggregates BS EN Soils BS Clause .
Plasticity of aggregate or soil sources on site per m BS Clause .
Constituents sourced offsite Aggregates Results of routine control tests from the factory production control system required by BS EN Annex C to be provided weekly .
Cement Certificates to be provided monthly for each cement type in accordance with BS EN National Annex NB .
Slag Certificates to be provided weekly to confirm the declared values required by BS EN Clause .
Fly ash Certificates to be provided weekly to confirm compliance with the requirements of BS EN .
Other constituents certificates to be provided weekly to confirm compliance with the specification agreed as part of the factory production control system for the mixture .
Batching records for mixinplant method of construction using batching by mass Continuously using the automated surveillance and data collection system Batching records for mixinplant method of construction using batching by volume and mixinplace Dispensing accuracy shall be verified by reconciliation between constituent deliveries and the area and depth of completed layer for each m of work or part thereof during each days operation Spread checks for mixinplace method of construction at each stage of the mixing process subClause .
determination per m but not less than per day Mixture grading including binder per m but not less than per day BS EN Water content at final compaction per m but not less than per day BS Clause .
MCV at mixing and final compaction and in the case of cohesive mixtures during the mellowing period per m but not less than per day BS EN Pulverization cohesive mixtures only per m but not less than per day BS EN Depth of mixing for mixinplace method of construction at each stage of the mixing process subClause .
per m but not less than per day Insitu wet density per m or part thereof laid each day measured at the locations detailed in subClause .
SubClause .
Laboratory mechanical performance per m or part thereof laid each day with test specimens prepared from a bulk sample taken from each of the locations detailed in subClause .
As required by Table Strength after immersion in water Laboratory mixture design procedure As required by Clause Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Unbound Cement and Other Hydraulically Bound Mixtures Amendment February TABLE Laboratory Mechanical Performance Testing Requirements for HBM Clause Mixture Curing regime Curing temperature Test method Age at test GBGM A CBGM B and CBGM C Regime A from BS EN Annex C C RC BS EN days or other age agreed by the Overseeing Organisation see Note SBM HRBBM and FABM except FABM BS EN C FABM treated with lime BS EN C Rit BS EN FABM treated with cement BS EN C SC Regime A from BS EN Annex B C Ec BS EN SS SFA BS EN C NOTE For site control purposed HBM may be assessed on the basis of days strength or other agreed age where the Contractor so requests provided that a robust correlation is established between days and days strength using representative samples of the aggregates and binder used in the works .
Compliance of the area specified in subClause .
shall be assessed using the results for test specimens that are cured and tested in accordance with Table using either compression or indirect tensile testing as appropriate to the class of mechanical performance specified in contract specific Appendix .
Assessment shall be made using the following criteria i Compressive strength The requirement specified in contract specific Appendix shall be deemed to be satisfied if the average compressive strength of the group of specimens in Table is equal to or greater than the minimum for the specified Rc class and no individual test result is less than of the minimum strength requirement for the Rc class .
ii Indirect tensile strength The requirement specified in contract specific Appendix shall be deemed to be satisfied if the average indirect tensile strength of the group of specimens in Table is equal to or greater than the minimum requirement and no individual result is less than of the minimum requirement appropriate to the E value determined during the laboratory mixture design procedure specified in Clause .
For the purposes of this specification any reference to characteristic strength in BS EN shall be superseded by the requirements of this subClause .
Determination of the Coefficient of Linear Thermal Expansion Scope The test method described in this Clause shall be used to determine the coefficient of linear thermal expansion of HBM within the normal range of temperature for pavement layers .
The test method shall be carried out using hardened specimens .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Unbound Cement and Other Hydraulically Bound Mixtures Amendment February Apparatus The following apparatus shall be used i A water bath with sufficient capacity to accommodate three test specimens and capable of maintaining predetermined temperatures between C and C .
ii A device capable of measuring linear dimensions of not less than mm to an accuracy of .
mm with a known temperature correction factor .
iii Vibrating hammer compaction apparatus capable of producing mm diameter cylindrical test specimens in accordance with BS EN .
The apparatus shall be suitably modified to manufacture mm long test specimens .
Test procedure The following test procedure shall be followed i Compact three mm diameter test specimens mm in length in accordance with BS EN but using six layers each with a nominal depth of mm .
ii Mark each specimen with pairs of permanent reference points aligned longitudinally .
One of each pair shall be at opposite ends of the specimen .
Each pair shall be located at  around the circumference of the specimens aligned parallel to the axis and not more than mm from each end of the specimen .
iii Cure the specimens using the procedure specified for the determination of mechanical laboratory performance in Table .
iv Saturate the test specimens either at atmospheric pressure or under vacuum until the increase in the surface dried mass of each specimen determined using two readings taken at least hours apart is less than .
v Immerse the specimens in the water bath at a constant temperature T maintained to an accuracy of C for hours .
Then measure the length L of each test specimen at the locations defined by the three pairs of reference points .
Repeat the measurement of length every hours until the change in length between successive measurements is less than .
mm .
vi Raise the temperature of the water bath by at least C and record the temperature T. T shall not exceed C .
Maintain the temperature at T C for hours and measure the length L using the procedure in v. vii Lower the temperature of the water bath by at least C and record the temperature T. Maintain the temperature at T C for hours and measure the final length L using the procedure in v. Calculations Calculate the Coefficient of Linear Thermal Expansion CLE as follows i For each pair of reference points for the heating sequence calculate CLE L L T T giving results in total .
ii Reject the highest and lowest results and record the mean value of CLE for the remaining results .
iii For each pair of reference points for the cooling sequence calculate CLE L L T T giving results in total .
iv Reject the highest and lowest results and record the mean value of CLE for the remaining results .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Unbound Cement and Other Hydraulically Bound Mixtures Amendment February F v Calculate CLE .
Mean value of CLE Mean value of CLE .
vi Check that the mean values of CLE and CLE lie in the range .CLE to .CLE .
If the mean values lie outside this range repeat the procedure in subClause ..
Reporting of Results Report the value of CLE using units of m.C expressed to the nearest whole number .
to Not used Laboratory Mixture Design Procedure Prior to the commencement of the work or any change in mixture constituents the Contractor shall determine the target proportions of the constituents including water for the specified HBM based on the mixture design procedure described in this Clause .
The mixture design procedure shall determine the properties of the HBM at a minimum of values of binder contents and a minimum of values of water content for each value of binder content .
Immediate Stability When required the mixture design procedure shall include the determination of the immediate bearing index IBI at the selected design water and binder content measured in accordance with BS EN .
The IBI value shall be taken as the average value for a set of test specimens .
Resistance to Water Strength After Immersion The strength after immersion in water shall be assessed by comparing the average strength and condition of i specimens initially cured in a sealed condition for days at the test temperature and then removed from their moulds and immersed in aerated water for days at the same test temperature .
ii specimens cured in sealed condition for days at the same test temperature .
The immersed specimens shall be unconfined and have water in contact with all surfaces .
On completion of the immersion stage of the test the specimens shall show no signs of cracking or swelling .
For mixtures containing less than by dry mass of the mixture of cement the test temperature shall be C .
For mixtures containing or more cement the test temperature shall be C .
Resistance to Frost Heave HBM shall be deemed resistant to frost heave where the compressive strength class is C or greater or Rit is greater than .
MPa when cured in accordance with Table .
MANUAL OF CONTRACT DOCUMENTS FOR HIGHWAY WORKS VOLUME SPECIFICATION FOR HIGHWAY WORKS Amendment May SERIES ROAD PAVEMENTS BITUMINOUS BOUND MATERIALS Contents Clause Title Page General Bituminous Mixtures Reclaimed Asphalt Placing and Compaction of Bituminous Mixtures Hot Rolled Asphalt Base Hot Rolled Asphalt Binder Course Recipe Mixtures Dense Base and Binder Course Asphalt Concrete with Paving Grade Bitumen Recipe Mixtures Regulating Course Not Used mm Dense Asphalt Concrete Surface Course Hot Rolled Asphalt Surface Course Recipe Mixtures Hot Rolled Asphalt Surface Course Design Mixtures Close Graded Asphalt Concrete Surface Course Not Used Fine Graded Asphalt Concrete Surface Course Coated Chippings for Application to Hot Rolled Asphalt Surfacings Not Used Slurry Surfacing Incorporating Microsurfacing Surface Dressing Recipe Specification Bond Coats Tack Coats and Other Bituminous Sprays Surface Macrotexture of Bituminous Surface Courses Clause Title Page Surface Dressing Design Application and End Product Performance Cold Applied UltraThin Surfacing High Friction Surfaces Testing of Bituminous Mixtures In Situ Recycling The Repave Process Not Used Dense Base and Binder Course Asphalt Concrete Design Mixtures EME Base and Binder Course Asphalt Concrete to Not Used Stone Mastic Asphalt SMA Binder Course and Regulating Course Porous Asphalt to Not Used Thin Surface Course Systems Hot Rolled Asphalt Surface Course and Binder Course Performance Related Design Mixtures Not Used Weather Conditions for Laying of Bituminous Mixtures Local Repairs In Situ Cold Recycled Bound Material Ex Situ Cold Recycled Bound Material Not Used Surface Preservation Systems Torque Bond Test Not Used MANUAL OF CONTRACT DOCUMENTS FOR HIGHWAY WORKS VOLUME SPECIFICATION FOR HIGHWAY WORKS Amendment May Clause Title Page Method for Laboratory Determination of Interface Properties UsingtheModifiedLeutnerShearTest AgeingProfileTestUsinga ModifiedRollingThinFilmOvenTest MRTFOT Not Used ModifiedBinderStorage Stability Test NATIONAL ALTERATIONS OF THE OVERSEEING ORGANISATIONS OF SCOTLAND WALES AND NORTHERN IRELAND Clause Title Page TSWG Hot Rolled Asphalt Surface Course Design Mixtures F TS Stone Mastic Asphalt Surface Course TS F denotesaClauseorSampleContractSpecificAppendixwhich hasasubstituteNationalClauseorSampleContractSpecific Appendix for one or more of the Overseeing Organisations of Scotland Wales or Northern Ireland .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Bituminous Bound Materials Amendment May ROAD PAVEMENTS BITUMINOUS BOUND MATERIALS General ThisSeriesispartoftheSpecificationforHighwayWorks.WhilstthisSeriesisparticularlyrelevantto the subject matter in its title it must be read in conjunction with the general requirements in Series and and withallotherSeriesrelevanttothespecificationfortheparticularworkstobeundertaken .
Bituminous Pavement Mixtures General This Clause gives general requirements for the properties of the aggregates and bitumen used in plantproduced bituminous mixtures .
These requirements apply to all plant produced bituminous mixtures unless otherwisespecifiedincontractspecificAppendixorwhereotherrequirementsaregiveninspecificClausesin this Series .
Bituminous mixtures shall be laid by organisations registered to and operating in compliance with the Sector Scheme for the Laying of Asphalt Mixes listed in Appendix A .
All mixtures supplied in accordance with BS EN shall be CE marked and the Contractor shall submit the declaration of performance which shall demonstratethatthemixtureprovidestheperformancerequiredbythespecification .
Aggregates for Bituminous Mixtures Naturalrecycledunboundandmanufacturedartificialaggregatesshallbecleanhardanddurableand shall comply with BS EN and be CE marked and have a declared performance which demonstrates that theaggregatemeetstherequirementsofthespecification.Whererecycledcoarseaggregateorrecycledconcrete aggregate is used in bituminous mixtures it shall have been tested in accordance with Clause and the content of other materials Class X including wood plastic and metal shall not exceed by mass .
Reclaimed asphalt shall comply with Clause .
The use of aggregate derived as a byproduct during the extraction of china clay is permitted .
It shall comply with the requirements of this Clause BS EN and the examples of the relevant annex of BSI PD .
The use of crushed slate aggregate is permitted in base and binder course layers .
It shall comply with the requirements of this Clause BS EN and the examples of the relevant annex of BSI PD except for theflakinesscategorywhichshallbesubjecttopriorapprovalbytheOverseeingOrganisation.Mixturesofcrushed slate aggregate with coarse aggregate of a different geological type shall not be permitted .
Resistance to Fragmentation Hardness UnlessotherwisestatedincontractspecificAppendixthecoarseaggregatesforbituminousmixtures shall meet the following criteria i theresistancetofragmentationcategoryofthecoarseaggregateasdefinedinclause .. of BS EN shall be LA or better for natural aggregates and LA or better for blast furnace slag or ii crushed rock aggregate has a Los Angeles Value greater than but less than where evidence can be presented to the Overseeing Organisation of previous satisfactory use of the source in asphalt .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Bituminous Bound Materials Amendment May Naturalandmanufacturedartificialaggregatesrecoveredfromaprevioususeinanunboundformshallcomply with the requirements of this Clause .
Resistance to Freezing and Thawing Durability WhenrequiredincontractspecificAppendixtheresistanceofthecoarseaggregatetofreezing andthawingshallbedeclared.ThefreezingandthawingsoundnesscategoryasdefinedinBSEN clause shall be MSunlessotherwisespecifiedincontractspecificAppendix.Thewaterabsorption value of the coarse aggregate shall be determined in accordance with BS EN clause If the water absorption value of the coarse aggregate is greater than WA the soundness test shall be carried out on the material delivered to site .
The requirements for water absorption do not apply to blast furnace slag aggregate .
Cleanness UnlessotherwisespecifiedincontractspecificAppendixtheproportionofcoarseandfine aggregatesforbituminousmixturespassingthe.mmtestsievefinescontentshallnotexceedthelimits stated in BSI PD Annex B Annex C and Annex D when tested in accordance with the washing and sieving method of BS EN .
Resistance to Polishing and Surface Abrasion WhenspecifiedintheappropriateClauseorcontractspecificAppendixtheaggregateshallconform to the required declared PSV category in accordance with BS EN clause .. and BSI PD clause The resistance to surface abrasion of coarse aggregate used in surface courses in accordance with BS EN clause .. and BSI PD clause .. shall conform to category AAV unless otherwise specifiedintheappropriateClauseorincontractspecificAppendix .
Chemical Requirements Dicalcium Silicate Disintegration Aircooled blast furnace slag aggregates shall be free from iron dicalcium silicate disintegration as definedinBSENclause Iron Disintegration Aircooledblastfurnaceslagaggregatesshallbefreefromirondisintegrationasdefinedin BS EN clause Volume Stability ThevolumestabilitycategoryofsteelslagaggregatesasdefinedinBSENclauseshall not exceed V. Bitumen Paving grade bitumen shall comply with BS EN .
PolymermodifiedbitumenshallcomplywithBSEN .
Asphalt Durability The durability of adhesion in base and binder course mixtures designed in accordance with Clause and to be used on trunk roads including motorways shall be determined by testing in accordance with BS EN .
The SATS Durability Index of the mix components shall be above .
MixturesthatincludehydratedlimefilleraredeemedtosatisfythisrequirementandSATStestingis notrequired.HydratedlimefillershallbeCaOH in the form of hydrated lime type CL S. Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Bituminous Bound Materials Amendment May Reclaimed Asphalt The requirements of this clause apply to all bituminous mixtures containing reclaimed asphalt .
Reclaimed asphalt may be used in the production of bituminous surface course binder course regulatingcourseandbase.UnlessotherwisespecifiedincontractspecificAppendixtheuseofreclaimed asphalt shall be in accordance with i ClauseforsurfacecoursemixturesspecifiedinClause ii BSI PD B for Asphalt Concrete mixtures macadams iii BSI PD C for Hot Rolled Asphalt mixtures iv BSI PD D for Stone Mastic Asphalt mixtures .
Other recycled materials shall only be used in bituminous mixtures with the approval of the Overseeing Organisation .
The mixed material shall comply with the requirements of all the relevant Clauses in this Series .
Reclaimed Feedstock All reclaimed material shall be pretreated before use such that it is homogeneously mixed and the maximumparticlesizedoesnotexceedmm .
Properties of Binder The fresh bitumen added to the mixture shall not be more than two grades softer than the nominal grade for the mixture given in Table of BSI PD .
Checks on the penetration of the binder recovered from the reclaimed asphalt together with a calculation of the properties of the combined binder shall be carried out in accordance with the relevant parts of BS EN .
When more than of reclaimed asphalt is incorporated in a mixture tests on binder recovered from the mixture shall be carried out following the example in BSI PD The results shall be within the limits set out in BSI PD Mixed materials containing more than reclaimed asphalt When more than of reclaimed asphalt is incorporated in a designed base or binder course mixture cores taken to assess compliance with Clause .
or Clause .
shall also be tested for stiffness in accordance with BS EN ITSM method C. The frequency of testing shall be agreed with the Overseeing Organisation prior to the commencement of works and shall comply with the requirements of contract specificAppendicesand .
The stiffness of the mixture shall comply with the appropriate category from Table .
TABLE Stiffness Categories for Designed Base and Binder Course Mixtures Incorporating Greater than Reclaimed Asphalt Nominal binder grade of mixture Stiffness category Smin Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Bituminous Bound Materials Amendment May Placing and Compaction of Bituminous Mixtures General This Clause gives general requirements for the placing and compaction of bituminous mixtures which are complementary and additional to the requirements of BS .
These requirements and the requirements ofBSapplytoallbituminousmixturesunlessotherwisespecifiedintheotherClausesinthisSeriesorin contractspecificAppendix .
Bituminouspavementsshallbeconstructedusingthematerialsspecifiedincontractspecific Appendix and shall be laid by contractors that are registered to the BS EN ISO Sector Scheme for the Laying of Asphalt Mixes listed in Appendix A .
In order to exclude moisture from interfaces and ensure full interlayer bonding the surface of all bituminous material shall be kept clean and uncontaminated .
Unless agreed with the Overseeing Organisation the onlytrafficpermittedtorunonthesurfaceofbituminousmaterialtobeoverlaidshallbethatengagedinlaying and compacting the next course or where a binder course is to be blinded or surface dressed that is engaged on such surface treatment .
If any surface becomes contaminated it shall be made good by cleaning and if this proves impracticablebyrectificationincompliancewithClause .
Prior to placing bituminous material on any new or existing bound substrate a bond coat or tack coat shall be applied in accordance with Clauses or as appropriate .
Before work commences the Contractor shall submit a method statement to the Overseeing Organisation that includes i Layingandcompactionproceduresforeachlayerincludingpavingspeedandpavedwidthsizetype and number of rollers and number of roller passes .
ii The joint formation procedures for each layer including the location of longitudinal and transverse joints and the methods of treating upstanding edges .
Transporting Hot bituminous mixtures shall be transported in accordance with the requirements of BS and shall remain covered whilst awaiting tipping .
Laying HotbituminousmixturesotherthanthosespecifiedunderClauseshallbelaidinaccordancewith therequirementsofBSandsubClausestoofthisClause.SurfacingsspecifiedunderClauseshall be laid in accordance with the requirements of that Clause and subClauses to of this Clause .
Wherever practicable hot bituminous mixtures shall be spread levelled and tamped by a selfpropelled paving machine .
The rate of delivery of material to the paver shall be regulated to enable the paver to operate continuously .
Hand placing of hot bituminous mixtures shall be restricted to the following circumstances i For laying regulating courses of irregular shape and varying thickness .
ii Inconfinedspaceswhereitisimpracticableforapavertooperate .
iii For footways .
iv At the approaches to expansion joints at bridges viaducts or other structures .
v For laying mastic asphalt .
Handraking of surface course material or the addition of such material by handspreading to the paved area for adjustment of level shall be restricted to the following circumstances i At the edges of the layers of material and at gullies manholes and other ironwork .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Bituminous Bound Materials Amendment May ii At the approaches to expansion joints at bridges viaducts or other structures .
Themethodoflayingshallbesuchthatthefinishedmatisfreefromdraggingtearingandsegregation of the material .
When laying mixtures from more than one source the mixtures shall have equivalent laying and compaction characteristics so that surface evenness is not compromised .
When paving adjacent to an expansion joint of a structure the joint or joint cavity shall be kept clear of material .
When laying binder course or surface course the paver shall be taken out of use whilst laying the remainder of the pavement up to the joint and the corresponding area beyond it .
Whenpavingdirectlyontobridgedeckwaterproofingsystemsanyspecialrequirementswhichapplyto that system shall be complied with .
Compaction The compaction of hot bituminous mixtures shall be in accordance with BS and the requirementsforspecificmixturesin i Clause for dense base and binder course asphalt concrete design mixtures .
ii Clause for EME mixtures .
iii Clause for thin surface course systems .
ExceptwhereotherwisespecifiedrollersshallcomplywiththegeneralrequirementsofBS except that the minimum mass of deadweight smooth wheeled rollers shall be tonnes .
Multiwheeled pneumatic tyred rollers and vibratory rollers may be used if they are capable of achieving at least the standard of compaction of an tonnes deadweight roller .
Where compaction is to be determined in accordance with Clauses and the requirements to prove the performance of rollers do not apply .
In such cases the Contractor may use any plant to achieve the specifiedlevelofcompactionandshallfinishcompactionattemperaturesabovetheminimumspecifiedrolling temperature .
Vibratory rollers shall not be used in vibrating mode on bridge decks .
Chippings The application of coated chippings to areas of surface course shall be by a mechanical spreader capable of distributing chippings to an even rate of spread .
Addition of chippings by hand operation shall only be permitted in the following circumstances i Inconfinedspaceswhereitisimpracticableforachippingspreadertooperate .
ii As a temporary expedient when adjustments have to be made to the spreader distribution mechanism .
iii When hand laying of the surface course is permitted .
iv To correct uneven distribution of chippings .
Chippings shall be applied uniformly and rolled into the surface so they are effectively held and provide theinitialmacrotexturedepthspecifiedinClause .
Joints For new pavement construction all longitudinal joints in all layers shall be situated outside wheel trackzones.Whereanexistingroadpavementisresurfacedjointsinthesurfacecourseshallcoincidewitheither thelaneedgethelanemarkingorthemiddleofatrafficlanewhicheverisappropriate.Jointsshallnotcoincide withthewheelpath.ForthepurposesofthisClausethewheeltrackzonesshallbetakentobebetween.mand .mandbetween.mand.mfromthecentreofthenearsidelanemarkingsforeachtrafficlaneorinthe absence of lane markings lane edges .
All joints shall be offset at least mm from parallel joints in the layer beneath .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Bituminous Bound Materials Amendment May UnlessotherwisespecifiedincontractspecificAppendixthefacesofallcoldupstandingedges including previously laid asphalt against which hot bituminous mixtures are to be laid to form joints shall be treated with one of the following i hot bituminous binder with a penetration of not less than pen ii hotelastomericpolymermodifiedbituminousbindercomplyingwithBSENwithapenetration of not less than pen iii coldappliedthixotropicbituminouscompoundofsimilarbitumenorpolymermodifiedbitumengrade iv polymermodifiedadhesivebitumenstripwithaminimumthicknessofmm .
This operation shall be done so that the binder adheres to both the cold and the warm upstanding edges when the asphalt is placed .
UnlessotherwisespecifiedincontractspecificAppendixjointsinbindercoursesandbasesshall be compacted such that the air voids content measured from core pairs whose centres are not more than mm fromthefinaljointisnotgreaterthanabovethemaximumpermittedlimitforcorepairsinthebodyofthemat .
The air voids content shall be calculated in accordance with BS EN using the relevant bulk and maximum densitiesdefinedinAppendixBofBSENfortherelevantmixturetype .
Within hours of the joint being formed a sealant shall be applied to the top surface of all base and binder course joints such that there is not less than .
kgm of residual bitumen mm either side of the joint unlessotherwisespecifiedincontractspecificAppendix.Thesealantwhichmaycontainmineralfillerto BS EN shall be one of the following i hotelastomericpolymermodifiedbituminousbindercomplyingwithBSENwithapenetration of not less than pen ii bitumen emulsion with a cohesion by pendulum of Class or above in accordance with BS EN iii slurry surfacing complying with Clause .
UnlessotherwisespecifiedincontractspecificAppendixasealantasspecifiedinsubClauseof thisClauseshallbeappliedtothewholeofanyfreestandingedgeontheoutsideofthefinishedpavementonthe highsideofthecamberandwhenspecifiedincontractspecificAppendixonthelowside .
Regulating Course Regulating course material shall be made and laid in accordance with the requirements of Clause .
Use of Surfaces by Traffic Whereanewbituminouslayerotherthanthesurfacecourseistobeopenedtohighwaytrafficasa temporary running surface it shall either i be surface dressed in accordance with Clause using chippings of category not less than PSV unlessotherwisespecifiedincontractspecificAppendixor ii contain a coarse aggregate of category of not less than PSVunlessotherwisespecifiedincontract specificAppendix .
Constructionplantandtrafficusedonpavementsunderconstructionshallbesuitableinrelationtothe material condition and thickness of the courses it traverses so that damage is not caused to the subgrade or the pavement courses already constructed .
The wheels or tracks of plant moving over the various pavement courses shall be kept free from deleterious materials .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Bituminous Bound Materials Amendment May Hot Rolled Asphalt Base Hot Rolled Asphalt base recipe mixes shall conform to BS EN the detailed requirements of theexampleinBSIPDAnnexCandrequirementsspecifiedincontractspecificAppendix.Themixture designation shall be one of the following i HRA base .
ii HRA base .
iii HRA base .
iv HRA base .
Hot Rolled Asphalt Binder Course Recipe Mixtures Hot Rolled Asphalt binder course recipe mixes shall conform to BS EN the example in BSIPDAnnexCandrequirementsspecifiedincontractspecificAppendix.Themixturedesignationshall be one of the following i HRA bin .
ii HRA bin .
iii HRA bin .
iv HRA bin .
Dense Base and Binder Course Asphalt Concrete Recipe Mixtures Dense base and binder course asphalt concrete formerly macadam recipe mixtures shall be asphalt concrete conforming to BS EN the detailed requirements from BSI PD Annex B and requirements specifiedincontractspecificAppendix.Themixturedesignationshallbeoneofthefollowing i AC dense base rec .
ii AC dense base rec .
iii AC dense base rec .
iv AC dense bin rec .
v AC dense bin rec .
vi AC dense bin rec .
vii AC dense bin rec .
viii AC dense bin rec .
ix AC dense bin rec .
Regulating Course Regulating courses which may consist of one or more layers of a bituminous material shall have their finishedsurfaceslaidtoachievetheappropriatetolerancesforhorizontalalignmentssurfacelevelsandsurface regularity for pavement layers in accordance with Clause .
UnlessotherwisespecifiedincontractspecificAppendixstonemasticasphaltcomplyingwith Clause or base or binder course asphalt concrete complying with Clause or hot rolled asphalt complying with Clause shall be used for regulating courses immediately below surface courses .
Bituminous mixtures for regulatingcoursesshallmeettherequirementsfortheappropriatematerialasspecifiedabove .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Bituminous Bound Materials Amendment May Where the total depth of a regulating course exceeds mm then the course shall be laid so that each regulating layer has a compacted thickness of between mm and mm .
Not Used mm Dense Asphalt Concrete Surface Course mm dense asphalt concrete formerly macadam surface course shall be asphalt concrete conforming toBSENtheexampleinBSIPDAnnexBandrequirementsspecifiedincontractspecific Appendix .
The mixture designation shall be one of the following i AC dense surf .
ii AC dense surf .
Coarse Aggregate To ensure adequate resistance to polishing and abrasion the coarse aggregate shall have a minimum declaredPSVasspecifiedincontractspecificAppendixinaccordancewithBSENclause andBSIPDandshallhaveamaximumdeclaredAAVasspecifiedincontractspecificAppendixin accordance with BS EN clause .. and BSI PD .
Hot Rolled Asphalt Surface Course Recipe Mixtures Hot Rolled Asphalt surface course recipe mixtures shall conform to BS EN the example ofBSIPDAnnexCandtherequirementsspecifiedincontractspecificAppendix.Unlessotherwise specifiedincontractspecificAppendixthemixturedesignationshallbeoneofthefollowing i HRA F surf .
ii HRA F surf .
iii HRA F surf .
iv HRA F surf .
v HRA F surf .
WhenthemixturedesignationisnotspecifiedincontractspecificAppendixthemixtureselectedbythe ContractorshallbenotifiedtotheOverseeingOrganisationpriortoitsuseintheworks .
Coarse Aggregate The resistance to polishing of the coarse aggregate for chipped mixtures shall be category PSV as definedinBSENclauseForunchippedmixturesthecoarseaggregateshallhaveaminimum declaredPSVandamaximumAAVasspecifiedincontractspecificAppendix .
Coated Chippings Whenrequiredcoatedchippingsshallbeeithermmormmasspecifiedincontractspecific Appendix and comply with Clause .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Bituminous Bound Materials Amendment May Hot Rolled Asphalt Surface Course Design Mixtures Hot Rolled Asphalt surface course design mixes shall conform to BS EN the example of BSIPDAnnexCandrequirementsspecifiedincontractspecificAppendix.Themixturedesignationshall be one of the following i HRA F surf xxyy des .
ii HRA F surf xxyy des .
iii HRA F surf xxyy des .
iv HRA F surf xxyy des .
v HRA F surf xxyy des .
vi HRA C surf xxyy des .
vii HRA C surf xxyy des .
viii HRA C surf xxyy des .
ix HRA C surf xxyy des .
x HRA C surf xxyy des .
UnlessotherwisespecifiedincontractspecificAppendixthegradeofbitumenrequiredxxyyshallbe .
Coarse Aggregate The resistance to polishing of the coarse aggregate for chipped mixtures shall be category PSV as definedinBSENclauseForunchippedmixturesthecoarseaggregateshallhaveaminimum declaredPSVandamaximumAAVasspecifiedincontractspecificAppendix .
Coated Chippings When required coated chippings shall be either mm or mm in accordance with BSIPDasspecifiedincontractspecificAppendix.Coatedchippingsshallalsocomplywith Clause .
Close Graded Asphalt Concrete Surface Course Close graded asphalt concrete formerly macadam surface course recipe mixes shall be asphalt concrete conformingtoBSENtheexampleofBSIPDAnnexBandrequirementsspecifiedincontract specificAppendix.Themixturedesignationshallbeoneofthefollowing i AC close surf .
ii AC close surf .
iii AC close surf .
iv AC close surf .
Coarse Aggregate To ensure adequate resistance to polishing and abrasion the coarse aggregate shall have a minimum declaredPSVandamaximumAAVasspecifiedincontractspecificAppendix .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Bituminous Bound Materials Amendment May Not Used Fine Graded Asphalt Concrete Surface Course Fine graded asphalt concrete formerly macadam surface course recipe mixes shall be asphalt concrete conformingtoBSENtheexampleofBSIPDAnnexBandrequirementsspecifiedincontract specificAppendix.Themixturedesignationshallbeoneofthefollowing i ACfinesurf .
ii ACfinesurf .
Coarse Aggregate To ensure adequate resistance to polishing and abrasion the coarse aggregate shall have a minimum declaredPSVandamaximumAAVasspecifiedincontractspecificAppendix .
Coated Chippings for Application to Hot Rolled Asphalt Surfacings Coated chippings for rolling into the surface of hot rolled asphalt shall conform to BS EN the exampleinBSIPDAnnexCclauseC .. andrequirementsspecifiedincontractspecificAppendix .
To ensure adequate resistance to polishing and abrasion the coarse aggregate shall have a minimum declaredPSVandamaximumAAVasspecifiedincontractspecificAppendix .
The shape of the chippings shall comply with category FIasdefinedinBSEN clause Not used Slurry Surfacing Incorporating Microsurfacing The Contractor shall be responsible for the design of the Slurry Surfacing choice of materials techniquesandprocessesbasedonsiteandtrafficdataspecifiedincontractspecificAppendixandtheschedule ofconstraintsonsiteavailabilityincontractspecificAppendix .
The Contractor shall i Provide a Design Proposal to achieve the performance requirements in terms of texture and maximum levelsofdefectsassetoutinthisClauseandincontractspecificAppendixensuringthattheSlurry Surfacinghasaninitialstabilitysuchthatitiscapableofwithstandingthenormaltrafficforthesite whenfirstopened .
ii State the Estimated Design Life of the Slurry Surfacing in the Design Proposal .
iii Provide a Quality Plan .
iv Carry out the Slurry Surfacing in accordance with the manufacturers installation instructions and the DesignProposaltothethicknessandtolerancesspecifiedincontractspecificAppendix .
The Contractor shall guarantee the design materials and workmanship against defects and against failuretomeettheendperformancerequirementsforaperiodoftwoyearsorasotherwisespecifiedincontract specificAppendixfromthedateofcompletionofthework.TheContractorshallrectifyanydefectsidentified during the guarantee period .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Bituminous Bound Materials Amendment May The System The proposed Slurry Surfacing shall comply with BS EN and it shall be CE marked .
The Contractor shall provide the declaration of performance and installation information as required in this Clause and contractspecificAppendix .
Thedeclarationofperformanceshalldemonstratethatthesystemmeetstherequirementsofthespecificationand providesperformancecategoriesforalloftheitemsidentifiedinthisClauseandincontractspecificAppendix .
Aggregates Theaggregateshallbecrushedrockslaggravelorcalcinedbauxitecomplyingwiththisspecification .
ThecoarseaggregateshallhaveaminimumdeclaredPSVandamaximumAAVasspecifiedincontractspecific Appendix .
In the Design Proposal the Contractor shall provide the declaration of performance for the aggregate whichshalldemonstratethattheaggregateshallmeettherequirementsofthespecificationincludingtheproperties detailedincontractspecificAppendix.Thegradingandbindercontentshallnotdifferfromtheproposedtarget values by more than the tolerances detailed in the Design Proposal .
Binder The Contractor shall provide with his Design Proposal the declaration of performance for the binder whichshalldemonstratethatthebindershallmeettherequirementsofthespecificationincludingtheproperties detailedincontractspecificAppendix .
ContractcompliancetestingshallbecarriedoutbytheContractorasdetailedincontractspecificAppendix .
The recovery of the binder shall be carried out in accordance with Clause .
The test to determine Vialit Pendulum Cohesion shall be carried out in accordance with BS EN .
The Contractor shall provide rheological productidentificationdataformodifiedbindersinaccordancewithBSEN .
Coloured Materials WhererequiredincontractspecificAppendixacolouredslurrysurfacingshallbeprovided.All coloured slurry surfacings shall be approved by the Overseeing Organisation .
They shall conform in all respects with the requirements of this Clause .
Equipment The mixing machine shall be capable of uniform application and the provision of a continuous surface without ridges or segregation .
Health and Safety Health and Safety information and safe handling guidance shall be provided by the Contractor to the Overseeing Organisation .
Layer Thickness WhenrequiredtheminimumandormaximumthicknessoftheSlurrySurfacingshallbeasspecifiedin contractspecificAppendix .
Preparation Any necessary remedial works to the road surface and structure shall be completed either prior to the commencement of works or as part of the contract and agreed as acceptable by the Overseeing Organisation and the Contractor before Slurry Surfacing commences .
StreetfurnitureandwherespecifiedincontractspecificAppendixroadmarkingsandkerbsshall bemaskedusingselfadhesivemaskingmaterialorothermaterialfirmlysecuredagainstthepassageofthespreader box or the tools used for hand laying .
Any packed mud or other deposits on the road surface shall be removed all organic growth shall be removed by suitable means and the road surface shall be swept free of all loose material .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Bituminous Bound Materials Amendment May A bond coat complying with Clause shall be applied prior to the Slurry Surfacing with or without grit or chippings in order to seal the existing substrate and to enhance the bond to the existing road surface unless theContractorcandemonstratethatsufficientbondwillbedevelopedwithoutitsuse.Thistreatmentshallbein accordance with the Contractors method statement contained within his Design Proposal .
Traffic Safety and Management TrafficSafetyandManagementshallbestrictlyinaccordancewiththerequirementsofSeriesand thesitespecificrequirementsspecifiedincontractspecificAppendixandtheconstraintsdescribedincontract specificAppendix .
Mixing TheSlurrySurfacingshallbemixedinacontinuousflowmixingmachineanddischargeddirectlyinto the spreader box .
Where the material is to be hand laid the Slurry Surfacing may be mixed in a batch mixer or supplied to site premixed in suitable containers .
The Quality Plan shall detail the precautions to be taken to achieve a homogeneous mixture .
Application Applicationrestrictionstobeobservedintheeventofadverseweathershallbeasspecifiedinthis ClausetheContractorsMethodStatementandanyadditionalrequirementsspecifiedincontractspecific Appendix .
Transversejointsshallbeformedwithspreadingstartingandfinishingonaprotectivestripnotless thanmmwideateachendofthelanelengthorareabeingtreatedorsuchothermethodasdefinedinthe Contractors Method Statement to produce an equivalent standard .
Transverse joints shall be formed such that there shall be no ridges or bare strips .
Unless otherwise agreed with the Overseeing Organisation longitudinal joints where the material is laid on a road shall coincide with lane markings .
Longitudinal joints shall be formed such that there shall be no ridges or bare strips .
Handwork around street furniture and other ironwork shall meet the same performance requirements and form a homogeneous surface with the rest of the treated carriageway .
Footwaysandotherconfinedareasmaybespreadbyhandusingsqueegeesandbrooms.Kerbedges and other areas not being treated shall be suitably masked with selfadhesive masking material .
Footways shall befinishedbydraggingadampenedbroomtransverselyoverthefootwayunderitsownweightorothermethod producingasimilarmacrotextureorasstatedincontractspecificAppendix .
Allvoidscracksandsurfaceirregularitiesshallbecompletelyfilled.Spreadingshallnotbeundertaken on carriageways when the temperature falls below C or when standing water is present on the surface .
In warm dry weather the surface immediately ahead of the spreading shall be slightly damped by mist water spray applied mechanically or for hand laying by a hand operated pressure sprayer unless otherwise agreed by the Overseeing Organisation .
ThefinishedSlurrySurfacingshallhaveauniformsurfacemacrotexturethroughouttheworkwithout variations of macrotexture within the lane width or from area to area .
Thefinishedsurfaceshallbefreefromblowholesandsurfaceirregularitiesduetoscrapingscabbing score marks dragging droppings excess overlapping or badly aligned longitudinal or transverse joints damage by rain or frost or other defects which remain hours after laying .
Slurry Surfacing which does not comply with this Clauseorisnonuniforminsurfacemacrotextureorcolourhoursafterlayingshallberectifiedbyremovaland replacement or superimposed if this is impractical with fresh material in compliance with this Clause .
Areas so treated shall be not less than m long and not less than one lane wide or the full width if less than a lane wide .
All areasbeingworkedonshallbekeptfreeoftrafficuntilthematerialhassetsufficientlytocarrythetraffic .
The Contractor shall record the amount of Slurry Surfacing used and the area covered for each run or section completed .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Bituminous Bound Materials Amendment May The Contractor shall facilitate duplicate or joint testing by the Overseeing Organisation if required .
Aftercare Masking shall be removed after the Slurry Surfacing has been applied without damage to the edge of thesurfacingandbeforeopeningtheroadorfootwaytotraffic.Theironworkshallberesetifnecessarywithin hours of application of the Slurry Surfacing .
The Contractor shall remove surplus aggregate from the treated areas using a method stated in the Quality Plan .
The Contractor shall monitor the Slurry Surfacing closely for a minimum period of hours and if necessary the lane shall be swept again .
The monitoring shall continue until the Slurry Surfacing has reached sufficientstabilitytocarryunrestrictedtraffic.IftherearesignsofdistresstheContractorshallreinstatetraffic safety and management procedures or other such remedial action where necessary in order to prevent further damage .
Further operations to remove subsequently loosened aggregate shall be carried out over the next hours .
The areas treated and adjacent side roads footways and paved areas shall be kept substantially free of loose aggregate for a period of days after completion of the work .
As Built Manual Not more than days after completion of the work the Contractor shall provide a record of the progress of the work in the form of an As Built Manual incorporating all relevant information including all contract compliance test results volumes of Slurry Surfacing used and areas covered with calculated thickness record of trafficcontrolcarriedoutweatherinformationunforeseenproblemsalistofcomplaintsifanyfromthegeneral public or road users and any other information that the Overseeing Organisation may reasonably require to be included .
Performance Standards for Slurry Surfacing During the Guarantee Period Surface Macrotexture The Contractor is responsible for maintaining the surface macrotexture requirements set out in contract specificAppendixthroughouttheguaranteeperiod .
ThedefinitivetestisthevolumetricpatchtechniquemeasuredinaccordancewithBSENexceptthat individualmeasurementsshallbemadeonthenearsideinsidewheeltrackofthemostheavilytraffickedlane orforlowtrafficcategorysitesthetrackcarryingthemoststress.Theaveragemacrotexturedepthofeachlane kilometreorthecompletecarriagewaylanewherethisislessthanmetresshallbeasspecifiedincontract specificAppendix.Theaverageofeachsetofindividualmeasurementsshallbenotlessthanofthe minimum permitted .
Surface Profile ThesurfaceprofileoftheslurrysurfacingwhenmeasuredinaccordancewithSeriesshallmeetthe requirementsspecifiedincontractspecificAppendixforbothtransverseandlongitudinalprofile .
Defects When the extent of area and linear defects is monitored using the visual method of assessment in accordance with BS EN the Slurry Surfacing shall have less than the permitted maximum level of defects asdescribedincontractspecificAppendix .
Coloured materials shall retain their colour throughout the guarantee period to the level stated in the contractspecificAppendix .
AnysectionfailingtomeettherequiredstandardasspecifiedincontractspecificAppendixshallbe subject to remedial action by the Contractor .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Bituminous Bound Materials Amendment May Surface Dressing Recipe Specification The Contractor shall i CarryouttheSurfaceDressinginaccordancewiththedesigndescribedincontractspecific Appendix subjecttothescheduleofconstraintsonsiteavailabilitysetoutincontractspecific Appendix .
The supply and application of Surface Dressing to road surfaces shall be undertaken by organisations registered to the National Highways Sector Scheme for The Supply and Application of Surface Treatments to Road Surfaces listed in Appendix A. ii Be responsible for the choice of materials techniques and processes subject to the requirements describedincontractspecificAppendix.Thetolerancespermittedforthisworkshallbeasspecified incontractspecificAppendix .
iii Provide a Quality Plan which may be subject to audit by the Overseeing Organisation with respect to the method of executing the work .
iv Guaranteethematerialsandworkmanshipagainstdefectsandagainstfailuretomeetthespecification foraperiodofoneyearorasotherwisedescribedincontractspecificAppendixfromthedateof completion of the work .
Materials and Equipment Binder ThebindershallbeofthetypeandgradespecifiedinthecontractspecificAppendixcomplying with BS EN and be CE marked .
TheContractorshallprovideaBinderDataSheetgivingdetailsofthepropertiesspecifiedincontract specificAppendixforeachbinderproposed.Contractcompliancetestingshallbecarriedoutasdetailed incontractspecificAppendix.ThetesttodeterminetheVialitPendulumCohesionshallbecarriedoutin accordancewithBSEN.TheContractorshallproviderheologicalproductidentificationdataformodified binders in accordance with BS EN .
Health and Safety information and a safe handling guide from the manufacturer shall be provided together with details of any weather restrictions placed upon the use of the binder .
The binder sprayer shall be capable of uniform application at the designed rate of spread over a variable orfixedwidthsufficienttoallowafulllanewidthtobeproducedinasinglepass.Beforesprayingbeginsthe ContractorshallprovidetheOverseeingOrganisationwithatestcertificateshowingtestresultsforrateofspread and accuracy of spread of binder carried out in accordance with the test methods in BS EN issued by an appropriate organisation accredited in accordance with subClause .
for those tests demonstrating that the binder sprayer has been tested using the binder to be used in the Contract not more than six weeks before the commencementoftheworkandthatitcomplieswiththerequirementssetoutincontractspecificAppendix .
Materials and Equipment Chippings The chippings shall be crushed rock slag gravel or calcined bauxite complying with BS EN andshallbeCEmarkedandbeofthesizespecifiedincontractspecificAppendix.Inhisproposalsthe Contractor shall state the source and characteristics of chippings to be used and the coating if any .
The coarse aggregateshallhaveaminimumdeclaredPSVandamaximumAAVasspecifiedincontractspecificAppendix .
The shape of the chipping shall comply with category FIasdefinedinBSENclauseContract compliancetestingshallbecarriedoutasrequiredandatthefrequencyspecifiedincontractspecificAppendix .
Thechippingspreadershallhavecontrolledmeteringandbecapableofvariableorfixedwidthapplication to match the binder sprayer .
Before a spreader is used the Contractor shall provide to the Overseeing Organisation a testcertificateshowingtestresultsforrateofspreadandaccuracyofspreadofchippingsinaccordancewiththetest methods in BS EN issued by an appropriate organisation accredited in accordance with subClause .
for those tests or tests carried out under his own quality management scheme demonstrating that the chipping spreader has been tested using chippings similar to those to be used in the Contract not more than six weeks before the commencementoftheworkandthatitcomplieswiththerequirementssetoutincontractspecificAppendix .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Bituminous Bound Materials Amendment May Preparation Any necessary remedial works to the road surface and structure shall be completed either prior to commencement of the works or as part of the contract and agreed as acceptable by the Overseeing Organisation and the Contractor before Surface Dressing commences .
Before binder is applied street furniture shall be masked using selfadhesive masking material .
Oil sand or similar materials shall not be used .
Any packed mud or other deposits on the road surface shall be removed and the road surface shall be swept free of all loose material .
TrafficSafetyandManagementshallbeinaccordancewiththerequirementsofSeriesandthesite specificrequirementsspecifiedincontractspecificAppendixandtheconstraintsdescribedincontractspecific Appendix .
Application Bindershallbeappliedtotheroadsurfaceattheratesspecifiedinthedesign.TheContractorshallmark out areas where an adjusted binder rate is needed because of localised conditions and note such changes in the As BuiltManual.Applicationrestrictionstobeobservedintheeventofadverseweathershallbeasspecifiedbelow togetherwithanyadditionallimitationssetoutincontractspecificAppendix .
i When there is precipitation .
ii When there is free water on the surface .
iii When the air temperature is at or below the values given in Table .
iv For emulsion binders when the relative humidity exceeds .
v When the road surface temperature exceeds C for roads carrying over cvlaneday or C below thattrafficlevel .
TABLE Air Temperature for Spraying Binder Uncoated chippings Coated chippings Minimum C Minimum C Bitumen emulsion All modified binders and fluxed binders Manufacturers recommendation Manufacturers recommendation Transversejointsshallbeformedwithsprayingstartingandfinishingonaprotectivestripnotlessthan metre wide at each end of the lane length being treated .
Transverse joints shall be of binder overlap only and not wider than mm .
There shall be no ridges or bare strips .
Longitudinal joints shall coincide with lane markings .
Longitudinal joints shall be of binder overlap only while ensuring that the proposed rate of spread is achieved across the joint .
For quartering using a part of the spraybar the overlap may be extended to a maximum of mm .
There shall be no ridges or bare strips .
The Contractor shall carry out the tests for rates of spread and accuracy of application of binder and chippingsinaccordancewiththetestmethodsinBSENatthefrequencyspecifiedincontractspecific Appendix and report the results verbally to the Overseeing Organisation within hours of carrying out thetestandconfirminwritingwithindays.TheContractorshallfacilitateduplicatetestingbytheOverseeing Organisation if required .
Rolling shall be performed by rubber coated vibratory steel rollers andor pneumatic tyred rollers as specifiedinClause.Therollersshallhavefullyoperatingsprinklersystemssprayingwaterorotherrelease agent onto the drum or tyres so that if the chippings start to move under the roller exposing binder the sprinklers are available immediately .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Bituminous Bound Materials Amendment May Aftercare Masking shall be removed after the Surface Dressing has been applied and before opening the road to unrestrictedtraffic.TheContractorshallremovesurpluschippingsfromtheroadbysuctionsweepingbeforeitis openedtounrestrictedtraffic .
The Contractor shall monitor the Surface Dressing closely for a minimum period of hours or as specifiedincontractspecificAppendixaftertheroadisopenedtotraffic.TheContractorshallreinstatetraffic safety and management procedures or institute other remedial action where necessary such as dusting if there are signs of distress such as turning of the chippings in order to prevent further damage to the Surface Dressing .
Further operations to remove subsequently loosened chippings shall be carried out over the next hours .
The road and adjacent side roads footways and paved areas shall be kept substantially free of loose chippings for a period of days after completion of the work .
Anydefectsarisingfromdeficienciesinthematerialsworkmanshipandaftercaremanifestduringorat theendofthemaintenanceperiodshallberectifiedbytheContractorathisownexpense .
As Built Manual Not more than days after completion of the work the Contractor shall provide a record of the progress of the work in the form of an As Built Manual incorporating all relevant information including all test results variations to the design and those necessitated by localised site conditions weather information unforeseen problems a list of complaints if any from the general public or road users and any such other information that the Overseeing Organisation may reasonably require to be included .
Bond Coats Tack Coats and Other Bituminous Sprays Bond coats and tack coats used in conjunction with bituminous mixtures other than those covered by ClauseshallbeinaccordancewiththisClauseandtherequirementsspecifiedincontractspecificAppendix and .
Bond Coats Bondcoatsforbituminousmixturesshallbecationicpolymermodifiedbitumenemulsionscomplying withBSENorpolymermodifiedbitumencomplyingwithBSENwithaminimumpeakcohesion valueof.Jcm when tested in accordance with BS EN .
They shall be CE marked and the Contractor shall submit the declaration of performance to the Overseeing Organisation prior to their application .
The declaration of performanceshalldemonstratethatthebondcoatmeetstherequirementsofthespecification .
Tack Coats Tackcoatsforbituminousmixturesshallbeunmodifiedbitumenemulsioncomplyingwith BS EN .
They shall be CE marked and the Contractor shall submit the declaration of performance to the Overseeing Organisation prior to their application .
The declaration of performance shall demonstrate that the tack coatmeetstherequirementsofthespecification .
Bituminous Sprays Bituminous sprays used to facilitate sealing and curing shall consist of either bitumen emulsion complying with BS EN or paving grade bitumen complying with BS EN .
They shall be CE marked and the Contractor shall submit the declaration of performance to the Overseeing Organisation prior to their application .
The declaration of performance shall demonstrate that the spray meets the requirements of the specification .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Bituminous Bound Materials Amendment May Product Information ForbondcoatstackcoatsandbituminousspraystheContractorshallprovidetheinformationspecified incontractspecificAppendixandsupplyacopytotheOverseeingOrganisationpriortotheapplicationofthe product .
Preparation The Contractor shall comply with any limitations on area availability and timing or other constraints fortheworkasspecifiedincontractspecificAppendix.Beforesprayingiscommencedthesurfaceshallbe freeofallloosematerialandstandingwaterandshallcomplywithanyrequirementsspecifiedincontractspecific Appendix.WhenspecifiedincontractspecificAppendixstreetfurnitureironworkanddropkerbsshallbe masked using selfadhesive masking material before application starts and removed on completion of the works .
Application Application shall be by metered mechanical spraying equipment spray tanker or spraying device integral with the paving machine .
The spraying equipment used shall not cause permanent deformation in the surface .
For small or inaccessible areas application may be by hand held sprayer with the agreement of the Overseeing Organisation .
The target rates of spread of bond coats or tack coats below bituminous mixtures shall be in accordance withBSclause .. Forotherapplicationsunmodifiedbitumenemulsionsshallbesprayedattherateof spreadspecifiedinBSorasstatedincontractspecificAppendix .
Accuracy of Application Spray application shall be uniform .
Before spraying begins the Contractor shall provide the Overseeing Organisationwithatestcertificateshowingtheresultsforrateofspreadandaccuracyofspread.Thesetestsshall be carried out in accordance with BS EN by an appropriate organisation accredited in accordance with subClause.forthosetests.Thecertificateshalldemonstratethatthesprayingdevicehasbeentestedusing the product to be used in the contract not more than six weeks before commencement of the work .
The tolerance onthespecifiedrateofspreadshallnotexceedandthecoefficientofvariationofthetransversedistribution shall not exceed .
During the works the Contractor shall repeat the tests for rate of spread and accuracy of applicationatthefrequencyspecifiedincontractspecificAppendix.Theresultsshallbereportedverballytothe Overseeing Organisation within hours of carrying out a test and in writing within days .
Where application is by hand held sprayer the rate of spread shall be measured by calculating the volume applied per square metre and evenness shall be visually assessed .
Joints There shall be no bare strips or areas having less than the minimum permitted rate of spread .
Transverse joints shall have an overlap not wider than mm .
Longitudinal joints shall have an overlap to ensure that the minimum permitted rate of spread is achieved across the joint .
For quartering using part of the spraybar the longitudinal joint overlap width may be extended to a maximum of mm .
Paver integral sprayers shall provide a wet edge to ensure spray overlap under adjacent overlays such that the minimum permitted rate of spread is achieved across the longitudinal joint .
Where the longitudinal spray overlap causes the effective rate of spread to be increasedbymorethanofthespecifiedratethenthewidthofoverlapshallnotbegreaterthanmmand shall be outside the location of the wheel tracks for the lane .
Overlaying Concrete Surfaces The Contractor shall submit evidence of the suitability of the bond or tack coats he intends to use when overlaying concrete surfaces to the Overseeing Organisation prior to the commencement of the work .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Bituminous Bound Materials Amendment May Blinding Material for Bituminous Sprays WhenspecifiedincontractspecificAppendixblindingmaterialshallconsistofhardcleancrushed fineaggregateorslagfineaggregateorsandcontainingnotmorethanbymassretainedona.mmsieve.It shall be distributed over the sprayed area and left .
Blinding used on cementitious materials shall be light in colour to minimise solar gain .
All loose material on a sprayed surface including nonadhered blinding material shall be removed prior to the application of an overlay .
Chipping to Prevent Binder Pickup When chippings are used to prevent tack or bond coat pickup on vehicle tyres they shall consist of hard clean aggregate mm or mm Gc .
The rate of application of aggregate shall be the minimum necessary and shall be distributed by metered mechanical means .
Bond coat shall be visible after aggregate application to ensure bond is still achieved between the pavement layers .
Surface Macrotexture of Bituminous Surface Courses Surface macrotexture of bituminous surface courses other than those covered by Clause shall be inaccordancewiththisClausewhereunlessotherwisespecifiedincontractspecificAppendix.Initialsurface macrotexture for bituminous surface courses shall be measured using the volumetric patch method described in BS EN .
Texture depth shall be measured by individual measurements taken at approximately m spacing alongadiagonallineacrossthelanewidth.UnlessotherwisespecifiedincontractspecificAppendixatleast one set of measurements shall be made for each m section of carriageway lane .
The average texture depth for each set of individual measurements and the average texture depth of each m section or complete carriageway lane where this is less than m shall not be less than the appropriate values shown in Table unlessotherwisespecifiedincontractspecificAppendix .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Bituminous Bound Materials Amendment May TABLE Requirements for Initial Texture Depth for Materials Other Than Those Covered by Clause Road Type Surfacing Type Average per m section mm Average for a set of Measurements mm minimum Minimum Maximum High speed roads Postedspeedlimitmiles hr kmhr Cold applied ultra thin surface course systems to Clause .
. . Chipped hot rolled asphalt and all other surfacings .
. . Lower speed roads Postedspeedlimitmiles hr kmhr Cold applied ultra thin surface course systems to Clause .
. . Chipped hot rolled asphalt and all other surfacings .
. . Roundabouts on high speed roads Postedspeedlimitmiles hr kmhr Chipped hot rolled asphalt and all other surfacings .
. . Roundabouts on lower speed roads Postedspeedlimitmiles hr kmhr Chipped hot rolled asphalt and all other surfacings .
. .
Surface Dressing Design Application and End Product Performance The Contractor shall be responsible for the design of the Surface Dressing choice of materials techniquesandprocessesbasedonsiteandtrafficdataspecifiedincontractspecificAppendixandtheschedule ofconstraintsonsiteavailabilityincontractspecificAppendix .
The Contractor shall i Provide a Design Proposal to achieve the performance requirements in terms of macrotexture and maximumlevelsofdefectsassetoutinthisClauseandincontractspecificAppendixensuringthat theSurfaceDressinghasaninitialstabilitysuchthatitiscapableofwithstandingthenormaltrafficfor thesitewhenfirstopened .
ii State the Estimated Design Life of the Surface Dressing in the Design Proposal .
iii Provide a Quality Plan .
iv Carry out the Surface Dressing in accordance with BS EN and the Design Proposal to the tolerancesspecifiedincontractspecificAppendix .
The Contractor shall guarantee the design materials and workmanship against defects and against failuretomeettheendproductperformancerequirementsforaperiodoftwoyearsorasotherwisespecifiedin contractspecificAppendixfromthedateofcompletionofthework.TheContractorshallrectifyanydefects identifiedduringtheguaranteeperiod .
The System The proposed Surface Dressing shall comply with BS EN and it shall be CE marked .
The Contractor shall provide the declaration of performance and installation information as required in this Clause and contractspecificAppendix .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Bituminous Bound Materials Amendment May Thedeclarationofperformanceshalldemonstratethatthesystemmeetstherequirementsofthespecificationand providesperformancecategoriesforalloftheitemsidentifiedinthisClauseandcontractspecificAppendix .
Materials and Equipment Binder The binder shall be bitumen emulsion complying with BS EN and be CE marked and comply withrequirementsstatedincontractspecificAppendix .
The Contractor shall provide with his Design Proposal the declaration of performance for the binder whichshalldemonstratethatthebindershallmeettherequirementsofthespecificationincludingtheproperties detailedincontractspecificAppendix .
ContractcompliancetestingshallbecarriedoutasdetailedincontractspecificAppendix.Therecoveryofthe binder shall be carried out in accordance with Clause .
The test to determine Vialit Pendulum Cohesion shall becarriedoutinaccordancewithBSEN.TheContractorshallproviderheologicalproductidentification dataformodifiedbindersinaccordancewithBSEN.Thedataprovidedshallbenotmorethanmonthsold and obtained on samples of binder representative of binder manufactured and supplied using the same source and processes as the proposed binder .
Health and Safety information and a safe handling guide from the manufacturer shall be provided together with details of any weather restrictions placed upon use of the binder .
Thebinderapplicationshallbeuniformandformotorwaystrunkroadsandheavilytraffickedand highlystressedroadsshallbeofsufficientwidthtoallowafulllanetobedressedinasinglepass.Beforespraying beginstheContractorshallprovidetheOverseeingOrganisationwithatestcertificateshowingtestresultsfor rate of spread and accuracy of spread of binder carried out in accordance with the test methods in BS EN and issued by an appropriate organisation accredited in accordance with subClause .
for those tests demonstrating that the binder sprayer has been tested using the binder to be used in the Contract not more than six weeks before the commencement of the work and that it complies with the requirements set out in contract specificAppendix .
Materials and Equipment Chippings The chippings shall be crushed rock slag gravel or calcined bauxite complying with the general requirements of BS EN .
The aggregate shall have a minimum declared PSV and a maximum AAV as specifiedincontractspecificAppendix .
Chippingspreadersshallhavecontrolledmeteringandbecapableofvariableorfixedwidthapplication to match the binder sprayer .
Before a spreader is used the Contractor shall provide the Overseeing Organisation withatestcertificateshowingtestresultsforrateofspreadandaccuracyofspreadofchippingscarriedoutin accordance with the test methods in BS EN and issued by an appropriate organisation accredited in accordance with subClause .
for those tests demonstrating that the chipping spreader has been tested using chippings similar to those to be used in the Contract not more than six weeks before the commencement of the workandthatitcomplieswiththerequirementssetoutincontractspecificAppendix .
Preparation Any necessary remedial works to the road surface and structure shall be completed prior to or as part of the contract and agreed as acceptable by the Overseeing Organisation and the Contractor before Surface Dressing commences .
Before binder is applied street furniture shall be masked using selfadhesive masking material .
Oil sand or similar materials shall not be used .
Any packed mud or other deposits on the road surface shall be removed and the road surface shall be swept free of all loose material .
Traffic Safety and Management TrafficSafetyandManagementshallbeinaccordancewiththerequirementsofSeriesandthe sitespecificrequirementsspecifiedincontractAppendixandtheconstraintsdescribedincontractspecific Appendix .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Bituminous Bound Materials Amendment May Application Restrictionstobeobservedintheeventofadverseweathershallbeasspecifiedincontractspecific Appendix.Transversejointsshallbeformedwithsprayingstartingandfinishingonaprotectivestripnotless than metre wide at each end of the lane length being treated .
Transverse joints shall be of binder overlap only and not wider than mm .
There shall be no ridges or bare strips .
Longitudinal joints shall coincide with lane markings .
Longitudinal joints shall be of binder overlap only while ensuring that the proposed rate of spread is achieved across the joint for quartering using a part of the spraybar the overlap may be extended to a maximum of mm .
There shall be no ridges or bare strips .
The Contractor shall carry out the tests for rates of spread and accuracy of application of binder and chippingsinaccordancewiththetestmethodsinBSENatthefrequencyspecifiedincontractspecific Appendix and report the results verbally to the Overseeing Organisation within twentyfour hours of carrying outthetestandconfirminwritingwithinsevendays.TheContractorshallfacilitateduplicatetestingbythe Overseeing Organisation if required .
Aftercare Masking shall be removed after the Surface Dressing has been applied and before opening the road to unrestrictedtraffic.ThetimeperiodbeforeunrestrictedtrafficmayusetheSurfaceDressingshallnotexceedthat specifiedincontractspecificAppendix.TheContractorshallremovesurpluschippingsfromtheroadbysuction sweepingbeforeitisopenedtounrestrictedtraffic .
The Contractor shall monitor the Surface Dressing closely for a minimum period of hours or as specifiedincontractspecificAppendixaftertheroadisopenedtotraffic.TheContractorshallreinstatetraffic safety and management procedures or institute other such remedial action where necessary such as dusting if there are signs of distress such as turning of the chippings in order to prevent further damage to the Surface Dressing .
Further operations to remove subsequently loosened chippings shall be carried out over the next hours .
The road and adjacent side roads footways and paved areas shall be kept substantially free of loose chippings for a period of days after completion of the work .
As Built Manual Not more than days after completion of the work the Contractor shall provide a record of the progress of the work in the form of an As Built Manual incorporating all relevant information including all contract compliance test results variations to the Design Proposal and those necessitated by localised site conditions a recordoftrafficcontrolcarriedoutweatherinformationunforeseenproblemsalistofcomplaintsifanyfromthe general public or road users and any other information that the Overseeing Organisation may reasonably require to be included .
Performance Standards During the Guarantee Period Surface Macrotexture The Contractor is responsible for maintaining the surface macrotexture requirements set out in contract specificAppendixthroughouttheguaranteeperiod .
ThedefinitivetestisthevolumetricpatchtechniquemeasuredinaccordancewithBSENexceptthat individualmeasurementsshallbemadeonthenearsideinsidewheeltrackofthemostheavilytrafficked lane .
The average macrotexture depth of each lane kilometre or the complete carriageway lane where this is less thanmetresshallbeasspecifiedincontractspecificAppendix.Theaverageofeachsetofindividual measurements shall be not less than of the minimum permitted .
TheOverseeingOrganisationwillusetheTRAfficspeedConditionSurveyTRACSorothersuitableequipment to determine the Sensor Measured Texture Depth SMTD for trunk roads including motorways and other highly traffickedorhighlystressedroads.MeasurementsofSMTDshallbemadeinthenearsideandoffsidewheeltracks of all lanes .
For other roads where road closure is less critical the volumetric patch technique or other measuring device such as the Mini Texture Meter may be used .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Bituminous Bound Materials Amendment May The SMTD or results from other devices shall be calibrated for the particular Surface Dressing product design and condition against volumetric patch values to provide the Volumetric Patch Equivalent value .
The macrotexture depths will be measured after months and before months and additionally for two year guarantee period contractsaftermonthsandbeforemonthsunlessotherwisespecifiedincontractspecificAppendix.When required the Contractor shall design the Surface Dressing to limit the maximum macrotexture after four weeks traffickingtothatspecifiedincontractspecificAppendixandthemacrotexturedepthswillbemeasuredforthis purposebetweenthreeweeksandfiveweeksaftercompletionoftheWorks .
Defects The extent of chipping loss or other defects will be monitored using a visual method of assessment .
The performance standard is that any section of the works shall be deemed as having failed if the areas of defects do not complywiththeclassesspecifiedincontractspecificAppendix.IfthereisafailedsectiontheContractorshall agree remedial measures with the Overseeing Organisation and undertake the remedial measures .
In the event that the Contractor and Overseeing Organisation are unable to reach agreement on whether a section has failed by qualitative visual assessment described in BS EN the level of defects shall be determined in accordance with the quantitative test methods in BS EN .
Any section failing to meet the required standard asspecifiedincontractspecificAppendixshallbesubjecttoremedialactionbytheContractorafteragreement of the Overseeing Organisation .
Cold Applied Ultra Thin Surfacing General The Cold Applied Ultra Thin Surfacing shall meet the product performance requirements under the combinationsoftrafficlevelandsiteclassificationspecifiedincontractspecificAppendixanditshallmeetthe following criteria .
i Where the product falls under the scope of a harmonised European standard under the Construction Products Regulation the Cold Applied Ultra Thin Surfacing shall have a declaration of performance and be CE marked in accordance with the relevant British adopted European standard .
ii Where the product does not fall under the scope of a harmonised European standard under the Construction Products Regulation it shall either a have a declaration of performance and be CE marked in accordance with a European Technical Assessment or b becertifiedunderaproductacceptanceschemeasdetailedinsubClauses.and.such asHAPAScertification .
TheContractorshallsupplythecertificationordeclarationofperformancetotheOverseeingOrganisationitshall demonstratethattheColdAppliedUltraThinSurfacingshallmeettherequirementsofthespecification .
TheinstallationofthesurfacingshallbecertifiedunderaproductacceptanceschemeasdetailedinsubClauses .and.suchasHAPAScertification .
Cold Applied Ultra Thin Surfacing systems that are supplied in accordance with subClause paragraph ii b shall be produced and installed by organisations that are registered to the National Highways Sector Scheme for The Supply and Application of Surface Treatments to Road Surfaces as listed in Appendix A .
Documentation Test Certificates and Material Samples The Contractor shall supply a Quality Plan and Installation Method Statement to the Overseeing Organisation .
TestcertificatesstatingthepropertiesoftheaggregatetobeusedshallbesuppliedtotheOverseeing Organisation unless the values are declared in the Declaration of Performance under the CE mark .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Bituminous Bound Materials Amendment May The details of the component materials and their relative proportions andor spread rates for use in the permanentworksshallbenotifiedtotheOverseeingOrganisation.Thecomponentmaterialslistedshallincludeas appropriatecoarseaggregatesfineaggregatesfilleradditivesincludingfibresbindermodifierandbondcoat and shall be subdivided into layers if applied .
WhenrequiredincontractspecificAppendixsamplesofaggregatebondcoatorbindermodified orunmodifiedbitumenfromeitherthespraybarorstoragetankormixedbituminousmaterialsfromthepavement surface or other suitable sampling point shall be supplied to the Overseeing Organisation .
Aggregates Coarse aggregate shall be crushed rock or steel slag complying with Clause when tested in accordance with the procedures of BS EN .
The coarse aggregate shall additionally have the following properties .
i PolishedStoneValuePSVasspecifiedincontractspecificAppendixBSEN ii AggregateAbrasionValueAAVasspecifiedincontractspecificAppendixBSEN iii LosAngelesCoefficientLAnotgreaterthanLA .
BS EN iv Flakiness Index FI not more than FI .
BS EN .
Performance Levels ColdAppliedUltraThinSurfacingispermittedonSiteCategoriesBCDEFandGasdefinedin Table .
TABLE Site Stress Level Classification Site Category Site Definition Stress Level A Motorway main line B Dual carriageway all purpose nonevent sections C Single carriageway nonevent sections D Dual carriageway all purpose minor junctions E Single carriageway minor junctions F Approaches to and across major junctions all limbs G Gradient longer than m Dual downhill single uphill and downhill H Bend not subject to mph or lower speed limit radius m H Bend not subject to mph or lower speed limit radius m L Roundabout J Approach to roundabout K Approach to traffic signals pedestrian crossing railway level crossing and similar Theroadtyrenoiselevelofthecoldappliedultrathinsurfaceshallbeasspecifiedincontractspecific AppendixasdefinedinTable .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Bituminous Bound Materials Amendment May TABLE RoadTyre Noise Levels Level Road Surface Influence RSI .
dBA NR No requirement Layer Thickness The minimum andor maximum compacted thickness of the Cold Applied Ultra Thin Surfacing system shallbeasspecifiedincontractspecificAppendix.Theinstalledlayerthicknessmustnotbelessthanthe permittedminimumthicknessstatedintheHAPAScertificateorequivalentcertificationforaparticularsystem .
Surface Preparation WhenrequiredincontractspecificAppendixasiteinspectionshallbeundertakenpriortothemain works jointly by representatives of the Overseeing Organisation and the Contractor to agree suitable preparation works e.g .
patching .
Surface preparation shall be in accordance with BS clause .
and .
and the Installation Method Statement provided in accordance with subClause .
Transportation Transportation of the Cold Applied Ultra Thin Surfacing andor its components shall be in accordance with the Installation Method Statement provided in accordance with subClause .
Sweeping and early life monitoring of Cold Applied Ultra Thin Surfacings Sweeping of newly laid Cold Applied Ultra Thin Surfacing shall be in accordance with the HAPAS or equivalentcertificationandtheInstallationMethodStatement .
Notwithstanding the above suction sweeping shall be undertaken immediately before the newly laid ColdAppliedUltraThinSurfacingisopenedtotraffic .
The installation shall be monitored closely for a minimum period of hours after the road is opened to traffic.Trafficsafetyandmanagementproceduresshallbereinstatedorothersuchremedialactionsinstigatedif there are signs of distress in the surfacing such as turning of the chippings in order to prevent further damage to the installation .
WheredetailedincontractspecificAppendixamandatoryspeedlimitshallbeimplementedduring installation and for a period of days after installation .
Further operations to remove subsequently loosened chippings shall be carried out over the next hours .
The road and adjacent side roads footways and paved areas shall be kept substantially free of loose chippings for a period of days after completion of the surfacing work .
Surface Macrotexture Untrafficked The macrotexture depth of the cold applied ultra thin surfacing after compaction has been completed and beforeopeningtotrafficshallbeinaccordancewithClause .
Surface Macrotexture Performance Guarantee Foraperiodoftwoyearsfromthedateofopeningtotraffictheaveragemacrotexturemeasuredusing the volumetric patch technique described in BS EN will be maintained above an average per m of .mmunlessotherwisespecifiedincontractspecificAppendix .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Bituminous Bound Materials Amendment May Where measurement is necessary to demonstrate compliance during the guarantee period the macrotextureshallbemeasuredinaccordancewithBSENinthemostheavilytraffickedlaneatm intervals .
The average value of a set of individual measurements taken along the centre of the most heavily worn wheeltrackshallnotbelessthantheappropriatevaluestatedincontractspecificAppendix .
Surfacing Integrity Performance Guarantee UnlessotherwisestatedincontractspecificAppendixaguaranteeshallbeprovidedfortheintegrity ofthesurfacingandtheworkmanshipforaperiodoffiveyearsfromthedateofopeningtotraffic .
Thefiveyearguaranteeshallincludefordefectssuchasfrettingravellingstrippingandlossof chippings .
Replacement of the surfacing or other remedial measures agreed with the Overseeing Organisation shall beexecutedifthesurfacingisinaSuspectPoororBadconditionasdefinedinAppendixAofTRLReport TRL Durability of thin surfacing systems Part Final report after nine years monitoring TRL report .
High Friction Surfaces HighfrictionsurfacingsystemsshallhavecurrentHAPAScertificateorequivalentproductacceptance schemecertificationasdescribedinsubClauses.and .. High friction surfacing shall be installed in accordance with the requirements of the HAPAS or equivalentproductacceptanceschemecertification .
ThehighfrictionsurfacingsystemHAPASorequivalentproductacceptanceschemecertificationType ClassificationrequiredforeachlocationshallbeasspecifiedincontractspecificAppendix .
Aggregate Aggregate used in high friction surfacing systems shall have the minimum declared PSV category specifiedincontractspecificAppendixinaccordancewithBSENclauseTheresistance toabrasionofcoarseaggregateshallhavethemaximumAAVspecifiedincontractspecificAppendixin accordance with BS EN clause The Contractor shall provide before work commences the declaration of performance for the aggregate to the Overseeing Organisation .
The declaration of performance shall demonstratethattheaggregateshallmeettherequirementsofthespecification .
Installation and Quality Control Procedures The installation and quality control procedures shall be in accordance with the HAPAS or equivalent productacceptanceschemecertificationforeachsystemandthecurrentmethodstatement.Theresultsofallquality control checks carried out on site by the Contractor and quality management information compiled in accordance withtherequirementsoftheCertificateincludingresultsfromsurveillancevisitsshallbemadeavailabletothe Overseeing Organisation on request .
System Coverage For each location where high friction surfacing is applied the total quantities of each system component used the measured area of the surface treated and the calculated coverage rate in kgm shall be reported to the Overseeing Organisation within three days of completion at that location .
For systems in which aggregate is broadcastoverafilmofbinderappliedtothesurfacethecalculatedcoveragerateshallbethatofthebinderfilm and shall not include the mass of the aggregate .
Guarantee The Contractor shall guarantee the high friction surfacing materials and workmanship for a period of twoyearsfromthedateofopeningthesurfacingtotraffic.Thisguaranteeshallcoverfailuretomeettheminimum requirementssetoutinTableoftheHAPASdocumentGuidelineDocumentfortheAssessmentandCertification of High Friction Surfaces for Highways .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Bituminous Bound Materials Amendment May Testing of Bituminous Mixtures The contract compliance sampling and testing of bituminous mixtures shall comply with BS EN exceptwhereotherwisespecifiedinthisSeries .
AdditionaltestingshallbecarriedoutasspecifiedincontractspecificAppendicesand .
In Situ Recycling The Repave Process Where milling is required it shall be carried out in accordance with Clause and as described in contractspecificAppendix .
Heating and Scarifying Surfaces to be treated shall be heated by plant with heating surfaces insulated and fully enclosed .
The heatedwidthofsurfacingshallexceedthescarifiedwidthbyatleastmmoneachsideexceptagainsttheedge of the carriageway or kerb face .
When new surfacing material is spilt onto the road surface it shall be removed beforetheexistingsurfaceisheatedandscarified.Areasofunscarifiedmaterialshallnotexceedmmxmm .
Thedepthofscarificationshallbesuchthatthebottomofthescarifiedlayerisparalleltoandbelowthe finishedroadsurfacelevelbythethicknessofsurfacecoursematerialspecifiedincontractspecificAppendix .
Atoleranceofmmispermissible .
Where ironwork and other obstructions occur these shall be suitably protected or removed and the void covered .
Surface dressings and large areas of road markings shall be removed by milling planing scarifying or similar .
TheheatedsurfaceshallbeevenlyscarifiedtocomplywiththerequirementsofsubClauseofthis Clause.Whenironworkisleftinplaceorraisedtheadjacentareasshallbescarifiedbyothermeanswiththe material either left in place or removed prior to passage of the machine .
If ironwork needs to be relevelled on completion of work the new surface course material shall be used to make good the road surface for a maximum width of mm around the ironwork .
During the reheating process the surface temperature of the road shall not exceed C for more than minutes .
New Surfacing NewsurfacecourseshallconformtoClausesorasdescribedincontractspecific Appendix .
Thenewsurfacingmaterialshallbelaidonandcompactedwiththereprofiledsurfacingwhichshall be at a temperature within the range of C to C. Not Used Dense Base and Binder Course Asphalt Concrete Design Mixtures Designed dense base and binder course asphalt concrete formerly macadams including HDM and HMB shall be asphalt concrete conforming to BS EN the example of BSI PD Annex B for the selectedmixtureandrequirementsspecifiedincontractspecificAppendix.Themixturedesignationshallbe one of the following i AC HDM base des .
ii AC dense base des .
iii AC HMB base des .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Bituminous Bound Materials Amendment May iv AC HDM bin des .
v AC HDM bin des .
vi AC dense bin des .
vii AC dense bin des .
viii AC HMB bin des .
ix AC HMB bin des .
The volumetric properties of mixtures shall follow the example in BSI PD clause B .. for designed base mixtures and BSI PD clause B .. for designed binder course mixtures .
WhenspecifiedincontractspecificAppendixthevolumetricpropertiesofthemixtureshallbe monitored by determining the void content of cores compacted to refusal .
Core pairs and samples of loose mix shall be taken every lane metres and tested in accordance with BS clauses C .. C .. C. C .. and C If the mean air void content at refusal of any three consecutive pairs of cores falls below .
the mixture target composition shall be reviewed and the type test revalidated in accordance with BS Annex C. Deformation Resistance The resistance to permanent deformation of the mixture shall be in accordance with the appropriate class selectedfromTableD.ofPDasspecifiedincontractspecificAppendix .
WhenspecifiedincontractspecificAppendixtheresistancetopermanentdeformationofmaterial laid in the permanent works shall be monitored by testing in accordance with clauses D . . and .
of BSAnnexD.Sixcoresshallbetakenfromthefirstkilometrelengthofmaterialfromeachmixingplant and thereafter one further core from each subsequent lane kilometre .
Results shall be assessed on successive rolling meansofsetsofsixconsecutiveresultsandshallbedeemedtoconformifthemeanisnogreaterthanthespecified valueandindividualvaluesnotmorethangreaterthanthespecifiedvalue .
Stiffness Stiffness of the mixture shall be assessed in accordance with BS Annex E. Mixtures with grade binder shall conform to category Smin asdefinedinBSENclause Mixtures with grade binder shall conform to category Smin asdefinedinBSENclause Compaction Control for the Permanent Works Compaction shall be controlled and monitored in accordance with the general requirements of BS .. andthespecificrequirementsofthisClause .
Compaction shall be continuously assessed using an indirect density gauge in accordance with BS .. with readings taken at m intervals in alternate wheeltracks .
Gauge readings shall also be takenateachcorelocationspecifiedinsubClausesand.Eachgaugeshallbeindividuallycalibratedoneach mixture from each mixing plant and the calibrations shall be continually checked and updated based on correlations between gauge readings and core densities at the same locations .
For each location the in situ void content shall be determined in accordance with BS EN using the bulk density from the gauge reading and a maximum density taken from the mixture type testing data and updated with values from testing in accordance with subClause .
The average in situ void content calculated from any six consecutive indirect gauge readings shall not exceed .
In the event of a failure to meet the requirements in subClause cores shall be taken at each location and void contents determined as described in subClause and the evaluation of the extent of any nonconformity shall be based on these .
If it is necessary to remove and replace any material to restore conformity this shall be in lengths not less than m unless otherwise agreed by the Overseeing Organisation .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Bituminous Bound Materials Amendment May For the material from each mixing plant a pair of cores shall be taken from every linear metres laid and the void content shall be determined in accordance with BS clause The average in situ air voids for each core pair shall not exceed .
For the material from each mixing plant a pair of cores shall be taken every linear metres laid centredmmfromthefinaljointpositionatanyunsupportededgeandtheairvoidshallbedeterminedin accordance with BS clause The average in situ void content for each of these pairs shall not exceed .
In the event of nonconformity with subClauses or then density readings with indirect gauges and if necessary further cores shall be taken to establish the extent .
If it is necessary to remove and replace any material to restore conformity this shall be in lengths not less than m unless otherwise agreed by the Overseeing Organisation .
Each core extracted shall be examined for evidence of excessive voids below the depth to which the indirect density gauge penetrates .
If excessive voids are observed further cores shall be taken to determine its extent .
Twocopiesofthefinalindirectdensitytestresultsobtainedandtheircorrelationwithinsituairvoid contents shall be passed to the Overseeing Organisation within hours .
EME Base and Binder Course Asphalt Concrete EME base and binder course asphalt concrete shall conform to BS EN the example in BSIPDAnnexBfortheselectedmixturetherequirementsofthisClauseandthosespecifiedincontract specificAppendix.Themixturedesignationshallbeoneofthefollowing i AC EME binbase des .
ii AC EME binbase des .
iii AC EME binbase des .
iv AC EME binbase des .
v AC EME binbase des .
vi AC EME binbase des .
The binder shall be Hard Paving Grade Bitumen in accordance with BS EN and the requirements specifiedinTablesand .
EME mixtures otherwise conforming to BS EN and the example in BSI PD Annex B butusingalternativepavinggradebitumensorpolymermodifiedpavinggradebitumensshallnotbeusedwithout prior approval by the Overseeing Organisation .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Bituminous Bound Materials Amendment May TABLE Initial Binder Characteristics as Supplied Characteristic Test Method Unit Hard Grade Binders for EME FPC pen pen Test frequency Penetration at C EN .mm D Softening Point EN C Target value max Target value max W Penetration Index max EN Annex A .
Target Value .
max .
Target Value .
max W Fraass breaking point max EN C Target mean max Range to Target mean max Range to Q Viscosity at C min EN mmS A Flash point minimum EN C A Solubility minimum EN mm . . A Notes Target max value based on a rolling mean of the last consecutive results in FPC .
Target max value based on a rolling mean of the last consecutive results in FPC .
All tests to be carried out on subsamples of a single bulk sample of binder .
Minimum test frequency D Daily W Weekly Q Quarterly A Annually .
Indicated frequencies apply only if product is in regular supply .
TABLE Binder Characteristics After Shortterm Ageing to EN RTFOT Characteristic Test Method Unit Hard Grade Binders for EME FPC pen pen Test frequency Change of mass max . . A Retained Pen C EN Q Increase in Softening Point maximum EN C A Notes Target minimum value based on a rolling mean of the last consecutive results in FPC .
All tests to be carried out on subsamples of a single bulk sample of binder .
Minimum test frequency A Annually Q Quarterly .
Indicated frequencies apply only if product is in regular supply .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Bituminous Bound Materials Amendment May TABLE Binder Characteristics to be Reported Characteristic Test Method Unit Binder for EME FPC frequency AS STA LTA Brookfield Viscosity T cP EN C TBR A T cP C TBR A T cP C TBR A G and Phase Angle BS EN Graphical Output Pa degrees TBR A A A VET temperature GG at .
Hz C TBR A A A G at the VET temperature Pa TBR A A A G and G Mastercurves C to C Graphical Output TBR A A A GandPhaseAngleatCHz andCHz Pa degrees TBR A A A T S MPa by BBR BS EN C TBR A A A T m. by BBR C TBR A A A Pendulum Cohesion min BS EN Jcm TBR A A A Fraass breaking point min EN C TBR A Notes AS As Supplied STA After EN RTFOT LTA After PAV An ageing profile determined in accordance with clause is an acceptable alternative to STA and PAV .
All tests to be carried out on subsamples of a single bulk sample of binder .
Minimum test frequency A Annually .
Indicated frequencies apply only if product is in regular supply .
The properties of mixtures shall follow the example in BSI PD Annex B clause .. to clause .. inclusive .
A separate assessment shall be made of the conformity of soluble binder content analysis results of EME mixtures using the principles of the mean of four results approach used in BS EN .
Binder content shall be assessed on a continuous basis by taking the mean value of the previous four analysis results .
This will give a rolling mean binder content .
In addition to the analysis results meeting all of the standard conformity requirementsofENthisrollingmeanbindercontentshallcomplywiththetargetcomposition .. Compaction EME shall be delivered to site at a temperature which enables laying with a minimum paverout temperature of C. EME mixtures shall be compacted with either i steel rollers exceeding tonnes provided compaction is speedily undertaken .
Any vibration shall be switched off when traversing compacted material to avoid microcracking the cooling surface ii pneumatictyredrollersPTRsweightedataminimumof.tonneperwheelfinishingwithwidesteel nonvibrating rollers and point rollers .
Compaction shall be substantially completed before the temperature falls below C. Limited rolling withoutvibrationmaybecarriedoutbelowthistemperaturetoimprovethefinish .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Bituminous Bound Materials Amendment May Compaction Control for the Permanent Works Compaction shall be controlled and monitored in accordance with the general requirements of BS .. andthespecificrequirementsofthisClause .
Compaction shall be continuously assessed using an indirect density gauge in accordance with BS .. with readings taken at m intervals in alternate wheeltracks .
Gauge readings shall also be takenateachcorelocationspecifiedinsubClausesand.Eachgaugeshallbeindividuallycalibratedoneach mixture from each mixing plant and the calibrations shall be continually checked and updated based on correlations between gauge readings and core densities at the same locations .
For each location determine the in situ void content in accordance with BS EN using the bulk density from the gauge reading and a maximum density taken from the mixture type testing data and updated with values from testing in accordance with subClauses and .
The average in situ void content calculated from any six consecutive indirect gauge readings shall not exceed .
In the event of a failure to meet the requirements in subClause cores shall be taken and void contents determined in accordance with BS clause and the evaluation of the extent of any non conformity shall be based on these .
If it is necessary to remove and replace any material to restore conformity this shall be in lengths not less than m unless otherwise agreed by the Overseeing Organisation .
For the material from each mixing plant a pair of cores shall be taken from the wheeltracks every metres laid and the void content shall be determined in accordance with BS clause The average in situ air voids for each core pair shall not exceed .
For the material from each mixing plant a pair of cores shall be taken every metres laid centred mmfromthefinaljointpositionatanyunsupportededgeandtheairvoidshallbedeterminedinaccordance with BS clause The average in situ void content for each of these pairs shall not exceed In the event of nonconformity with subClauses or then density readings with indirect gauges and if necessary further cores shall be taken to establish the extent .
If it is necessary to remove and replace any material to restore conformity this shall be in lengths not less than m unless otherwise agreed by the Overseeing Organisation .
Each core extracted shall be examined for evidence of excessive voids below the depth to which the indirect density gauge penetrates .
If excessive voids are observed further cores shall be taken to determine its extent .
Twocopiesofthefinalindirectdensitytestresultsobtainedandtheircorrelationwithinsituairvoid contents shall be passed to the Overseeing Organisation within hours of the material being laid .
to Not Used Stone Mastic Asphalt SMA Binder Course and Regulating Course General Stone Mastic Asphalt binder course and regulating course shall conform to BS EN the example fromBSIPDAnnexDfortheselectedmixturetherequirementsofthisClauseandthosespecifiedincontract specificAppendix.Themixturedesignationshallbeoneofthefollowing i SMA bin .
ii SMA bin .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Bituminous Bound Materials Amendment May iii SMA bin .
iv SMA bin PMB .
v SMA bin .
vi SMA bin .
vii SMA bin .
viii SMA bin PMB .
ix SMA bin .
x SMA bin .
xi SMA bin .
xii SMA bin PMB .
xiii SMA bin .
xiv SMA bin .
xv SMA bin .
xvi SMA bin PMB .
Binder Modification PolymermodifiedbitumensshallcomplywithBSEN.TheContractorshallprovidethe declarationofperformanceforthepolymermodifiedbitumentotheOverseeingOrganisation.Thedeclaration ofperformanceshalldemonstratethatthebindermeetstherequirementsofthespecificationincludingthe requirementsstatedincontractspecificAppendix .
For premixed binders not covered by BS EN or BS EN the Contractor shall provide data sheetsgivingdetailsofthepropertiesofthemodifiedbindersoradditivesproposedincludingthosespecifiedin contractspecificAppendix.Theseshallincluderheologicaldataforpreblendedpolymermodifiedbindersin accordance with BS EN and cohesion in accordance with BS EN .
Deformation Resistance The resistance to permanent deformation of the mixture shall be in accordance with the appropriate class selectedfromTableD.ofBSIPDasspecifiedincontractspecificAppendix .
WhenspecifiedincontractspecificAppendixtheresistancetopermanentdeformationofmaterial laid in the permanent works shall be monitored by testing in accordance with BS clause G . . and .. Sixcoresshallbetakenfromthefirstkilometrelengthofmaterialfromeachmixingplantandthereafteronefurther core from each subsequent lane kilometre .
Results shall be assessed on successive rolling means of sets of six consecutiveresultsandshallbedeemedtoconformifthemeanisnogreaterthanthespecifiedvalueandindividual valuesnotmorethangreaterthanthespecifiedvalue .
Compaction control for Permanent Works Compaction shall be controlled by monitoring density and air void content in accordance with BS clause .. and the requirements of this Clause .
Density shall be continuously assessed using an indirect density gauge in accordance with BS clause .. with readings taken at m intervals in the centre of the mat .
Gauge readings shall also be taken at eachcorelocationspecifiedinBSclauseandatthelocationofcoresrequiredbysubClause .
Each gauge shall be individually calibrated on each mixture from each mixing plant and the calibrations shall be continually checked and updated based on correlations between gauge readings and core densities at the same locations .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Bituminous Bound Materials Amendment May For each location the in situ void content shall be determined in accordance with EN using the bulk density from the indirect gauge reading and a maximum density taken from the mixture type testing data and updated with values from testing in accordance with subClause .
The average in situ void content calculated from any six consecutive indirect gauge readings shall not exceed or for regulating course less than mm in thickness shall not exceed .
In the event of a failure to meet the requirements in subClause cores shall be taken at each location and void contents determined .
Testing of cores shall be carried out in accordance with BS section .. and assessment of conformity shall be in accordance with BS clause In the event of nonconformity with the requirements of subClause then density readings with indirect gauges and if necessary further cores shall be taken to establish the extent of the nonconformity .
If it is necessary to remove and replace any material to restore conformity this shall be in lengths not less than m unless otherwise agreed by the Overseeing Organisation .
If the density readings taken with the indirect density gauge indicate that the air voids content may be less than one mm diameter core shall be cut at that chainage and the resistance to permanent deformation checked in accordance with subClause .
Bond Coat Wherethethicknessofthestonemasticasphaltislessthanmmpolymermodifiedbondcoatsshall be used .
Porous Asphalt PorousasphaltshallconformtoBSENasspecifiedincontractspecificAppendix .
to Not Used Thin Surface Course Systems General Thin surface course systems shall be provided and installed in accordance with the requirements stated inthisClauseandthosegivenincontractspecificAppendix .
ThinsurfacecoursesystemsspecifiedunderthisClauseshallbebetweenmmandmmthick .
Overall Performance Requirements The Contractor shall guarantee the installed thin surface course for a period of years from the date of openingtotraffic.Fortheperiodoftheguaranteethethinsurfacecourseshallmeettheperformancerequirements statedinthisClauseandcontractspecificAppendix.Theguaranteeshallexcludedefectsarisingfrom accidental damage or damage caused by settlement subsidence or failure of the underlying carriageway on which the surfacing material has been laid .
Replacement of the surfacing or other remedial measures agreed with the OverseeingOrganisationshallbeexecutedifthesurfacingisinaSuspectPoororBadconditionasdefined in Appendix A of TRL Report TRL Durability of thin surfacing systems Part Final report after nine years monitoring TRL report .
The Contractor shall demonstrate that the as installed thin surface course system can meet the requirementsofthespecification.Thisshallbedemonstratedbythesystemmeetingthestatedmaterial requirements and by having undergone a System Installation Performance Trial SIPT to cover the aspects of the installation not covered by the materials declaration of performance .
The SIPT shall comply with the requirements of subClauses to of this Clause .
An acceptable approach for the SIPT would be to use a scheme in Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Bituminous Bound Materials Amendment May accordance with subClause ..
The Contractor shall submit details of the SIPT for the systems to be used in the contract as required in subClause to the Overseeing Organisation for acceptance .
Material Requirements The thin surface course mixture shall comply with BS EN BS EN or BS EN .
It shall be CE marked and the Contractor shall submit the declaration of performance for the material to the Overseeing Organisation .
The declaration of performance shall demonstrate that the material meets the requirementsofthespecification .
The coarse aggregate shall be crushed rock or steel slag complying with Clause and BS EN .
The Contractor shall submit the declaration of performance for the aggregate to the Overseeing Organisation .
The declaration of performance shall demonstrate that the aggregate meets the requirements of the specification.TheresistancetopolishingandabrasionPSVandAAVshallbeasspecifiedincontractspecific Appendix .
TheaggregateresistancetofragmentationandflakinessIndexshallbeasfollows i ResistancetofragmentationLosAngelesCoefficientLAnotgreaterthanLA ii Flakiness Index FI not greater than FI .
ThemaximumaggregatesizeshallbeasgiveninTable TABLE Maximum Aggregate Size Site Definition MaximumAggregateSize Roundabouts mm Bends m radius mm Junctionswhereturningradiusmovements m mm All other sites mm TheminimumtargetdesignbindercontentsshallbeinaccordancewithTableandcontractspecific Appendix .
TABLE Minimum design binder content Minimum target design binder content Bmin Maximum aggregate size D Mixture types EN Parts and AC BBTM with PMB to BS EN Mixture types EN Part SMA paving grade bitumen to BS EN and fibresSMA .
. . . . Not used TheresistancetopermanentdeformationshallbeasspecifiedincontractspecificAppendix.The resistance to permanent deformation of mixtures conforming to BS EN Parts and shall be in accordance with the appropriate class selected from Table B. or D. respectively of PD .
ThewatersensitivityshallbeasspecifiedincontractspecificAppendix.Thewatersensitivityof mixtures conforming with BS EN Parts and shall conform to at least category ITSRmin .
WhererequiredincontractspecificAppendixthedesignvoidcontentshallbeVmin to Vmax Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Bituminous Bound Materials Amendment May Contractcompliancetestingofthemixtureshallbecarriedoutasrequiredincontractspecific AppendixandsamplessuppliedasdetailedincontractspecificAppendix .
Installation Requirements General The Contractor shall provide an Installation Method Statement to the Overseeing Organisation .
It shall include the SIPT method statement as described in subClause of this Clause all installation instructions relevanttothesystembeinguseddetailsasspecifiedinthisClauseanddetailstomeettherequirementsofClause .
Thedesignthicknessofthethinsurfacecoursesystemshallbeasspecifiedinthecontractspecific Appendix within the minimum and maximum design thickness permitted in Table .
The installed layer thickness must not be less than the permitted minimum thickness nor greater than the permitted maximum thickness stated in the Installation Method Statement .
TABLE Design Target Layer Thickness .
Nominal Aggregate size mm Design target thickness mm Minimum Maximum WhererequiredintheInstallationMethodStatementorincontractspecificAppendixtoachieve finalpavementlevelsandorthicknessestheexistingsubstratesurfaceshallbestrengthenedorregulatedin accordance with Clause .
Where the existing substrate surface is regulated in accordance with Clause evidence that the deformationresistanceoftheregulatingmaterialwillmeetthespecificationshallbesubmittedbytheContractorto the Overseeing Organisation .
Where the combined thickness of the regulating material and the thin surface course is more than mm evidence of the deformation resistance of the combined layers shall be provided .
Surface preparation including the removal of road markings cleaning and drying resetting of ironwork and road studs shall be in accordance with BS and the Installation Method Statement .
Where required in the Installation Method Statement a bond coat or tack coat shall be applied .
It shall be in accordance with the Installation Method Statement .
Unless otherwise stated in the Installation Method Statement is shall also comply with Clause and BS .
A calibrated mechanised method of application shall be used unless otherwise agreed with the Overseeing Organisation .
Transportation of the thin surface course material shall be in accordance with the System Installation Method Statement and Clause .
Installation Requirements Surface Macrotexture Untrafficked The surface macrotexture depth of the thin surface course system shall be measured in accordance withBSEN.UnlessotherwisestatedincontractspecificAppendixthemacrotextureoftheinstalled surfacing shall comply with the relevant section of Table or Table .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Bituminous Bound Materials Amendment May TABLE Requirements for Initial Texture Depth for Trunk Roads including Motorways for Thin Surface Course Systems Road Type Surfacing Type Average per m section mm Average for a set of Measurements mm minimum Minimum Maximum High speed roads Upper Daggregatesizeofmm .
. . Upper Daggregatesizeofmm .
. . Upper Daggregatesizeofmm .
. . Lower speed roads Upper Daggregatesizeofmmor less .
. . Roundabouts on high speed roads Upper Daggregatesizeofmm .
. . Roundabouts on lower speed roads Upper Daggregatesizeofmm .
. . Upper Daggregatesizeofmm .
. . HighSpeedRoadsarethosewithapostedspeedlimitmileshkmh LowerSpeedRoadsarethosewithapostedspeedlimitmileshkmh TABLE Requirements for Initial Texture Depth for Roads other than Trunk Roads and Motorways for Thin Surface Course Systems Road Classification Posted traffic speed Average per m section mm Average for a set of Measurements mm minimum Minimum initial mm Maximum Initial mm A mph .
. . A All other traffic speeds .
. . BCU All traffic speeds .
. .
Installation Requirements Macrotexture Trafficked Foraperiodoftwoyearsfromthedateofopeningtotraffictheaveragemacrotexturemeasuredusing the volumetric patch technique in accordance with BS EN will be maintained above the levels given in contractspecificAppendixandTable.Themeasurementsshallbeinthemostheavilytraffickedlaneat m intervals along the centre of the most heavily worn wheeltrack .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Bituminous Bound Materials Amendment May TABLE Retained Surface Macrotexture Requirements Surfacing Type Average texture depth per m section mm Systems with an upper Daggregatesizeofmmlaidonmotorway trunk and high speed A roads .
Systems with an upper Daggregatesizeofmmlaidonmotorway trunk and high speed A roads .
Systems with an upper Daggregatesizeofmmlaidonmotorway trunk and high speed A roads .
SystemswithallaggregatesizeslaidonnontrunklowspeedAandall B C and U classification roads .
or the complete carriageway lane where this is less than m. verificationofhighspeedfrictionperformancerequired Installation Requirements Torque Bond ThebondstrengthbetweenathinsurfacingsystemanditssubstrateshallbekPameasuredin accordance with Clause .
Installation Requirements Noise The thin surface course system shall have the roadtyre noise characteristics as required in contract specificAppendix .
System Installation Performance Trial SIPT Requirements The thin surface course used in the SIPT shall meet the performance requirements of the thin surface course to be supplied under the contract .
This shall be demonstrated by the assessments and testing undertaken for the SIPT .
TheinstalledthinsurfacecoursesystemshallbeassessedtestedandcertifiedbyaCertificationBody usingoneormoretrialareasofsurfacing.TheCertificationBodyshallbeaccreditedtoBSENbyUKASor equivalentEuropeanAccreditationorganisationwhichispartytoamultilateralagreementMLAwithUKASor any equivalent International Accreditation Forum MLA signatory with a scope that includes relevant standards or schemes .
The area of surfacing for the SIPT shall be a minimum of metres in length and .
metres in width .
ASIPTmethodstatementshallbeprepared.TheSIPTshalldemonstrateandenableverificationof the installation procedures given in the SIPT method statement .
This will include the correct application rates of the bond or tack coat application method of bond coat paving speed of mixed material joint formation layingtemperaturesmethodsofverificationtobeusedonsitemaintenanceandrepairtechniquesaftercareand frequencyoftestingandacceptablevariationswithinthespecifiedlimits .
A SIPT inspection protocol shall be prepared .
It shall demonstrate qualitatively and quantitatively the applicability of the SIPT for the system in order to satisfy the performance requirements .
The SIPT method statement SIPT inspection protocols all inspection and testing results and the SIPT certificationshallbesubmittedtotheOverseeingOrganisationalongwiththeInstallationMethodStatement .
TheSIPTshallincludethefollowingtobeundertakenbytheCertificationBody i verificationthatthesysteminstallationtrialhasbeenundertakeninaccordancewiththeSIPTmethod statement and the stated protocols ii assessment of the visual condition of the completed system at the times stated in subClause iii assessment of the data from the site performance tests detailed in subClause .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Bituminous Bound Materials Amendment May The assessments shall be undertaken by an assessment team that includes a lead assessor with experience in pavement inspections and a minimum of two additional suitably experienced persons to comprise an inspection panel for the visual condition of the SIPT installation and interim inspections .
The installed performance characteristics of the trail area shall meet the criteria stated in Table at the times and intervals stated .
TABLE Installed Performance characteristics Characteristic Performance Requirements Times at which the performance characteristic shall be determined or measured Visual inspection As defined in subClause Good or Excellent At opening to traffic .
Good or Excellent months after opening to traffic .
Good or Excellent months after opening to traffic Surface macrotexture depth BS EN Contract specific Appendix or Table or At opening to traffic .
Appendix and Table months after opening to traffic .
Appendix and Table months after opening to traffic Torque Bond kPa Between and days after installation .
RoadTyre Noise level Table Between and months after opening to traffic .
Void Content Voluntary assessment and declaration SubClause Between and months after opening to traffic .
Defectsidentifiedduringthevisualinspectionsshallberecorded.Thedefectstoberecordedare those described in TRL .
The assessment of defects shall be summarised as a Performance Band as listed in Table .
TABLE Site Installation Performance Trial visual inspection requirement Performance Band Description Excellent No discernible fault Good No significant fault Moderate Some defects but insufficient for serious problem Acceptable Several defects but would usually be just acceptable Suspect Seriously defective but still serviceable in the short term Poor Requires remedial treatment Bad Requires immediate remedial treatment The torque bond strength between the thin surface course and its substrate shall be established in accordance with Clause .
This shall be established between and days after the SIPT is installed .
The void content of the proposed mixture when evaluated for the SIPT shall be Vmin to Vmax from the average of cores .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Bituminous Bound Materials Amendment May Noise Wherenoisecharacteristicsforthethinsurfacecoursesystemsarespecifiedincontractspecific Appendix the SIPT shall include the assessment and measurement of noise characteristics as described in sub Clauses to of this Clause .
The declared level shall be to or NR as given in Table .
TABLE RoadTyre Noise Levels Level Equivalence to Traditional Surfacing Materials Road Surface Influence RSI Very quiet surfacing material .
dBA Quieter than HRA surfacing materials .
dBA Equivalent to HRA surfacing materials .
dBA Noisier than HRA Surfacing Materials .
dBA NR No requirement No requirement Theinfluenceoftheroadsurfaceontrafficnoiseusingthestatisticalpassbymethodshallbeestablished attheSIPTsitebetweenandmonthsafteropeningtotrafficinaccordancewithISO Sections and .
Acoustic measurements shall only be carried out when the road surface is dry and the meteorological conditionspecifiedinISOSectionaremet .
The air and surface temperatures shall be monitored in accordance with the procedure described in ISO clause ..
The road surface temperature T surface must be within C to C during acoustic measurements .
The air temperature T air must be within C to C. ThetestlocationroadspeedcategoryshallbeclassifiedaseitherMediumorHighasdefinedin ISO clause .. Not less than two test locations shall be selected for each road speed category which may be at the same site provided the locations are at least m apart or on different carriageways .
Eachtestlocationshallberepresentativeintermsofroadspeedcategoryandtrafficlevel.Eachofthetestsites selected must meet the requirements of ISO Section and ISOCD .
The road must be essentially straight or bends with a radius of curvature greater than m for mediumspeed and m for high speed road categories .
The crossfall of the test lane at the test site must not exceed .
The apparatus described in ISO Section are used .
The frequency range of between andHzcentrefrequenciesoftheonethirdoctavebandsshouldbecovered .
The macrotexture of the road surface used for the noise assessment shall be measured in the nearside wheeltrack along the whole length of test material in accordance BS EN .
The macrotexture depth of the nearside wheeltrack in front of a test location must be within per cent of the average macrotexture measured along the site .
The microphone location at each measurement site shall be recorded accurately and marked with appropriatemethodssuchthatthepositioncanbereadilyidentifiedforaperiodofatleasttwoyears .
Whensufficientvehiclepassbyshavebeenmeasuredalinearregressionanalysisshallbeperformed in accordance with ISO clause ..
In the case of the highspeed road category measurements must not be taken of vehicles travelling at speeds of less than kmh in accordance with AFNOR Standard S. ForeachcategoryofvehicledefinedinTabletheVehicleSoundLevelLveh shall be calculated as the ordinate sound level of the regression line at the reference speed for the category of road .
All levels shall be calculated to two decimal places and rounded to one decimal place .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Bituminous Bound Materials Amendment May TABLE Reference speeds kmh for different road speed categories Vehicle category Road speed category kmh Medium High L H H Category L vehicles light vehicles including passenger cars and car derived vans excluding vehicles towing trailers .
Category H vehicles commercial trucks with axles and greater than .
tonnes .
Category H vehicles commercial trucks with more than axles and greater than .
tonnes .
Hot Rolled Asphalt Surface Course and Binder Course PerformanceRelated Design Mixtures HRA Performance Related surface course shall conform to BS EN and follow the example fromBSIPDAnnexCsectionCtherequirementsofthisClauseandthosespecifiedincontract specificAppendix ..
This mixture can be laid at lower layers within special pavement types e.g bridge decks when it is unchipped .
Layer Thickness The nominal thickness of the hot rolled asphalt surface course layer shall be either mm or mm unlessotherwisespecifiedincontractspecificAppendix .
Binder and Binder Modification Bitumenprocessedduringrefiningtoprovideabinderwithenhancedpropertieswithouttheadditionof amodifiershallhaveaHAPAScertificateorequivalentproductacceptanceschemecertification .
For binders that do not comply with Clause and without HAPAS or equivalent product acceptance schemecertificationtheContractorshallprovidedatasheetsgivingdetailsofthepropertiesofmodifiedbinders whetherthemodifierispreblendedwithbitumenthebitumenismodifiedduringrefineryprocessingormodified byadditionintotheasphaltmixerincludingthosespecifiedincontractspecificAppendix.Theseshallinclude rheological data in accordance with BS EN and cohesion in accordance with BS EN .
Binders that do not comply with Clause or subClause of this Clause shall not be used without the approval of the Overseeing Organisation .
Coarse Aggregate Coarse aggregate shall be crushed rock or slag complying with BS EN and Clause .
The resistance to polishing of the coarse aggregate for surface course shall comply with category PSV in accordance with BS EN clause Deformation Resistance The resistance to permanent deformation of the mixture shall be in accordance with the appropriate class selectedfromTableC.ofBSIPDasspecifiedincontractspecificAppendix .
Coated Chippings for Surface Course Whenrequiredcoatedchippingsshallbemmormmsizeasspecifiedincontractspecific Appendix and comply with Clause .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Bituminous Bound Materials Amendment May Surface Macrotexture for Surface Course The surface macrotexture shall comply with Clause .
Compaction Control Procedures Control testing for compaction and resistance to permanent deformation shall be carried out in accordance with BS section WhenspecifiedinthecontractspecificAppendixtheresistancetopermanentdeformationof material laid in the permanent works shall be monitored by testing in accordance with clause F. of BS AnnexF.Sixcoresshallbetakenfromthefirstkilometrelengthofmaterialfromeachmixingplantandthereafter one further core from each subsequent lane kilometre .
Results shall be assessed on successive rolling means of sets ofsixconsecutiveresultsandshallbedeemedtoconformifthemeanisnogreaterthanthespecifiedvalueand individualvaluesnotmorethangreaterthanthespecifiedvalue .
Trafficking Newly Laid Surfacing The Contractor shall ensure the pavement material has adequately cooled and hardened before the road isopenedtotraffic.UnlessotherwiseagreedbytheOverseeingOrganisationtheroadshallnotbeopenedtotraffic if its surface temperature exceeds C unless the maximum temperature within the mat has fallen below C. Not Used Weather Conditions for Laying of Hot Bituminous Mixtures The Contractor shall take account of the weather conditions when planning his working methods .
The Contractors working methods shall comply with all weatherrelated requirements of BS and any additional requirements of this Clause .
When laying is to be undertaken during winter October to April andor nighttimep.m.toa.m.thecontractorshallworktoaQualityPlanthatallowsforthespecificissuesraisedby winter andor night time working .
Hot bituminous materials laid less than mm thick other than those supplied to Clause shall be laid within the wind speed and temperature constraints of Figure .
Thin Surface Course Systems Theweatherconditionsforlayingthinsurfacecoursesystemsshallcomplywiththoseidentifiedas being acceptable in the Installation Method Statement as required in Clause .
Hot Rolled Asphalt With Precoated Chippings Hot rolled asphalt surface course mixtures incorporating coarse aggregate with precoated chippings shall be laid mm thick within the following constraints of delivery temperature wind speed and air temperature .
Air temperature minimum C Wind speed maximum at any air temperature kmh at m height or kmh at m height Minimum delivery temperature of materials C. Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Bituminous Bound Materials Amendment May Wind Speed When measurements are required for assessment wind speed shall be measured by anemometer positionednearthelayingsitetoaccuratelyreflectconditionsatthelayingsite.Theanemometershallbefittedwith a digital accumulative device .
FIGURE Wind Speed and Air Temperature Laying Restrictions for Layers Less Than mm Thick Local Repairs General Localrepairisdefinedasthereinstatementofsurfacecourseandbindercourseandbaseifnecessary over a relatively small area .
Areas of defectiveness greater than m shall be repaired by inset replacement over a length and width in accordance with subClause .iv and subClause .. Areas of defectiveness up to m in surface area may be repaired using an inset patch .
The repair technique used shall be as given in Table .
TABLE Repair Technique Size approx m Application Repair technique Up to .
Individual pothole or road stud hole .
Discrete area of local defectiveness Inset patch In excess of .
or several closely adjacent areas less than .
Wide area of local defectiveness .
Replacement for minimum length of m or m in accordance with subClause .
iv .
Full lane width or less where practicable joints to comply with sub Clause .. Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Bituminous Bound Materials Amendment May Inset Patch Repair for Areas .m Preparation The edges of the repair shall be sawcut or planed in a neat rectangular shape in sound surfacing at a distance of at least .m beyond the defective area .
The sawcut or planed opening shall have vertical straight edges and extend for the full depth of surface course .
For repairs that extend into the binder course andor base these lower layers may be removed by the use of a mechanical breaker .
An offset stepped detail for the binder and base layers shall be used to ensure that vertical joints do not pass through more than one layer at the same location .
Aminimumhorizontalstepofmmshallbeprovidedatalllayerinterfaces .
All existing material within the sawcut perimeter of the repair area shall be removed and the base and sides of the cavity thoroughly cleansed of all loose material and moisture to provide clean and dry surfaces throughout .
The prepared vertical joints and the base of the cavity shall be treated in accordance with subClause .. Inset Patch Repair for Areas .m Repair Materials Repairmaterialsshallcomplywiththespecificationrequirementsstatedincontractspecific Appendix.UnlessotherwisestatedincontractspecificAppendixrepairmaterialsshallbeconsistentwith and compatible to the surrounding materials .
Repair materials for patches in hot rolled asphalt surfacing shall be in accordance with Clause .
Inset Patch Repair for Areas .m Construction Construction of the repair should commence at the edges and progress inwards with particular care for full compaction especially in the vicinity of the vertical joint faces .
All construction layers shall be laid and compacted such that on completion each layer shall be at the same level as the adjacent course .
The repair material must be compacted using rollers vibrating plates andor tampers as appropriate for thesizeoftherepair.Thecornersoftherepairarethemostvulnerabletodistressandparticularcaremustbetaken to achieve full compaction in these areas .
Repair Areas .m Large areas shall only be repaired with materials installed using full scale selfpropelled paving machinery .
The extent of the repair area shall be as described in subClause .iv with appropriate longitudinal and transverse joints in accordance with subClause ..
Repairs to large areas in Thin Surface Course Systems shall be undertaken in accordance with the instructionsstatedincontractspecificAppendix .
Repairmaterialsshallcomplywiththespecificationrequirementsstatedincontractspecific Appendix.UnlessotherwisestatedincontractspecificAppendixrepairmaterialsshallbeconsistentwith and compatible to the surrounding materials .
Areas exceeding m in existing hot rolled asphalt surfacing shall be repaired using hot rolled asphalt material in accordance with Clause .
Placing and compaction shall be in accordance with Clause and BS with use of bond coat in accordance with Clause .
Proprietary Materials and Techniques for Repairs .m Evidence from laboratory evaluation shall be provided by the Contractor to the Overseeing Organisation to demonstrate that the proprietary repair materials andor techniques comply with the following performance criteria StiffnessGPaafterdayswhentestedinaccordancewithBSENITSMmethodC ResistancetopermanentdeformationClassificationNo.asdefinedinTableD.ofBSIPD Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Bituminous Bound Materials Amendment May Data from a representative area of the material andor technique for a local repair minsizemustbe providedtodemonstratethatthefinishedsurfacetobetraffickedcomplieswiththefollowing The initial surface texture shall be not less than .mm when measured using the volumetric patch method described in BS EN The minimum wet Skid Resistance value shall not be less than when determined using the portable skid resistance tester pendulum in accordance with BS EN .
In Situ Cold Recycled Bitumen Bound Material Scope In situ cold recycled bitumen bound material shall be designed and produced to form the foundation or main structural layer of the road pavement .
The primary aggregate source shall be obtained by cold pulverisation of all or part of the existing road structure .
The primary binder stabilising agent shall be a foamed bitumen with cementorlimeasanadhesionagent.Theaggregategradingmaybeadjustedbytheadditionofafiller.Limemay also be used to modify any cohesive subgrade soil incorporated in the pulverised layer .
Prior to commencing the pulverisation and stabilisation works the Contractor shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Overseeing Organisation using the results of mix design procedures described in subClauses toofthisClausethattheexistingpavementmaterialsinthesectionsoftheworksdefinedincontractspecific Appendix are capable of being recycled by pulverisation to form the primary aggregate component of an in situcoldrecycledbitumenboundmaterialwhichcanmeetthespecifiedendproductperformancerequirements .
Component Materials Aggregates and Fillers Thepulverisedpavementmaterialandanysupplementaryaggregateandorfillershallnormallybe granular material with not less than and not more than passing the .
mm sieve Zone A graded material .
Approval for use of pulverised granular material containing up to passing the .
mm sieve ZoneBgradedmaterialshallrequireconfirmationbytheOverseeingOrganisationsubjecttotheresultsofthe mixture design procedures described in subClauses to of this Clause .
The pulverised granular material shall contain not more than of organic matter as determined in accordance with BS clause .
Bitumen Binder The primary binder shall be foamed bitumen .
The base bitumen shall comply with BS EN and shall be penetration grade .
OtherthanfoamingagentsbitumenmodifiersshallnotbeusedunlessapprovedbytheOverseeing Organisation for special purposes or conditions .
The binder shall be transported to the site in tankers capable of maintaining the required temperature and a homogeneous binder consistency and transferred to the stabilising plant in a controlled and uniform manner .
The foaming of the bitumen shall be carried out within the spraybar system of the recycling machine and immediately mixed with the pulverised aggregate at which point the foamed bitumen shall have a volume of not less than times the volume of the base penetration grade bitumen .
Cement Filler Aggregate and Lime Theconstituentsandrequiredqualitystandardsofhydrauliccementfilleraggregateandlimedelivered tositeshallbecertifiedbythesupplierwhosemanufacturinganddeliveryprocessesshallbeimplementedusing qualitymanagementsystemsinaccordancewiththeBSENISOandcertifiedbyanaccreditedbody .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Bituminous Bound Materials Amendment May Hydrauliccementasafilleraggregateoradhesionagentshallbecementblastfurnaceslagcementor PFA cement in accordance with subClause .. PFAusedasafilleraggregateshallbeinaccordancewithBSEN .
Limeforlimestabilisationorasamodifierforplasticfinesshallasrequiredincontractspecific Appendix be either quicklime or hydrated lime complying with subClause .. Water Water for moisture content control of the pulverised granular material shall normally be obtained from a water company supply and used without testing .
Water from an alternative source shall comply with BS EN and be approved by the Overseeing Organisation .
Pulverisation and Stabilisation The Contractor shall satisfy the Overseeing Organisation that the plant used for pulverisation is capableofuniformlypulverisingtheexistingroadstructureinasinglepasstothedepthstatedincontractspecific Appendix .
The plant used for stabilisation shall be capable of uniformly mixing controlled amounts of water and binder agents into the full depth of pulverised layer .
For either operation the plant shall be equipped with a meansofcontrollingthedepthofprocessingtommoftherequireddepth .
The plant used for stabilisation shall be equipped with a spraybar system within the mixing chamber capable of producing and uniformly distributing foamed bitumen binder at a monitored and controlled rate .
An accessiblesamplingjetshallalsobefittedthatproducesfoamedbitumenhavingthesamecharacteristicsasthat produced by the main spraybar .
Flow rate meters for measuring the supply rate of hot bitumen and other liquid additivestothemixtureshallbecapableofrecordingthecorrectrateofflowduringallstatesofpipelineflow i.e.fullyorpartiallycharged.Evidenceconfirmingthecapabilitiesoftheplantandthecalibrationofflowmeters shall be submitted to and approved by the Overseeing Organisation prior to the stabilisation works commencing .
The material shall be pulverised and stabilised in a single layer if its compacted thickness is mm or less .
If the compacted thickness is greater than mm the material shall be pulverised and stabilised in the minimum number of layers between mm and mm thick .
Where more than one layer is required the Contractor shall satisfy the Overseeing Organisation that the lower layer has achieved adequate stability in accordance with subClause of this Clause before proceeding with the overlying layer .
Pulverisation Process Pulverisation of the existing road structure shall be carried out in a systematic pattern to the required depthtoensurethatallpartsoftheexistingroaddesignatedincontractspecificAppendixareincludedinthe works .
An overlap of at least mm shall be made between adjacent passes of the machine .
Any material missed along hard edges or around obstructions shall be excavated and placed in the path of subsequent passes of the machine until a uniform fully pulverised aggregate is obtained .
The pulverised material shall not be contaminated by material drawn in from the verges .
All longitudinal and transverse joints shall be clean cut and vertical .
Where work continues adjacent to previously recycled material transverse joints shall be reformed a minimum .
m into the previously treated construction .
Where a layer of material for stabilisation is placed over a layer previously stabilised the depth of pulverisationstabilisation of the upper layer shall be set to cut into the underlying stabilised layer by at least mm .
Excess pulverised material shall be removed by the grader andor excavator for use elsewhere on site ortransportedtostockpileatlocationsgivenincontractspecificAppendix.Thesurfaceofthelayershallbe gradednominallytotherequiredprofileandprovisionallycompacted .
Moisture content of the pulverised aggregate immediately prior to stabilisation shall be measured in accordance with BS EN using the high temperature method .
The moisture content shall be uniform throughoutthelayerwithintherangeoftheoptimummoisturecontentfortheunstabilisedaggregate includinganydesignedproportionoffillerdeterminedinaccordancewithBSEN .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Bituminous Bound Materials Amendment May Ifthemoisturecontentoftheunstabilisedpulverisedaggregatefailstomeetthespecifiedmoisture content range corrective action shall be taken either by aeration to reduce the moisture content or by controlled addition of water to increase the moisture content .
Aeration of the affected area shall be achieved by full depth passes of the recycling machine to disturb and loosen the material and assist the evaporation of excess moisture .
The material shall be kept in a loose condition until subsequent moisture content tests show that the treated material has reached the required moisture contentrange.Thelayershallberegradednominallytotherequiredprofileandprovisionallycompactedin preparation for stabilisation .
An increase in moisture content of the affected area shall be achieved by the addition of water through an adjustable spraybar system in conjunction with full depth passes of the recycling machine to achieve a uniform distribution of the water throughout the layer .
Increments of water shall be added and mixed in until subsequent moisture content tests show that the material has reached the required moisture content range .
The layer shall be regradednominallytotherequiredprofileandprovisionallycompactedinpreparationforstabilisation .
Stabilisation Process Stabilisation shall not be carried out during or after periods of rainfall where the duration and intensity arelikelytocausethestabilisedmixturetoexceedthespecifiedmoisturecontentcriteriaandcompromisethe stabilityofthelayerundercompactionasdefinedinsubClauseofthisClause.Stabilisationoffrozen materials shall not be permitted .
Prior to stabilisation pulverised materials within mm of restricted hard edges such as kerbs and channels or around obstructions such as gullies shall be removed and spread uniformly over the remaining full width of the pulverised material .
Immediatelypriortostabilisationanyfillerandoradhesionagentshallbespreaduniformlyoverthe full width of the layer using a mechanical spreader capable of distributing the materials in a uniform controlled manner .
The rate of spread of these materials shall be calculated to achieve the mixture composition determined in accordance with subClauses to of this Clause and monitored as the spreading operation proceeds in accordance with subClause of this Clause .
The stabilisation shall be carried out to the required depth in a systematic pattern similar to that used for the pulverisation process with an overlap of at least mm between adjacent passes of the machine .
The bitumen binder shall be introduced as a foamed bitumen and distributed through the spraybar system directly into the rotor and mixing box of the stabiliser .
The binder shall be supplied to the spraybar of the recycling machine by pumped pipeline from onboard tanks or from a tanker moving in tandem with the recycling machine .
The rate of supply of the bitumen and any foaming agent calculated to achieve the target binder content determined in accordance with subClauses to shall be controlled and monitored as described in subClause of this Clause .
Thelayerofstabilisedmaterialshallbegradedtolevelandcompactedwithintwohoursofthefinalpass of the stabilising plant unless a curing or maturing period of aeration is required .
Any furrow formed by prior excavationofedgematerialsshallberefilledbygradingtheadjacentstabilisedmaterialintothespaceusinga minimum amount of reworking .
The compaction of each layer shall be carried out using compaction plant approved by the Overseeing Organisation until such time as the insitu density complies with subClauses and of this Clause and the stabilised layer provides a stable and dense surface .
Any open or segregated surface area shall be blinded using dry crushedrockfines .
Thestabilityofthelayerundercompactionshallbedeemedadequateifthefinishedsurfacedoesnot shoverutorexhibittransversecrackingundertheloadofsubsequentconstructiontraffic .
Where required by the Overseeing Organisation the stability of a layer in any area shall be assessed afteracuringperiodofatleasthoursbychannelledtraffickingusingarigidthreeaxletippertruckloadedtoa gross mass of tonnes assumed equivalent to three standard axles .
The vertical deformation shall be measured in all wheeltracks at monitoring points on each of transverse sections set m apart after and passes ofthetruck.Themeanverticaldeformationsattheabovetraffickingincrementsshallbeplottedagainstthe Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Bituminous Bound Materials Amendment May respective number of truck passes and the mean vertical deformation corresponding to standard axles shall be interpolated .
The layer shall be deemed acceptable if the mean vertical deformation corresponding to standard axles is less than mm .
OncompletionofcompactionthesurfaceshallbesealedusingasprayedmembraneofClassK bitumen emulsion complying with Clause .
The bitumen emulsion shall be sprayed at the rate stated in contract specificAppendix.Wherethesurfaceisopenedtotrafficthesealingmembraneshallbeblindedwithfine aggregate or sand applied at a rate of .
to .
kgm .
Process Control The condition or quality of the pulverised material or stabilised mixture shall be assessed for specificationcomplianceonthebasisofeachm area of the works or part thereof completed in the same working day .
ThemoisturecontentspecifiedinsubClauseofthisClauseshallbemonitoredusingtestspecimens extracted from three bulk samples of pulverised aggregate taken from points evenly spaced along a diagonal bisecting the assessment area .
The bulk samples shall comprise material taken from the full depth of the pulverised layer .
The depth of pulverisation relative to the designed road level shall be measured and recorded at each point.Thesamplesshallalsobetestedtodeterminetheparticleorlumpsizedistributioninaccordancewith BS EN or by an amended method to obtain an early assessment of grading provided correlation with the standard test method can be demonstrated .
Where appropriate the residue of the three samples shall be combined to form one bulk sample and the bitumen content of the pulverised aggregate determined in accordance with BS EN .
If any adjustment of moisture content is carried out prior to stabilisation subsequent samples shall be taken and further moisture content tests completed .
Therateofspreadofcementfillerhydratedlimeorquicklimeshallbemeasuredbyweighingthe amountofmaterialretainedoneachoffivetraysormatsofknownarealaidinthepathofthespreadingmachine .
The trays shall be positioned approximately at points equally spaced along a diagonal bisecting the area of coverage .
The mean rate of spread and percentage addition of the material shall be determined and recorded for each assessment area .
Therateofsupplyofbitumenbinderandanyotherfluidstothestabilisingplantshallbesetand continuouslymonitoredusingtheappropriateflowratemetersonthestabilisingplant.Asacheckatthestartof each work period the rate of supply of bitumen shall be determined from before and after dip measurements of the storagedelivery tanks related to an area of stabilisation of not more than m. The calculated supply rate of bitumen for each test area shall be recorded .
As directed by the Overseeing Organisation where lime has been used to modify a cohesive soil componentofthepulverisedaggregatetheacceptabilityofthemodifiedmaterialsshallbetestedinaccordance with subClause .. Afterstabilisationpriortofinalcompactionofthestabilisedmixturefivesamplesofthestabilised material shall be obtained .
Each sample shall be taken from a point equally spaced along a diagonal bisecting the area under consideration .
The location of each sampling point shall be recorded .
Each sample shall comprise at least kg of material taken from the full depth of the layer .
The depth of stabilisation relative to the designed road level shall be measured and recorded at each point .
Where appropriate and as directed by the Overseeing Organisation the depth measurements shall be made using a stringline stretched between points of known level .
Inthefieldeachsampleofthestabilisedmaterialshallbemixedinatrayandsufficientrepresentative material taken to produce a mm cube specimen made in accordance with the relevant Clauses of Series .
The refusal density for each cube sample shall be determined to the nearest kgm .
The remainder of each sample shall be retained in a sealed condition for subsequent testing on site or in the laboratory as described in sub Clauses and of this Clause .
Aftertrimmingandfinalcompactionofthestabilisedlayertheinsitubulkdensityshallbemeasuredat m intervals per lane including points close to the material sampling points using an indirect density gauge in directtransmissionmodetoadepthwithinmmofthetotallayerthickness.Themeterreadingsshallbeverified periodically in accordance with BS EN .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Bituminous Bound Materials Amendment May The insitu bulk density values obtained shall be compared with the refusal density value obtained from thecubespecimensattherespectivesamplingpoints.Theaverageinsitubulkdensityofeachsetoffivevalues shall be at least of the cube refusal density with no individual insitu density value less than of the respective refusal density .
Eitheronsiteorimmediatelyonarrivalatthelaboratoryeachofthefivesamplesshallbetestedfor moisture content in accordance with BS .
Either on site or within hours of arrival at the laboratory one mm diameter by mm to mm highcylindertestspecimenbriquettespecimenshallbemanufacturedfromeachofthefivesamplescompacted inaPRDmouldtoatargetdensityoftheaverageinsitubulkdensitymeasuredinthefield.Thefinaldensityof each briquette specimen shall be measured and using the respective moisture content values the dry density values shall be determined .
Thecuringhistoryofthefivebriquettespecimenspriortotestingshallberecordedwhichshallassoon as possible after manufacture include a period of hours at a nominal temperature of C .
Immediately before testing each briquette specimen shall be conditioned in air for a minimum period of hours at C and then tested in accordance with BS EN ITSM method to determine the Indirect Tensile Stiffness Modulus ITSM of the material .
After removal from the test apparatus each briquette shall be immersed in water at C for a minimum period of hours then retested to determine the ITSM of the material in a saturated state .
The air voids content of each briquette shall be determined in accordance with BS except that the maximum density for the partially coated product used in the air voids content calculation shall be standardised using the maximum density determined for a fully coated laboratory prepared specimen .
A sample of loose pulverised aggregate obtained prior to the addition of foamed bitumen shall be dried to constant mass atC.Sufficienthotpenetrationgradebitumenshallthenbeaddedinincrementstothedriedaggregateina mechanical mixer until the mixture is visually fully coated using of the order of added bitumen .
The coated specimenshallbetestedtodeterminemaximumdensityasspecifiedinBSEN .
Theresidueofthefivesamplesofstabilisedmaterialshallbecombinedtoformonebulksample.From this bulk sample four subsamples shall be obtained .
Three subsamples shall be tested to determine the particle sizedistributionandonesubsampletodeterminebitumencontentinaccordancewithBSEN.Theadded bitumen content shall be the measured bitumen content of the stabilised mixture less the bitumen content of the pulverised aggregate prior to stabilisation .
ThespecificationcompliancecriteriafortheprocesscontroltestsshallbeasdescribedinTable .
End Product Performance of In Situ Cold Recycled Bitumen Bound Material The endproduct performance of the in situ cold recycled bitumen bound material shall be assessed on the basis of measurements carried out in areas of m or part thereof completed each working day which match theareasdefinedinsubClauseofthisClause .
Within hours of completion the asinstalled performance of the stabilised layer shall be evaluated using a dynamic plate loading or penetrometer technique to determine values of elastic modulus at points on a nominalgridpatternasdescribedincontractspecificAppendix.Theelasticmodulusateachpointandthe meanelasticmodulusfortheassessmentareashallcomplywiththeminimumstandardsstatedincontractspecific Appendix .
Additionally before proceeding with construction of the overlying pavement the valuation process shall be repeated to demonstrate that the elastic modulus value at all points and that of the mean value have increasedovertherespectiveasinstalledvaluesbynotlessthanthepercentagevaluesstatedincontractspecific Appendix .
Where these criteria are not met the full extent of the noncompliant material shall be determined and appropriate remedial measures implemented .
Remedial action shall comprise either a delay in construction to allow further curing and stiffening of the layer to occur or a repeat of all or part of the recycling process followed by reevaluation until a compliant material is achieved .
WithindaysofcompletionofthesurfacingworksaFallingWeightDeflectometersurveyshallbe carried out and analysed in general accordance with HD DMRB In particular the measurements shall betakenonthefinishedroadsurfaceinthenearsidewheelpathatauniformandmaximumspacingofm.The survey shall be carried out during a period when the pavement temperature at a depth of mm is within the range Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Bituminous Bound Materials Amendment May to C .
The FWD results shall be analysed using a linear elastic FWD back analysis computer program with the pavement modelled as a two layer system .
Layer shall represent the combined design thickness of the bound materials i.e .
the combined recycled material and overlying surfacing materials and layer shall represent the unboundfoundationlayerofinfinitedepth.Endproductperformanceshallbedefinedintermsofthecalculated stiffness of layer uncorrected for temperature .
Compliance shall be achieved when the rolling mean of results isnotlessthanthefigurespecifiedincontractspecificAppendixandnoindividualresultislessthanof thefigurespecified .
In the event that the layer stiffness requirement of subClause of this Clause are not met the full extent of the noncompliant material shall be determined by further investigation involving coring and laboratory testing .
For each area of noncompliance cores shall be extracted through the full depth of the stabilised layer at locations directed by the Overseeing Organisation at a minimum rate of one x mm diameter core per m. TABLE Compliance Criteria for Process Control Tests on In Situ Cold Recycled Bound Material Material property or characteristic Individual results Mean from test set Relative insitu density Minimum Minimum Aggregate grading In accordance with subClause of this Clause Added bitumen content Target .
NA Moisture content Optimum Optimum Layer thickness site measurement mmofspecified mmofspecified Cement content site rate of spread measurement Target Target Indirect Tensile Stiffness Modulus ITSM dry specimens MPa minimum MPa minimum ITSM water saturated specimens MPa minimum MPa minimum Percentage air voids content maximum maximum Note subject to the absolute minimum added bitumen content has stated contract specific Appendix .
The Contractor shall be responsible for extraction of the cores with the minimum of force or disruption .
Airflushcoringshallbeallowedformaterialsthataredisturbedbywaterflushcoring.Afterextractioneachcore shall be labelled and photographed and prior to testing shall be stored in sealed polythene bags in a uniformly supportedpositionatatemperatureofCC.Thethicknessofrecycledlayershallbemeasuredand recorded .
Reinstatementofallcoreholesshallbecompletedbeforeopeningtheareatotraffic .
Ifatanyoftheprescribedcorelocationsitisnotpossibletoextractanintactcoreofsuitablesizeor condition for the endproduct performance testing using a maximum of three attempts in an area of .
m radius thematerialinthevicinityshallbedeemednottocomplywiththeendproductperformancespecification .
In the laboratory each of the cores extracted successfully shall be trimmed to remove surfacing materials and any underlying material prior to cutting into core test specimens between mm and mm high .
Where possible three test specimens shall be obtained from each core one from the upper part one from the centre and the other from the lower part .
All core test specimens thus obtained shall be tested in accordance with the standards described in Table .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Bituminous Bound Materials Amendment May TABLE Testing Standards for Core Specimens of In Situ Cold Recycled Bound Material Test Standard Bulk density BS EN and subClause of this Clause Air voids content BS EN and subClause of this Clause Indirect Tensile Stiffness Modulus BS EN The results obtained shall be used for assessing the expected performance of the stabilised material in theWorksinrelationtotheknownperformanceofBSspecifiedbasematerials.Thestabilisedmaterialinthetrial area shall be deemed acceptable if the compliance criteria described in Table are met .
TABLE Compliance Criteria for In Situ Cold Recycled Bound Material Core Specimens from the Works Material property or characteristic Individual cores Mean from core set Core density relative to refusal density minimum minimum Air voids content maximum maximum Layer thickness from core measurement mmofspecified mmofspecified Indirect Tensile Stiffness Modulus dry MPa minimum MPa minimum Mixture Design and Characterisation Mixture design and characterisation of in situ cold recycled bitumen bound material for each site or sectionofsiteincludingdetailsoffillerbinderadhesionandorstabilisingagentsandtheirquantitiesshallbe submitted to the Overseeing Organisation at least one week prior to commencement of the recycling works .
Where thesiteinvestigationhasidentifiedsignificantvariationofexistingpavementmaterialsbetweendifferentsections of the site a mix design shall be submitted for each section of the site .
The proposed plan area and depth of the different sections covered by each mixture design shall be approved by the Overseeing Organisation .
The testing standards used for the mixture design of the recycled bitumen bound mixture shall be those listed in Table .
TABLE Testing Standards for the Design and Characterisation of In Situ Cold Recycled Bound Material Test Standard Moisture content BS Bulk density BS EN Air voids content BS EN and subClause of this Clause Grading and Binder Content BS EN Indirect Tensile Stiffness Modulus BS EN The aggregate used in the design and characterisation process shall be obtained from the appropriate section of the works and shall be representative in terms of component material proportions of the pavement layers to be pulverised .
The laboratory manufactured aggregate shall be pulverised or crushed such that it closely replicatesthenatureandgradingofthepulverisedaggregateandthattheaggregateparticlesizedistributionshall comply with subClause of this Clause .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Bituminous Bound Materials Amendment May The laboratory prepared aggregate shall be thoroughly mixed with measured proportions of the bitumen binder and adhesion agents to produce at least three trial mixtures with different added bitumen contents .
The penetration reference of the bitumen and the type of the adhesion agents used in the trial mixtures shall be the sameasthoseusedinthefinishedworks .
The different added bitumen contents of the trial mixtures shall be set at increments of between .
and .
in the range .
to .
with appropriate allowance made for residual binder in any crushed asphalt component .
From each trial mixture four mm diameter x mm to mm high cylinder test specimens briquette specimens shall be compacted to refusal by vibratory compaction in a cylindrical metal mould using the compaction mould assembly and vibratory hammer described in BS EN .
The bulk density of each cylinder shall be determined .
The briquette specimens shall be cured for a period of hours at a nominal temperature of C .
Following this the briquette specimens shall be conditioned in air for a minimum period of hours at C and then immediately tested in accordance with BS EN to determine the ITSM .
After further conditioning of the briquettes immersed in water at C for a minimum period of hours the ITSM tests shall be repeated on each specimen .
The characteristics of the mixture to be used in the works including any added water shall be determined using the optimum ITSM dry values .
If peak conditions are not clearly displayed then plateau characteristicsshallbeacceptedandthelowestaddedbitumencontentforwhichallthecriteriadefinedinTable are met shall be used in the works subject to a minimum of .
for mixtures containing only pulverised unbound or cement bound aggregate and .
for mixtures containing only pulverised bitumen bound materials .
OnthebasisoftheforegoingtestresultsthecontractorshalldeclaredetailsoftheJobStandard Mixtures for the works setting out target aggregate grading and type added water content adhesion agents and binder content together with tolerances .
The method of compaction shall be described such that the material to be utilised in the works meets the mixture .
TABLE Acceptable Design and Characteristic Requirements for In Situ Cold Recycled Bound Material Property or characteristic Individual specimens Mean from test set Moisture content NA Optimum Indirect Tensile Stiffness Modulus dry MPa MPa Indirect Tensile Stiffness Modulus wet MPa MPa Bitumen content NA Target .
Particlesizedistribution NA Zone A or Zone B Air voids content maximum maximum Ex Situ Cold Recycled Bound Material General ExsitucoldrecycledboundmaterialCRBMcomprisesbaseandbindercoursesproducedinafixed or mobile mixing plant from graded aggregate processed from arisings from the excavation of roads and similar sources blended if necessary with other aggregate and bound with cementitious hydraulic or bituminous binders separately or in combination .
This Clause covers four generic material families Quick Hydraulic QH Slow Hydraulic SH Quick ViscoElastic QVE and Slow ViscoElastic SVE .
The primary binder of these families of materials shall be as follows QH Cement as the main component and excluding bituminous binders .
SH Hydraulic binders e.g .
PFAlime and GBSlime excluding bituminous and Portland Cement Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Bituminous Bound Materials Amendment May QVE Bituminous binder as the main component but also including Portland Cement .
SVE Bituminous binder as main component but excluding Portland Cement .
ExsituCRBMshallbedesignedtoachievethespecifiedleveloftheappropriateendperformance property Quality Assurance ExsituCRBMshallbeproducedinplantsthathaveaUKASaccreditedBSENISOQuality ManagementSystem.TheBSENISOCertificatescopeshallincludethisactivity .
Sourcing of Aggregate The quality plan shall contain details of all aggregates to be used in the CRBM .
Aggregate may include i asphalt concrete or granular material planed or excavated from a road or other paved area ii primary secondary or recycled aggregate from other sources iii fillersfromprimaryorsecondarysourcese.g.PFA .
Theprocessedaggregateincludingaddedfillershallnotcontaindeleteriousmaterialthatadversely affects the performance of the mixture .
Processing of Aggregate The quality plan shall describe how in particular highway arisings are to be processed crushed screenedandstockedtoenableconsistentproductionoftheCRBMinlinewiththeJobStandardmixture .
Binders and Other Constituents The bitumen and other constituents shall conform to the following standards i Bitumen emulsion shall conform to BS EN and be used in accordance with BS .
ii Cement shall conform to BS EN .
iii Bitumen used for foaming shall conform to BS EN and shall be grade or harder .
iv Granulated blast furnace slag GBS shall comply with EN .
v Ground granulated blast furnace slag GGBS shall comply with BS EN .
vi Lime shall comply with BS EN .
vii FlyashPFAusedaseitherasfillerorpozzolanshallcomplywithBSEN .
viii UnweatheredmmBasicOxygenSlagBOSslagfinesusedinSHmaterialasactivatoraccelerator to the GBS shall comply with BS Part .
Subject to approval other constituents including setting and hardening agents may be used to enhance the performance of the mixture .
Water shall not contain material that adversely affects the performance of the mixture .
Job Standard Mixture The composition of the job standard mixture shall be declared as follows i Source origin and proportion of all aggregate constituents .
ii Combined target grading including mineral binders and tolerances .
iii Source origin and proportion of all binders .
iv Target moisture content .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Bituminous Bound Materials Amendment May The grading of the job standard mixture i.e .
the aggregate together with the other constituents including hydraulicbindersshallcomplywithoneofthezonesinTable .
Use of Zone B or C graded material shall be permitted only when the results of a full mix design showing compliance with the required day performance properties are available or when evidence can be provided of satisfactory achievement of the performance requirements on an earlier contract with a similar composition .
TABLE Particle Size Distribution of Mixture for Cold Recycling Sieve mm Percentage by mass passing Zone A Zone B Zone C The binder addition shall comply with Table .
TABLE Minimum Binder Contents for Ex Situ Construction by Family and Binder Type Family OPC Lime PFA GBS GGBS Bitumen QH SH QVE SVE .
foamed or emulsion residual PFA may be added as filler lime may be added for breaking and adhesion purposes and if PFA included as filler will contribute to strength Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Bituminous Bound Materials Amendment May Mixture Design Validation When a mix design validation is required it shall be carried out on aggregates and binders representative of those to be used on the works .
The validation may be carried out on CRBM mixed either in the laboratory or on a pilot basis on a full scale plant .
The target mixture shall comply with subClauses and .
A preliminary exercise shall be undertaken to establish a target grading and suitable moisture content .
Representative samples of the mixture shall be taken and from these mm diameter cylindrical specimens shall be produced in accordance with subClause .
These specimens shall be mm high for hydraulic bound mixtures and mm high for viscoelastic bound mixtures .
The time between mixing and specimen production shall be in accordance with the setting times given in Table .
The density of each specimen shall be measured and using the respective moisture content values the dry density values shall be determined .
The cylindrical specimens shall be conditioned and tested .
The conditioning and testing regime shall be agreed with the Overseeing Organisation and the measured characteristics shall demonstrate compliance with the requirements of Table .
The performance properties of the conditioned specimens shall be declared .
The results shall be considered as indicative only as the compliance criteria apply only to the specimens prepared during the execution of the works .
TABLE Mix Design and End Product Requirements Property or Characteristic All Materials Mean from Test Set QVE and SVE Materials days Indirect Tensile Stiffness Modulus Class B MPa Class B MPa Class B MPa Class B MPa QH and SH Materials days Note days in situ or cured in accordance with sub clause .
Trafficking Trial WhenspecifiedincontractspecificAppendixatraffickingtrialshallbeundertakentodemonstrate that the CRBM is not prone to excessive rutting in its early life .
A trial area shall be laid using the materials and plant to be used in the main works and on a foundation typical of that in the main works .
The trial area shall be left to cure for hours and shall then be subjected to controlledtrafficking.Thetraffickingshallbeperformedbyaheavygoodsvehiclewithanaxleconfigurationand loading typical of that to be encountered in the construction phase .
The number of passes shall equate to the total expectedamountoftraffictobecarriedduringconstructionwithadefaultvalueequivalenttostandardaxles .
Themeasuredruttinginthetraffickingtrialshallbelessthanmmorthatspecifiedincontractspecific Appendix .
Process Control Production of the ex situ CRBM shall be subject to process control detailed in the quality plan and meeting the following requirements i Thereshallbeadescriptionoftheplantandtheproductionprocesspreferablyincludingaflowdiagram detailinghowmaterialistobeproducedinaccordancewiththisspecification .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Bituminous Bound Materials Amendment May ii Calibration schedules for all parts of the plant involved in determining mix consistency shall be provided .
These shall be accompanied by calibration records .
iii Details of transportation shall be provided .
These shall include the location of the mixing plant and the expected average time between mixing and laying .
The Contractor shall record the duration between mixing and the completion of compaction at the site during the execution of the works .
iv Measures to avoid problems caused by extreme weather .
In particular production shall not proceed if the feedstockisfrozenorexcessivelywet .
Inspection and Test There shall be a schedule of inspection and test frequencies to be made during production of CRBM .
This shall comply with the minimum frequencies in Table .
TABLE Minimum Frequencies for Inspection and Test Item Inspection Test Aggregate stockpiles Daily Grading and moisture content Before production and weekly Binders On receipt Supplier data Combined grading of mixture Continual Daily Moisture content of mixture Continual Daily Laying A written procedure for the laying of the ex situ CRBM shall be provided .
The plant used for placing ex situ processed material shall be capable of laying the material without significantsegregationevenlyandtotherequiredthicknessacrossatleastonelanewidth .
A method for the making of longitudinal and transverse joints appropriate to the type of CRBM being laid shall be provided .
Compaction Thecompactionofeachlayershallbecarriedouttoadefinedrollingpatterntoachievetherequired in situ density and until the recycled layer provides a stable and dense tight surface .
The stability of the layer after compactionshallbedeemedadequateifthefinishedsurfacedoesnotshoverutorexhibittransversecracking undertheloadofsubsequenttraffic.Openedgesshallbeprotectedfromtraffic .
Aftertrimmingandfinalcompactionoftherecycledlayertheinsitubulkdensityshallbemeasured using an indirect density gauge in direct transmission mode to a depth within mm of the total layer thickness .
ThemeterreadingsshallbeverifiedperiodicallyinaccordancewithBSEN .
TheinsitubulkdensityvaluesobtainedshallbecomparedwiththerefusaldensityvalueoftheJob Standard Mix or of the refusal density of a specimen representative of the days production .
The average in situ bulkdensityofeachsetoffivevaluesshallbeatleastoftherefusaldensitywithnoindividualinsitudensity value being less than of the respective refusal density .
Sealing WhenspecifiedincontractspecificAppendixthesurfaceshallbesealedusingasprayedmembrane of Class CB bitumen emulsion complying with Clause .
The bitumen emulsion shall be sprayed at a rate to .
lm to achieve a uniform and continuous seal to the surface of the layer .
Where the surface is opened to trafficthesealingmembraneshallbeblindedwithfineaggregateorsandappliedatarateof.to.kgm .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Bituminous Bound Materials Amendment May End Product Testing The end product testing of the ex situ CRBM shall be assessed on the basis of representative specimens madeupinaccordancewiththescheduleincontractspecificAppendix .
Representative samples of the ex situ CRBM shall be taken either at the mixing plant or from site .
mm diameter cylindrical test specimens shall be manufactured in sets of six by compacting to refusal in accordance with BS Part .
The height of the test specimens and the time period after mixing during which compaction must be completed shall be in accordance with Table .
TABLE Setting Times of Cold Recycled Families Family Setting time under normal temperature conditions Sample dimensions prepared to a target density Diameter mm Height mm QH hours SH hours QVE hours SVE hours can be longer depending on material composition Conditioning and Testing of Samples Prior to testing specimens shall be conditioned in a controlled environment sealed to keep the moisture inasdescribedinthisclause.Thepurposeofthisconditioningistosimulatethelikelycuringoverthefirstyearin the road .
Immediately after compaction the cylindrical specimens in their moulds shall be double wrapped in clingfilmplasticusingtwoseparatesheetseachofwhichshallbesufficienttocovertheentirecircumferenceof thecylinderandthetwoendsofthespecimen.Oncewrappedinclingfilmthesampleshallbeplacedinasealed plastic bag .
Care shall be taken when handling the specimens not to damage the plastic bag or the underlying clingfilmlayer.ThespecimensshouldbestoredinairorwateratatemperaturewithinCofthenominal conditioning temperature .
The following conditioning regimes shall apply i QH specimens shall be conditioned for a period of days at a temperature of C. ii SH and QVE specimens shall be conditioned for a period of days at a temperature of C. End Product Criteria Theminimumspecificationcompliancecriteriafortheprocesscontroltestsshallbeasdescribedin Table .
TABLE End Product Criteria Material property or characteristic Individual results Mean from test set of six specimens ParticleSizeDistribution Zone Moisture content Relative In situ density minimum minimum Layer thickness mmofspecified mmofspecified Indirect Tensile Stiffness Modulus or Indirect Tensile Test NA Relevant value from Table less Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Bituminous Bound Materials Amendment May In the event of test specimens failing to achieve the required indirect tensile test results compliance shall be determined by the testing of cores extracted by dry coring after one year .
The results shall be compared with the criteria in Table .
Not Used Surface Preservation Systems Systems that are intended to extend the life of existing asphalt surfacing by the application of a proprietaryliquidcoatingshallhaveHAPASorequivalentproductacceptanceschemecertificationtodemonstrate theirperformance.PreservationsystemswithoutHAPASorequivalentcertificationshallnotbeusedwithoutprior approval by the Overseeing Organisation .
Torque Bond Test The bond strength between a thin surfacing system and its substrate which may be bituminous or cementitious shall be established between and days after the SIPT is installed by measuring the peak shearing torque at a known temperature .
Sixevenlyspacedmmdiametercoresshallbecuttoadepthofmmbelowthethinsurfacing layer to be tested along a diagonal line across the lane width from a m length of the installation .
The surface to be tested must be clean and dry .
Ametalplateofmildsteelhavingadiameterofmmandathicknessofmmincorporating afittingtoenableittobecoupledtoatorquemetershallbesecuredtothesurfaceofthecoreusingasuitable bonding agent taking care to ensure that the plate is parallel to the surface .
Whenthebondingagenthasdevelopedsufficientstrengthie.failureshouldnotoccurwithinthe adhesiveatorquemeterfittedwithafiducialreadinggaugecalibratedoverarangeofNmwithascale readabletoatleastNmshallbefittedtothemetalplateusingadaptersandextensionrodsasappropriate .
Torque shall be applied to the core at a steady rate so that the torque wrench sweeps an angle of withinseconds.Caremustbetakentoensurethatthetorqueisappliedparalleltothecoresurface within.TorqueisappliedtotheplateuntilfailureofthebondoccursoratorqueofNmisexceeded .
The value of torque at failure shall be recorded in Newton metres M. The bond interface temperature shall be measured and recorded immediately after failure using a thermometer readable to a temperature of .C and accurate to .C .
The core diameter shall be measured and recorded at two locations approximately apart using callipers and the mean value D recorded to an accuracy of mm .
The bond strength is calculated for each specimen using the following formula M x  D where  interlayer bond strength in kiloPascals kPa M peak value of applied shearing torque in Newton metres Nm D diameter of core in millimetres mm Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Bituminous Bound Materials Amendment May The arithmetic mean of the interlayer bond strength  for the six specimens shall be calculated and shall be greater than or equal to kPa .
The test report shall include the name of organisation carrying out the test description of materials system and substrate date of test peak torque at failure Nm interlayer bond strength kPa individual and mean values time to failure seconds diameter of core mm depth of Bond interface mm temperature of the bondinterfaceattestCidentificationofsiteorschemecorelocationageoftheinstallationspecimenatthe time of test nature of the bond interface mode of failure .
Not Used Method for Laboratory Determination of Interface Properties Using the Modified Leutner Shear Test Scope ThisClausespecifiesalaboratorytestmethodtoassessthebondingbetweenadjacentasphaltpavement layers using cylindrical samples .
It is also appropriate for asphalt applied to concrete .
Terms and Definitions ForthepurposesofthisClausethetermsanddefinitionsgiveninBSshallapplytogetherwiththe following i Peak Shear Stress The maximum value of shear stress determined as the maximum force divided by the initial cross sectional area of a specimen when tested as described in this Clause .
ii Displacement at Peak Shear Stress The displacement at the maximum value of shear stress of a specimen when tested as described in this Clause .
iii Shear Stiffness Modulus The peak shear stress divided by the displacement at the peak shear stress of a specimen when tested as described in this Clause .
Principle of Test Cylindrical test specimens of nominal mm diameter shall be subjected to direct shear loading at CusingthemodifiedLeutnersheartest.ThemaximumshearstressinMPaattheinterfacebetweenlayers shall be determined .
Test Apparatus and Materials The following test apparatus and materials shall be used i SheartestapparatusasshowninFigurecomposedofabasebodyAonwhicharefixedthe sample support B and the lower shear ring D. The upper shear ring C is attached to the upper body E which is movable along the guiding bars F. The gap between shear rings C and D is mm .
ii Loadingframecapableofachievingaconstantverticaldisplacementrateof.mmperminuteand a maximum load of at least kN .
iii Data logging system to record load and displacement during the test .
iv Metal extension as shown in Figure .
v Stiffadhesivesuchasepoxyresinwithsufficientstrengthtoavoidfailurewithintheadhesiveoratthe adhesiveasphalt material interface .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Bituminous Bound Materials Amendment May Sample Preparation Testspecimensshallbecoresofmmdiametertheminimumthicknessofthelayersabove and below the interface to be tested shall be mm and mm respectively .
Specimens shall be cored from an inservice pavement or from a slab manufactured using a laboratory roller compactor in accordance with BS EN and BS EN .
If the thickness of the layer above the interface is between and mm a metal extension shall be glued on top of the layer above the interface .
Procedure The diameter and thickness of the specimen shall be determined to the nearest mm .
The specimen shall be placed into a suitable temperature controlled conditioning environment at .C for a minimum of hours .
Theappropriateshearringstoformaloosefitaroundthespecimenforexamplemmdiameter shear rings for a mm diameter specimen shall be selected and attached to the Leutner test frame .
The specimen shall be placed into the test apparatus and the interface aligned Figure G between the upper and lower shear rings Figure C and D. If a metal extension is used the specimen shall be placed into the test apparatus so that the direction of the grooves is perpendicular to the direction of the applied shear load .
Tighten the sample support using a suitable spanner .
The test apparatus shall be placed into the loading frame and adjusted until the upper shear ring Figure C nearly touches the specimen .
Start the data logging system to record load and displacement and commence shear loading .
The loadingrateshallbe.mmperminute .
RecordtheloadFtothenearest.kNandthedisplacementtothenearest.mm .
Stop the shear loading when the test frame reaches its limit of mm displacement .
The length of time between removal of the specimen from the temperature controlled conditioning environment and completion of testing shall not exceed minutes .
After the test has been completed the apparatus shall be dismantled and the specimen removed .
Both sections of the specimen shall be observed especially the interface for any visual cracks and unusual appearance i.e .
crushed aggregates on edges .
Record any comments as necessary .
Calculation and Expression of Results Calculate the shear stress as follows Where  shearstressinMPa F load in kN r initial radius of specimen in mm Produce a shear stress versus shear displacement graph an example is shown in Figure using the recorded data .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Bituminous Bound Materials Amendment May Determine the following parameters from the graph i max peak shear stress MPa expressed to the nearest .
ii max displacement at peak shear stress mm expressed to the nearest .
iii k shearstiffnessmodulusmaxmax MPamm expressed to the nearest .
Test Report The test report shall contain not less than the following information i A reference to this test method and test conditions .
ii Material descriptions for both layers .
iii Type and amount of tack bond coat if known .
iv For each specimen tested report specimen diameter expressed to the nearest mm layer thicknesses expressed to the nearest mm maximum load F expressed to the nearest .
kN peakshearstressmax expressed to the nearest .
MPa displacementatpeakshearstressmax expressed to the nearest .
mm shear stiffness modulus k expressed to the nearest .
MPamm any cracks or other damage .
v The test temperature expressed to the nearest .C vi The use or otherwise of a metal extension .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Bituminous Bound Materials Amendment May A base body B sample support C upper shear ring D lower shear ring E upper body F guiding bar G specimen interface FIGURE Schematic Diagram of the Modified Leutner Shear Test apparatus Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Bituminous Bound Materials Amendment May FIGURE Schematic Drawing of the Metal Extension FIGURE Example of Shear Stress vs Displacement Data Plot Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Bituminous Bound Materials Amendment May Ageing Profile Test Using a Modified Rolling Thin Film Oven Test MRTFOT Scope ThisClausespecifiestheprocedureforobtainingsamplesofAgedBinderaftervariousstagesof conditioning.InthiswayaplotofbinderpropertiesprovidinganAgeingProfilemaybeaccomplishedinashort timeusingtheModifiedRollingThinFilmOvenTestMRTFOTtosimulateageinginroadmaterialsovermany years in service .
TheMRTFOTutilisestheRollingThinFilmOvenASTMspecifiedinBSEN .
The method is suitable for generating small quantities of binder for rheological testing TheAgeingProfileisgeneratedbydeterminingtherheologicalpropertiesofcomplexshearstiffnessmodulus Gandphaseangleofsamplestakenfromtheovenatintervalsthroughoutthetestperiodtypicallyoneday .
Other properties such as durability of cohesion may also be assessed .
Three protocols are used depending on the type of binder and its use i amethodtosimulateageingofpolymermodifiedbinderorpavinggradebitumenusedinthe manufacture of asphalt ii amethodtoremovethewaterphaseandvolatilefluxfrompolymermodifiedbituminousemulsionsand simulate ageing and iii a method to test the potential for preservatives to reduce the ageing rate of bitumen .
TheAgeingProfileintermsofrheologicalcharacteristicsprovidesProductIdentificationandthisisessentialto ensureconsistencyandtoenableproprietarybinderstobeidentified .
Warning Theuseofthistestmethodcaninvolvehazardousmaterialsoperationsandequipment.ThisClause does not purport to address all of the safety problems associated with the use of the test method .
It is the responsibility of the user of these test methods to establish appropriate safety and health practices and determine the applicability of regulatory limitations prior to use .
Asphalt Binders BindersusedtomanufacturehotmixedasphaltasphaltbindersarefirstsubjectedtoaShortterm Ageing Test to simulate the effects of manufacture transport and laying .
In this respect the test described in this Clause has been shown to be equivalent to BS EN .
The binder is continually stirred by rotating stainless steelscrewsinsamplecanstoobtainahomogeneoussampletheprocedurealsobenefitsfromafasteroxidation rate rapid ageing because of the increased exposure to the jetted air stream and therefore a shorter test duration .
The binder samples are then aged at a lower temperature and samples removed at intervals and tested to obtain an AgeingProfile.Thisisparticularlyusefulforasphaltbecausedifferentairvoidcontentsandbindercontentsina road pavement result in different ageing rates .
The Longterm Aged binder sample where the characteristics are equivalent to those obtained after hours using the Pressure Ageing Vessel PAV Test is obtained after hours therefore the test may be carried out in one day .
PAV is detailed in BS EN .
Binders used for manufacturing Warm Asphalt are mixed at much lower temperatures than for hot mixed asphalt and they do not need the same high temperature protocol for Shortterm Ageing this part of the procedure is therefore amended for these binders .
All the ageing is done at the lower temperature .
Bituminous Emulsion Binders BitumenandpolymermodifiedbituminousemulsionsarefirstsubjectedtoaRapidRecoveryTest which removes any water phase and volatile oils to produce a Recovered Binder .
The Recovered Binder has similar properties to that produced from other evaporative tests but is achieved over a shorter period and the Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Bituminous Bound Materials Amendment May use of nitrogen replacing air reduces risks associated with volatile oils in the oven .
The Recovered Binder in rheological terms is equivalent to that recovered using BS EN .
TheAgeingProfileisprovidedbycontinuingtheageingoftheRecoveredBinderintheMRTFOatahigher temperaturereplacingthenitrogengaswithairandremovingsamplesafterspecifiedperiodsfortesting.A Stabilised Binder equivalent in rheological terms to that produced using BS EN may be obtained from theAgeingProfilePlotforaparticularemulsion.Fluxedandvegetalfluxedbinderswherevolatileoilsarethought to be present may also be tested using this protocol .
Preservatives penetration grade bitumen used as a control is subjected to Shortterm Ageing in the MRTFOT followed by an extended period at a lower temperature to simulate the ageing of the bitumen in a road pavement .
This aged bitumen control is then cooled to ambient and treated with the preservative .
Most of the volatile oils are then removed by conditioning the samples in the MRTFOT using a nitrogen blanket .
The aged bitumen treated by preservative is then subjected to further ageing with the MRTFOT .
The properties of the aged bitumen after action ofthepreservativeareassessedbyanAgeingProfileusingrheologyandcomparedwiththeAgeingProfileof the control bitumen .
Definitions ForthepurposesoftheproceduresspecifiedinthisClausethefollowingdefinitionsapply i Laboratory Sample sample of bituminous binder intended for laboratory tests .
It may be a spot sample a composite sample or a part thereof a divided sample as described in BS EN .
ii Test Sample sample of bituminous binder produced by treatment or subdivision of a laboratory sample for individual test BS EN .
iii Recovered Bindermaterialremainingafterremovalofwaterorfluxfromapolymermodified orunmodifiedbituminousemulsionorfluxedbinderinthepresenceofnitrogenequivalenttothe recovered binder using BS EN .
iv Aged Binder material remaining after the Ageing protocol .
v Shortterm Aged Binder material obtained during the MRTFOT which is equivalent to that provided by BS EN RTFOT vi Longterm Aged Binder material obtained during the MRTFOT which is equivalent to that provided by BS EN vii Ageing Profile graphical plot of performancerelated results from samples tested during the ageing protocol of this method .
Performancerelated testing is carried out using a Dynamic Shear Rheometer DSR providing G and phase angle data at a determined temperature and frequency .
Test Apparatus common to all protocols The following test apparatus shall be used i RTFOT apparatus to BS EN .
ii Eightidentifiablesamplecanswiththreadedscrewtoplidsorotherfixingsystemmanufactured fromaluminiumandcoatedonallinternalsurfaceswithpolytetrafluoroethylenePTFEwithinternal dimensions and aperture diameter L as shown below Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Bituminous Bound Materials Amendment May ThetaperinthethroatfromLaperturetolidtopis FIGURE Sample Can and Lid both with threads iii Eight screws manufactured from high quality stainless steel surgical quality complying with BS ENdesignation.toafinemachinedfinish.Allscrewsshallhavedimensionsdiameter .. mmlength.mmandhavebetweenandturnswithapitchof.mm.The depthofcutshallbe.mmwithasemicircularprofileseeFigure.Atoneendthescrewshall haveanunthreadedshank.mmlongand .. mmdiameterendinginaconetruncated togiveaflatendattheapex.to.mmdiameter.Theminimumweightofascrewshallbeg .
The direction of screw shall be such that the binder sample is drawn to the closed end of the sample can bottle when the can containing the screw is rotated in the carousel .
If the RTFO carousel rotates anticlockwise viewed from the front screws with a righthand thread are required and if the carousel rotates clockwise screws with a left hand thread are required .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Bituminous Bound Materials Amendment May Dimension a .mm to mm FIGURE Screw with Righthanded Thread for anticlockwise rotating carousel iv Aspatulaforremovingthebinderfromthesamplecansaflatbladewithasquareendhasbeenfound suitable .
v A balance accurate to .g .
vi AtimercapableoftimingminutesaccuratetosecondinfiveminutesandfortheMRTFOTa timer capable of timing hours to the same accuracy .
vii Nitrogen gas supply for Rapid Recovery Test and preservative test .
viii Air supply clean dry air for MRTFOT .
ix An oven to preheat the sample cans and the binder to the required temperature .
Principle of the Ageing Profile Test for Polymer Modified and Unmodified Bituminous Binders for Asphalts Athinfilmofbinderisrotatedinaluminiumsamplecanswithscrewtoplidsbothcoatedinternally with PTFE replacing glass bottles using the Rolling Thin Film Oven Test RTFOT apparatus as described in BS EN .
Special screws are used to disturb the binder and maintain a homogenous material during Ageing.Airisjettedoverthefilmofbinderforamuchlongerperiodthanintheconventionaltestandalower temperature used in order to simulate the ageing of the binder in the road after application .
The screws accelerate theprocessandarenecessarytomaintainahomogeneoussampleespeciallywhentestingpolymermodified binders which tend to form a skin and may phase separate in static ageing tests .
The initial conditioning test is to simulate the changes to the properties of the binder caused by the high temperatures during manufacture transport and laying termed Shortterm Ageing .
Further ageing is carried out at a reduced temperature and samples removed after set periods and tested so that an AgeingProfilemaybeplotted .
Test Procedure for Determining the Ageing Profile of Hot Mixed Polymer Modified and Unmodified Bituminous Binders for Asphalts Obtain a sample in accordance with BS EN .
Stir the sample thoroughly to ensure it is completely homogenized.Ifsubsamplesaretakentheseshallhaveaminimumvolumeofml.EnsurethattheRTFOis levelsothatthehorizontalaxesofthesamplecanswheninpositioninthecarouselarelevel.Preheattheovento Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Bituminous Bound Materials Amendment May Chisgenerallysufficient.ForbindersusedtomanufacturewarmmixedasphaltssubstituteCfor C throughout the test procedure .
Insert a stainless steel screw into each of the sample cans with the tapered end of the screw towards the aperture of the container and record the mass of each assembly to .g .
Heat the sample cans and the stainless steel screws to Cformin .
HeatthesampletoC.Thoroughlystirthesampletoensurehomogeneityimmediatelypriortodecanting into the sample cans .
Pour .. gofthesampleintoapreheatedsamplecanandrecordthemasswithlid.Immediatelyafter weighing roll the sample cans to ensure distribution of the binder on the walls of the can .
Mount the sample can in the carousel of the RTFO .
Repeat for the remaining sample cans .
Close the door of the RTFObetweenmountingeachsamplecaninthecarousel.Theperiodbetweenweighingthefirstsamplecanwith binder and mounting of all the sample cans and the start of the rotation of the carousel shall not exceed minutes .
Whenthecarouselisfullyloadedrotatethecarriageassemblyataspeedof .. min.Starttheflowofairat asetrateofmlmin.Startthetimer.Maintainthesamplesintheovenandtheairflowingformin fromthetimethetesttemperaturereachesC .
IfthetesttemperatureofCisnotreachedwithinthefirstminutesdiscontinuethetest .
Afterminsamplecansminimummayberemovedfortestingandtodeterminemasslossifrequired .
This is the Shortterm Aged binder equivalent to RTFOT BS EN .
TocontinuetheAgeingProfiletestmaintainthetemperatureatCforafurtherminuteswiththecarousel rotatingintheairflowthenreducethetemperatureoftheoventoC.NotethetimetheRTFOtakesto reach C. Once the temperature has been achieved continue to rotate the samples in the air supply and remove sample cans to obtain samples of aged binder as required for testing after three periods hmintermedAged Binder hmintermedAged Binder hmintermedAged Binder this is the Longterm Aged Binder equivalent to PAV .
Other periods may be used either for convenience or to allow other degrees of ageing to be investigated .
TABLE Summary of Sampling Times Stage Gas RTFO Temperature Time Sampling Cumulative time Ageing Air C min RTFOT Equivalent mins Air C min None h min Air C h Aged test samples h min Air C h Aged test samples h min Air C h Aged test samples equivalent to PAV h min For binders used to manufacture Warm Asphalt Short Term Ageing at C is not required therefore replace C by C in Table and report in addition Aged result ageing at C after a cumulative time of hmin .
Handling of the Aged Binder If the binder is to be tested immediately remove a sample can from the carousel extract the screw using a small spatula and set the screw aside for cleaning .
Place the sample cans in an oven preheated to the softening pointofthebinderplusCifknownorCifthepropertiesofthebinderareunknownformin .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Bituminous Bound Materials Amendment May Place the containers on their sides in an oven .
This allows the binder to drain to one side of the container which is more easily removed with the spatula .
Attheendofminremovethesamplecanfromtheovenunscrewthelidandusingthespatulascrapethe aged binder from the sample can and prepare the test samples in accordance with the relevant test method .
Warming the spatula to the same temperature as the binder facilitates removal of the binder .
If the aged binder from more than one sample can is needed to produce a test sample combine the aged binder from the sample cans and reheat .
Reheating for testing shall be in accordance with BS EN ensuring that agedbinderisheatedfornolongerthanisabsolutelynecessary.Thebindershallbethoroughlyhomogenizedby stirring after heating and before being used for testing while taking care not to entrain any air .
If the binder is not to be tested immediately remove a sample can from the RTFO extract the screw using a small spatula and set the screw aside for cleaning .
Unscrew the lid and using the spatula scrape the aged binder from the sample can and place on a silicon sheet .
The binder shall be sealed and stored at between C to C. The sample shall be reheated in accordance with BS EN and homogenised immediately before testing .
If the aged samples are to be transferred to another laboratory for testing they shall not be subjected to temperatures greater than ambient after ageing and before testing and the delay before testing shall not exceed hours .
The thermal history of the sample shall be recorded .
Principle of the Ageing Profile Test for Polymer Modified or Unmodified Bituminous Emulsions or Fluxed Binders Athinfilmofbinderisrotatedinaluminiumsamplecanswithscrewtoplidsbothcoatedinternallywith PTFE replacing glass bottles using the RTFOT apparatus as described in BS EN to evaporate water frombituminousemulsionsandorthelightsolventorhighlyvolatilefractionfromfluxedorotherbinders.Special screws are used to disturb the binder and maintain a homogenous material during breaking andor curing .
Nitrogen gasinsteadofairisjettedoverthefilmofbituminousbinderatalowertemperatureinordertominimizeageing effectsandsimulatetheconditionofthebindersoonafterapplication.Thefirstpartoftheprocessiscarriedout with the RTFO set at C to prevent frothing of the binder .
The temperature is then increased to C to drive off any remaining water andor solvent to provide the Recovered Binder which is equivalent to the recovered binder obtainedfromBSEN.TheAgeingProfileisprovidedbycontinuingtheageingofthebinderinthe RTFOatCreplacingthenitrogengaswithairandremovingsamplesafterspecifiedperiodsfortesting .
Test Procedure for Recovery and Ageing of Bituminous Emulsion and Fluxed Binders Obtain a sample in accordance with BS EN .
Stir the sample thoroughly to ensure it is completely homogenized.Thetemperatureofthebindersampleshallnotbelessthanofthenormalapplication temperature in degrees Celsius and shall be recorded for example high binder content surface dressing emulsion mayrequireaminimumofCorapolymermodifiedfluxedbinderC.Thesamplehistoryifknownshall be recorded this is important as some ageing may have occurred .
If subsamples are taken these shall have a minimumvolumeofml.Ensurethattheovenislevelsothatthehorizontalaxesofthesamplecanswhenin positioninthecarriagearelevel.PreheattheoventoChisgenerallysufficient .
Insert a stainless steel screw into each of the sample cans with the tapered end of the screw towards the aperture of the container and record the mass of each assembly to .g .
Heat the sample cans lids and the stainless steel screws toCformin .
HeatthesampletotheapplicationtemperatureofthebinderorifthisisnotknowntoC.Thoroughlystir the sample to ensure homogeneity immediately prior to decanting into the sample cans taking care to minimise loss of water content andor any volatile oil .
Some cutback binders and other binders such as primers having low flashpointsarenotsuitableforthistest.Ifthereisanydoubtconcerningthevolatilenatureofthesamplefortesta suitableflashpointtestmustbecarriedoutbeforeproceedingwiththeAgeingProfiletestorheatingtoC .
Pour .. gofthesampleintoapreheatedsamplecanandrecordthemass.Immediatelyafterweighingroll the containers to ensure distribution of the binder round the bottle .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Bituminous Bound Materials Amendment May Mount the sample can in the carousel of the RTFO .
Repeat for the remaining sample cans .
Close the door of the RTFObetweenmountingeachsamplecaninthecarousel.Theperiodbetweenweighingthefirstsamplecanwith binder and mounting of all the sample cans and the start of the rotation of the carousel shall not exceed minutes .
Whenthecarouselisfullyloadedrotatethecarriageassemblyataspeedof .. min.Starttheflowof nitrogenatasetrateofmlmin.Startthetimer.Maintainthesamplesintheovenandthenitrogen flowingforminfromthetimethetesttemperaturereachesC.Atthisstagetheremaystillberesidual water in emulsion binders especially those with high polymer contents .
IfthetesttemperatureofCisnotreachedwithinthefirstminutesdiscontinuethetest .
IncreasethetemperatureoftheoventoC.NotethetimetheRTFOtakestoreachC.Oncethe temperaturehasbeenachievedcontinuetorotatethecarouselforafurtherminatC.Attheendof the minutes turn off the nitrogen .
If required sample cans may be removed and the samples may be used for testing or determination of mass loss .
This is the Recovered Binder and is equivalent to that obtained using BS EN .
TheAgeingProfilecanbedeterminedbymaintainingtheRTFOatCandswitchingtoanairsupplysetat mlmin .
Rotate the samples in the air supply and remove sample cans to obtain samples of aged binder as required for testing after three periods hmintermedAged Binder hmintermedAged Binder and hmintermedAged Binder Other periods may be used either for convenience or to allow different degrees of ageing to be investigated .
Long term Ageing equivalent to PAV has been found to occur at hours .
It takes longer to achieve than with asphalt binder because there is no shortterm ageing at C. The PAV ageing period is not thought to be relevant for emulsion binders used in most road applications .
If samples at hours are not required to simulate PAV a combined sample from three sample cans may be useful at and hours or another aged sample from two cans sayathoursmaybeobtainedfortesttoenhancetheAgeingProfile TABLE Summary of Sampling Times Stage Gas RTFO Temperature Time Sampling Cumulative time Recovery Nitrogen C min none h min Nitrogen Ramp to C min approx none h min Nitrogen C min Recovered binder test samples h min Ageing Air C h Aged test samples h min Air C h Aged test samples h min Air C h optional Aged test samples h min Handling of the Recovered Binder If the binder is to be tested immediately remove a sample can from the carousel extract the screw using a small spatula and set the screw aside for cleaning .
Immediately transfer the sample can s to an oven and heat until at the required test temperature .
Place the containers on their sides in an oven .
This allows the binder to drain to one side of the container which is more easily removed with the spatula .
Unscrew the lid of the sample can and using the spatula scrape the recovered binder from the sample can and place in the test apparatus .
Warming the spatula to C facilitates removal of the binder .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Bituminous Bound Materials Amendment May If the recovered binder from more than one sample can is needed to produce a test sample combine the recovered binder from the sample cans and reheat .
Reheating for testing shall be in accordance with BS EN ensuring that recovered binder is heated for no longer than is absolutely necessary .
The recovered binder shall be thoroughly homogenizedbystirringafterheatingandbeforebeingusedfortestingwhiletakingcarenottoentrainanyair .
If the recovered binder is not to be tested immediately remove a sample can from the RTFO extract the screw using a small spatula and set the screw aside for cleaning .
Unscrew the lid and using the spatula scrape the recovered binder from the sample can and place on a silicon sheet .
The binder shall be sealed and stored at between C to C. The sample shall be reheated in accordance with BS EN and homogenised immediately before testing .
If the recovered samples are to be transferred to another laboratory for testing they shall not be subjected to temperatures greater than ambient after recovery and before testing and the delay before testing shall not exceed hours .
The thermal history of the sample shall be recorded .
Handling of the Aged Binder If the binder is to be tested immediately remove a sample can from the carousel extract the screw using a small spatula and set the screw aside for cleaning .
Place the sample can s in an oven preheated to the softening pointofthebinderplusCifknownorCifthepropertiesofthebinderareunknownformin .
Place the sample cans on their sides in an oven .
This allows the binder to drain to one side of the sample can which is more easily removed with the spatula .
Attheendofminremovethesamplecanfromtheovenunscrewthelidandusingthespatulascrapethe aged binder from the sample can and prepare the test samples in accordance with the relevant test method .
Warming the spatula to the same temperature as the binder facilitates removal of the binder .
If the aged binder from more than one sample can is needed to produce a test sample combine the aged binder from the containers and reheat .
Reheating for testing shall be in accordance with BS EN ensuring that agedbinderisheatedfornolongerthanisabsolutelynecessary.Thebindershallbethoroughlyhomogenizedby stirring after heating and before being used for testing while taking care not to entrain any air .
If the binder is not to be tested immediately remove a sample can from the RTFO extract the screw using a small spatula and set the screw aside for cleaning .
Unscrew the lid and using the spatula scrape the aged binder from the sample can and place on a silicon sheet .
The binder shall be sealed and stored at between C to C. The sample shall be reheated in accordance with BS EN and homogenised immediately before testing .
If the aged samples are to be transferred to another laboratory for testing they shall not be subjected to temperatures greater than ambient after ageing and before testing and the delay before testing shall not exceed hours .
The thermal history of the sample shall be recorded .
Principle of Assessing the Action of Preservatives using the MRTFOT Athinfilmofpenetrationgradebinderisrotatedinaluminiumsamplecanscoatedinternally with PTFE replacing glass bottles using the Rolling Thin Film Oven Test RTFOT apparatus as described in BS EN .
Special screws are used to disturb the binder and maintain a homogenous material during conditioning .
The bitumen is subjected to Shortterm Ageing followed by an extended period in the RTFO to simulate the ageing of the bitumen in a road pavement .
The properties of the Longterm Aged bitumen may be determined at this stage .
The aged bitumen control in the remaining samples is then cooled to ambient treated with the preservative and left for hours .
Most of the remaining highly volatile oils are subsequently removed by conditioning the samples in the RTFO using a nitrogen blanket .
The aged bitumen treated by preservative is thensubjectedtofurtherageingwiththeModifiedRTFO.Thepropertiesoftheagedbitumenafteractionofthe preservativeareassessedbyanAgeingProfiletestusingrheologyvaluesofcomplexshearstiffnessmodulus GandphaseangleinaccordancewithBSEN.Cohesiondurabilitymayalsobedetermined .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Bituminous Bound Materials Amendment May Test Procedure for Determining the Ageing Profile of Aged Paving Grade Bitumen as a Control Treated with a Preservative Obtain a sample of paving grade binder in accordance with BS EN .
Stir the sample thoroughly toensureitiscompletelyhomogenized.Ifsubsamplesaretakentheseshallhaveaminimumvolumeofml .
EnsurethattheRTFOislevelsothatthehorizontalaxesofthesamplecanswheninpositioninthecarouselare level.PreheattheoventoChisgenerallysufficient .
Insert a weighed stainless steel screw into each of the sample cans with the tapered end of the screw towards the aperture of the can lid record the mass of each assembly to .g .
Heat the sample cans lids and the stainless steel screwstoCformin .
Heat the sample to the maximum storage temperature of the binder .
Thoroughly stir the sample to ensure homogeneity immediately prior to decanting into the sample cans .
Pour .. gofthesampleintoapreheatedsamplecanandrecordthemass.Immediatelyafterweighingroll the sample can on the bench to ensure distribution of the binder round the walls of the can .
Mount the sample can in the carousel of the RTFO .
Repeat for the remaining sample cans .
Close the door of the RTFObetweenmountingeachsamplecaninthecarousel.Theperiodbetweenweighingthefirstsamplecanwith binder and mounting of all the sample cans and the start of the rotation of the carousel shall not exceed minutes .
Whenthecarouselisfullyloadedrotatethecarriageassemblyataspeedof .. min.Starttheflowofairat asetrateofmlmin.Startthetimer.Maintainthesamplesintheovenandtheairflowingformin from the time the test temperature reaches C. IfthetesttemperatureofCisnotreachedwithinthefirstminutesdiscontinuethetest .
AfterminatCsamplecansminimumshallberemovedfortestingandtodeterminemassloss .
This is the Shortterm Aged Binder .
ReducethetemperatureoftheoventoC.NotethetimetheRTFOtakestoreachC.Oncethis temperaturehasbeenachievedcontinuetorotatethesamplesintheairsupplyformin.Attheendofthis period remove the sample cans from the RTFO and determine their mass loss .
Removethescrewsandweightodeterminethemassofbinderretainedoneachidentifiedscrew .
A quantity of binder shall be removed from each sample can which shall be glessthemassofbinderretainedontheparticularscrewremoved .
It may be necessary to warm the sample cans to facilitate the removal of the screws and binder .
After removing the binder lay the sample cans on their sides and allow them to cool to ambient temperature .
Add.gofpreservativetoeachsamplecontainerandswillthepreservativearoundthesamplecontainerfor approximately seconds .
Determine the mass of each sample can .
The sample cans with the binder and preservative are stored on their sides with the pooled binder at the bottom inaventilatedfumecupboardatambienttemperatureforhours.Thisprocessallowsanyverylowflashpoint volatile oil to safely evaporate and consequently reduce the amount of hydrocarbon solvent within the sample can .
PreheattheoventoCandtransferthesamplecansfromthefumecupboardtotheRTFOcarousel.Startthe carouselandjetnitrogenatmlminoverthesamplecansformin .
Identify and weigh eight clean screws and heat the screws to C. AfterhourstheRTFOtemperatureisraisedfromCtoCandairjettedatmlminsubstituted for the nitrogen supply .
Note the time when the oven achieves C. When the RTFO has reached C stop the carousel and add a preheated screw to each sample can with the tapered end of the screw towards the aperturelid of the sample can and noting which screw is added to which sample can .
Restart the carousel and continue the conditioning of the samples at C in air jetted at mlminformin .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Bituminous Bound Materials Amendment May Remove the sample cans from the RTFO to obtain samples of aged binder as required for testing and determine the mass of each sample can .
The control bitumen may be substituted with a binder recovered from a road or from a laboratory aged sample in which case the Shortterm Ageing and subsequent ageing protocol are not carried out because the binder will already have been aged and heated .
In this case the recovered binder sample is heated in accordance with BSENand.gaddedtoheatedcansCwhicharethenrolledtoachieveafilmaroundthewalls .
Afterthistheyarecooled.gpreservativeaddedandthepreservativetreatedsamplessubjectedtothesame AgeingProfileprotocolasdescribedabove .
Handling of the Preservative Treated Aged Bitumen If the binder is to be tested immediately remove a container from the carousel extract the screw using a small spatula and set the screw aside for cleaning .
Place the sample can s in an oven preheated to C for min.Placethecontainersontheirsidesintheoven.Thisallowsthebindertodraintoonesideofthe container which is more easily removed with the spatula .
Attheendofminremovethecontainerfromtheovenunscrewthelidandusingthespatulascrapethe aged binder from the container and prepare the test samples in accordance with the relevant test method .
Warming the spatula to the same temperature as the binder facilitates removal of the binder .
If the aged binder from more than one container is needed to produce a test sample combine the aged binder from the containers and reheat .
Reheating for testing shall be in accordance with BS EN ensuring that aged binderisheatedfornolongerthanisabsolutelynecessary.Thebindershallbethoroughlyhomogenizedbystirring after heating and before being used for testing while taking care not to entrain any air .
If the binder is not to be tested immediately remove a container from the RTFO extract the screw using a small spatula and set the screw aside for cleaning .
Unscrew the lid and using the spatula scrape the aged binder from the container and place on a silicone sheet .
The binder shall be sealed and stored at between C to C. The sample shall be reheated in accordance with BS EN and homogenised immediately before testing .
If the aged samples are to be transferred to another laboratory for testing they shall not be subjected to temperatures greater than ambient after ageing and before testing and the delay before testing shall not exceed hours .
The thermal history of the sample shall be recorded .
Report Sample description e.g .
type agecondition and source .
TheAgeingProfiletestprocedureadoptedforthework .
The change in mass of the sample from each stage of the recovery and or ageing protocol shall be plotted to developanAgeingProfileformasschange .
Similarly results of tests for example G using BS EN carried out after each stage of recovery and or ageingprotocolshallbeplottedtodevelopanAgeingProfileforthatproperty.Theseresultsshallinclude AplotofG.HzoverarangeoftemperaturesbetweenCandC Aplotofphaseangle.HzoverarangeoftemperaturesbetweenCandC Gandphaseangleat.HzandC Temperature.HzwherethephaseangleisdegreesViscousElasticTransitionVET temperature G.HzattheVETtemperaturewherephaseangleisdegrees For Clause hard grade binder samples and other samples where they are considered to have a softening point above C the temperature range shall be increased to C. The thermal history of the samples if they are not tested immediately shall be reported .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Bituminous Bound Materials Amendment May Not used Modified Binder Storage Stability Test Scope Thistestdeterminesthesusceptibilityofapreblendedmodifiedbindertoseparationorinstabilityduring prolonged storage at high temperature .
Summary of Method Asampleofmodifiedbindershallbecontainedinaclosedvesselofspecificdimensionsandshallbe maintainedatCfordayshours.Abindersampleshallthenbetakenfromthetopandbottomthirdsof thevesselandbothsamplesshallbetestedforcompliancewiththebinderspecification .
Apparatus The apparatus shall consist of i Cylindermadeofheatresistantglassmmlongandmminternaldiameterhavinga removablelidflushfittingtoexcludeairwhenthecylinderisfilledwithbinderandprovidedwith three drain valves one at the base the other two spaced equally down the side of the cylinder to allow the sample to be divided into three equal portions as in subClause vii of the procedure .
Alternatively a thinwall sheet metal tube or similar vessel such as a ml beverage can of similar dimensionstotheglasscylinderandhavingasimilarlyremovablelidfittedeitherwithorwithout drainvalves .
ii OvenelectricallyheatedfanassistedandcapableofmaintainingatemperatureofChaving interior dimensions not less than mm from the top of the heating element to the top of the chamber and not less than mm in width and depth .
iii Tube holder made of metal that will hold either the glass cylinder or sheet metal can in a vertical positionsuchthatthebaseofthecylinderorcanisnotindirectcontactwiththeovenfloor .
iv Apparatus for determining the penetration and softening point of bitumen in accordance with BS EN and BS EN .
v Transferdishesmadeofmetaleachofacapacitysufficienttoholdatleastonethirdofthetest sample .
Test Procedure The procedure shall be as follows i ThebulksampleofmodifiedbindershallbeobtainedbysamplinginaccordancewithBSEN .
ii Placethebulksampleofmodifiedbinderandtheglasscylinderormetaltubeorequivalentvesselin thepreheatedovenatCforaperiodnotexceeding .. hours .
iii Remove the bulk sample from the oven and thoroughly mix by stirring to ensure obtaining a representative test sample .
iv Removetheglasscylinderormetaltubeorequivalentvesselfromtheovenandcompletelyfillwith themodifiedbindertestsampletoallownoairspacewhenthelidisfitted .
v Supportthefilledcylinderinaverticalpositionintheholderandtransfertotheovenwhichshallbe controlledatatemperatureofCandallowtostandundisturbedforaperiodofhours .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Bituminous Bound Materials Amendment May vi If a vessel having drainvalves has been used for the test proceed using Method A below otherwise proceed using Method B. vii Method A a Remove the glass cylinder or alternative approved vessel from the oven keeping the cylinder vertical .
b Open the uppermost drainvalve and run off the top third portion of the test sample into a transfer dish for testing .
c Open the middle drainvalve and run off the middle third portion of the test sample into a suitable container and discard .
d Open the lower drainvalve and run off the bottom third portion of the test sample into a transfer dish for testing .
viii Method B a Remove the tube or vessel containing the test sample from the oven and allow it to cool at room temperaturefor.hourswhilstmaintainingthevesselverticalintheholder .
b Whenthevesselofmodifiedbinderhascooledtoambienttemperatureremoveitfromthe tube holder and make two cuts through the vessel and the sample at positions onethird and two thirds of the length from and parallel to the base .
c Retain the top and bottom thirds of the test sample for further testing and discard the middle third .
ix Determine the penetrations and softening points of the top and bottom thirds of the test sample in accordance with BS EN and BS EN .
Reporting For both the top and bottom thirds of the test sample the following shall be reported i The penetration to BS EN .
ii The softening point to BS EN .
iii Whether Method A or Method B was used .
iv The location and date of obtaining the bulk sample and the dates of test .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Bituminous Bound Materials Amendment May F NATIONAL ALTERATIONS OF THE OVERSEEING ORGANISATIONS TSWG Hot Rolled Asphalt Surface Course Design Mixtures Hot Rolled Asphalt surface course design mixes shall conform to BS EN the example in BSI PDAnnexCandrequirementsspecifiedincontractspecificAppendix.Themixturedesignationshall be one of the following i HRA F surf xxyy des ii HRA F surf xxyy des iii HRA F surf xxyy des iv HRA F surf xxyy des v HRA F surf xxyy des vi HRA C surf xxyy des vii HRA C surf xxyy des viii HRA C surf xxyy des ix HRA C surf xxyy des x HRA C surf xxyy des UnlessotherwisespecifiedincontractspecificAppendixthegradeofbitumenrequiredxxyyshallbe .
Coarse Aggregate The resistance to polishing of the coarse aggregate for chipped mixtures shall be category PSV as definedinBSENclauseForunchippedmixturesthecoarseaggregateshallhaveaminimum declaredPSVandamaximumdeclaredAAVasspecifiedincontractspecificAppendix .
Coated Chippings Whenrequiredcoatedchippingsshallbeeithermmormmsizeinaccordancewith BSI PD asspecifiedincontractspecificAppendix.Coatedchippingsshallalsocomplywith Clause .
Marshall Stability and Flow WhenrequiredtheMarshallstabilityandflowofthemixtureatthetargetbindercontentshallbeas specifiedincontractspecificAppendix.Stabilityandflowvaluesshallbedeterminedinaccordancewiththe procedures in BS Annex H. TS Stone Mastic Asphalt Surface Course TS SMATSspecificationshallbeasperChapterofTSSurfaceCourseSpecification Guidance Issue October or subsequent issue available via the following link httpwww.transport.gov.scotsystemfilesuploaded_contentdocumentstsc_basic_pagesTransportTSIA BTSVerOct.pdf Amendment February MANUAL OF CONTRACT DOCUMENTS FOR HIGHWAY WORKS VOLUME SPECIFICATION FOR HIGHWAY WORKS SERIES ROAD PAVEMENTS CONCRETE MATERIALS Contents Clause Title Page General Strength Classes of Concrete and Constituent Materials for Pavement Layers Air Content Density Pavement Concrete Strength Consistence Workability Not Used Separation and Waterproof Membranes Steel Reinforcement Transverse Joints Longitudinal Joints Dowel Bars Tie Bars Joint Grooves Groove Formers and Bottom Crack Inducers Joint Filler Board Preparation and Sealing of Joint Grooves Joint Seals Joints at Manhole and Gully Slabs Inspection of Dowel Bars Side Forms Rails and Guide Wires to Not Used Transport and Delivery Construction by Machine Construction by Small Paving Machines or Hand Guided Methods Finished Surface Requirements Curing Clause Title Page Trial Length Texturing of Hardened Concrete Wet Lean Concrete Measurement of Macrotexture Depth Volumetric Patch Technique Thin Bonded Repairs Full Depth Repairs and Reinstatements Bay Replacement Slab Lifting Using Space Frames Pressure Grouting Vacuum Grouting Continuously Reinforced Slabs and Roadbases Full Depth Repair Summary of Rates for Sampling and Testing Concrete for Pavement Layers to Not Used Foamed Concrete Pavements with an Exposed Aggregate Concrete Surface Weather Conditions for Laying of Cementitious Materials F to Not Used F Use of Surfaces by Traffic and Construction Plant F Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Concrete Materials ROAD PAVEMENTS CONCRETE MATERIALS General This Series is part of the Specification for Highway Works .
Whilst this Series is particularly relevant to the subject matter in its title it must be read in conjunction with the general requirements in Series and and with all other Series relevant to the specification for the particular works to be undertaken .
Strength Classes of Concrete and Constituent Materials for Pavement Layers Concrete in rigid or rigid composite pavements shall be one of the classes given in Table in accordance with the pavement design alternatives permitted in contract specific Appendix .
Unless otherwise specified in contract specific Appendix concrete shall conform with the requirements of BS EN and the requirements of this Series .
The constituents of the concrete shall conform with BS EN and BS and BS and BS EN and the requirements of this Series .
TABLE Pavement Layers Concrete Strength Classes Pavement Layer BS EN BS BS EN BS BS EN Clause Designed Concrete Standardised Prescribed Concrete Designated Concrete i Surface slabs Unreinforced concrete URC Jointed reinforced concrete JRC Continuously reinforced concrete pavement CRCP CC C to and ii Continuously reinforced concrete base CRCB CC C iii CRCP and CRCB ground beam anchorages C iv v vi vii Wet lean concrete Wet lean concrete Wet lean concrete Wet lean concrete For bases or subbases as required in contract specific Appendix CC .
CC CC CC ST ST ST ST GEN GEN GEN GEN C C C C NOTE Cores shall not be taken from ground beam anchorages Cement The general term cement in this Series means any of the materials in i or the combinations in ii below i Cements Complying with a Portland cement CEM I BS EN b Portlandslag cement CEM IIAS and CEM IIBS BS EN c Blastfurnace cement CEM IIIA and CEM IIIB BS EN d Portlandfly ash cement CEM IIAV and CEM IIBV BS EN e Pozzolanic cement CEM IVA BS EN Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Concrete Materials ii Combinations a Portland cement CEM I with ground granulated blastfurnace slag ggbs for use with Portland cement CEM I BS EN BS EN and BS EN b Portland cement CEM I with pulverisedfuel ash pfa for use as a cementitious component in structural concrete BS EN BS EN and BS EN c Portland cement CEM I with pozzolanic additive having a current BBA Certificate BS EN iii In each cubic metre of fully compacted concrete the cement content shall be in accordance with Table .
For mm maximum size aggregate add kgm and for mm maximum size add kgm .
iv When used the proportion of silica fume to CEM I shall be .
TABLE Minimum Cement or Combination Contents with mm Maximum Aggregate Class BS C C C C C C C Class BS EN CC CC CC CC .
CC CC CC Cement In surface slabs overlaid by mm minimum thin surface course system complying with Clause In at least the top mm of surface slabs Min .
Portland cement CEM I BS EN kgm a or a or b or b or Min .
other cements or combinations permitted in sub Clauses i and ii kgm a or a or b or b or For mixtures preblended or mixed on site Maximum proportion of ggbs Maxmin .
proportion of pfa Min .
CEM I content kgm NOTES a denotes maximum aggregatecement ratio of by mass .
b denotes maximum aggregatecement ratio of by mass .
Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Concrete Materials Water Water from a water company supply may be used without testing .
Water from other sources may be used if it conforms to BS EN .
The water content shall be the minimum required to provide the specified consistence for full compaction of the concrete to the required density as determined by trial concrete mixes or other means and the maximum free watercement ratio shall be .
for strength classes CC CC C and C and .
for strength classes CC .
CC C and C. The requirements for standardised prescribed concrete shall be in accordance with BS EN and BS .
Admixtures Concrete in at least the top mm of surface slabs shall incorporate an airentraining admixture complying with BS EN except i for pavements with an exposed aggregate concrete surface constructed to Clause where at least the top mm of the surface slab shall be air entrained or ii for surface slabs of pavements with at least a class C concrete iii for surface slabs of pavements with a class C concrete which are to be overlaid by a mm minimum thickness thin surface course system complying with Clause and iv for surface slabs of pavements with a class C concrete which are to be overlaid by a mm minimum thickness thin surface course system complying with Clause .
Plasticisers or water reducing admixtures shall comply with BS EN .
Admixtures containing calcium chloride shall not be used .
Aggregate Aggregates for all pavement concrete including wet lean shall comply with BS EN .
Crushed concrete which complies with the quality and grading requirements of BS EN and Table of BS may also be used in all pavement concretes except aggregate concrete surface complying with Clause .
Alternatively coarse aggregate may be crushed aircooled blastfurnace slag complying with BS EN and shall be Category FI or FI for concrete of classes CC .
to CC and over class CC respectively .
PFA when used as part of the aggregate shall comply with BS EN .
Once the appropriate gradings have been determined they shall not be varied without the approval of the Overseeing Organisation .
Irrespective of source the aggregate will be considered suitable if i the resistance to freezing and thawing complies with BS EN clause .. for pavement and wet lean concrete and ii the resistance to fragmentation complies with category LA of BS EN clause .
for concrete surface slabs and LA of BS EN clause .
for concrete bases and wet lean concrete or iii evidence can be provided to the Overseeing Organisation of satisfactory use of aggregate from the source .
The water absorption WA of the coarse aggregate from the source determined in accordance with BS EN shall also be declared .
Where recycled coarse aggregate or recycled concrete aggregate is used in this Series they shall comply with the limits specified in Table of BS and it shall have been tested in accordance with Clause .
Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Concrete Materials The maximum size of coarse aggregate D shall not exceed mm .
When the spacing between longitudinal reinforcement is less than mm the maximum size of coarse aggregate D shall not exceed mm .
Sand i.e .
fine aggregate containing more than by mass of acidsoluble material as determined in accordance with BS EN in either the fraction retained on or the fraction passing the .
mm sieve shall not be used in the top mm of surface slabs .
This requirement will not apply for pavements with an exposed aggregate concrete surface constructed to Clause or if it can be shown that the sand ie fine aggregate retained on or the fraction passing the .
mm sieve contains less than per cent by weight of calcium carbonate .
The water absorption of flint coarse aggregate containing white flints for use in concrete surface slabs when determined in accordance with BS EN shall not exceed .
for any separate nominal size fraction .
for the total combination of coarse aggregates in the proportions to be used in the concrete .
Tests shall be carried out on three samples taken at random from the source prior to use .
Tests shall also be carried out during stockpiling or paving once a week or at a lesser rate when authorised by the Overseeing Organisation .
Source of Recycled Aggregates Where recycled coarse aggregate or recycled concrete aggregate is used only crushed concrete resulting from reclamation or processing of concrete previously used in construction which originates from appropriate identified structures with a known history of use shall be used .
In order to detect substances and chemicals harmful to the durability of concrete appropriate tests based on current relevant advice shall be carried out on recycled coarse aggregate and recycled concrete aggregate and the results reported to the Overseeing Organisation .
Chloride Content The chloride ion content of the aggregate to be used in concrete shall be as stated in BS EN .
The chloride class of reinforced concrete or concrete containing embedded metal shall be Cl and unreinforced concrete shall be Cl .
The chloride ion content of the aggregate to be used in concrete with embedded metal shall be determined in accordance with the Volhard reference method in BS EN or in the case of recycled coarse aggregate or recycled concrete aggregate in accordance with BS Part .
Chemical Requirement Acidsoluble sulfate Acidsoluble sulfate content of the aggregates and filler aggregates for concrete pavements including wet lean shall comply with BS EN clause .. and shall be Category AS for aircooled blast furnace slag and for other aggregates Category AS .
Total sulfur Total sulfur content of recycled coarse aggregates recycled concrete aggregates aggregates and filler aggregates shall comply with BS EN clause Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Concrete Materials Air Content The concrete shall meet the requirement for exposure class XF in BS EN .
This shall be achieved by the use of an airentraining agent .
The minimum quantity of air in airentrained concrete as a percentage of the volume of the concrete shall be as in Table TABLE Minimum Air Contents Maximum aggregate size mm Minimum Air Content .
The air content shall be determined at the point of delivery to the paving plant by the pressure gauge method in accordance with BS EN at the rate of one determination per m of slab or at least times per day whichever is the greater in conjunction with tests for consistence and strength .
For areas less than m the rate shall be at least one determination to each m length of slab or less constructed at any one time or at least times per day .
If the air content is outside the specified limits in BS EN the Contractor shall remove the concrete from the works .
The airentraining agent shall be added at the mixer by an apparatus capable of dispensing the correct dose within the tolerance for admixtures given in BS EN to ensure uniform distribution of the agent throughout the batch during mixing .
Density The density of a saturated core cut from the full depth of the concrete pavement shall not be less than of the average density of at least six fully compacted saturated moulded specimens made from the same concrete and tested at the same age .
The density of the concrete pavement shall be determined in accordance with BS EN .
The density of a saturated core cut from the full depth of the concrete pavement shall be determined in accordance with BS EN .
The determination of the saturated density of the fully compacted moulded specimens shall be in accordance with BS EN BS EN and BS EN .
The core shall have an average diameter of at least four times the nominal maximum aggregate size and in any case at least mm diameter .
Where different concrete mixes are used in separate layers the density of each layer shall be separately determined by splitting or cutting the cores between the layers .
Cores shall be taken at the rate given in Clause for trial bays and according to Category in Table of BS EN for the main slab .
If the density of any core is below the minimum required the concrete across the whole width of the slab constructed at the time relating to that core shall be removed .
In unreinforced concrete the whole slab length between joints shall be removed .
For reinforced slabs in order to determine the limit of the defective area of concrete which shall be removed additional cores shall be taken at m intervals on each side of any defective core until concrete of satisfactory density is found .
Defective areas shall be made good with new material in accordance with the specification .
In calculating the density allowance shall be made for any steel in the cores .
Core holes shall be reinstated with compacted concrete with mix proportions of part of Portland cement CEM I parts of sand parts of mm single sized coarse aggregate by mass .
Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Concrete Materials Pavement Concrete Strength Sampling and testing for and compliance with the specified characteristic core strength of designed concretes shall be undertaken by compressive strength testing in accordance with BS EN on cores cut from the full depth of the slab .
No correction for maturity shall be applied to the day or day strength .
Concrete cores of the appropriate size shall be taken cured and tested in accordance with BS EN with the exception that the core shall be cured under water at C C from as soon as practically possible .
The sampling rate shall be as designated in BS EN for Category three cores shall be taken from areas of concrete of up to m and one additional core for every further m of concrete laid .
An exception to the above sampling rate is that in the trial slab at least six cores shall be taken three to be tested at days and three at days .
The end preparation of the core shall be by grinding and the heightdiameter hd ratio of the tested specimen shall be between and .
If during the construction of the trial length the average corrected core compressive strength from the three cores falls below the day corrected core compressive strength given in Table then either the cement content of the concrete shall be increased by by mass or a further trial slab shall be constructed using an improved compaction technique andor an increased cement content .
The increased cement content shall be maintained at least until the three corresponding day core strength tests have been assessed .
If the cement content is increased the concrete shall be adjusted to maintain the required consistence .
TABLE Day Corrected Core Compressive Strengths Class of concrete CEM I concretes Nmm CEM I with pfa or ggbs concretes Nmm CC .
CC CC. . CC CC . . CC Overlapping groups of four consecutive day corrected core strengths shall be used for assessing the pavement for compliance with the criteria in Table A. of BS EN .
The pavement shall be accepted if both the criteria in Table A. are satisfied for four results derived from strength tests on cores taken from the constructed pavement .
Conformity control of the concrete is the responsibility of Contractor .
For small jobs constructed to BS EN cubes shall be used for compliance .
To assess the time for use of a concrete slab by traffic the strength development rate may be predetermined by cubes stored at C made from trial concrete mixes and maturity meters placed in the pavement .
Alternatively pairs of cubes may be made for each m or less and stored alongside the pavement in containers or in such a way that their sides are well insulated .
If thermal insulation is used for accelerated curing the cubes shall be similarly insulated .
Pairs of cubes shall be tested at the intervals specified in contract specific Appendix .
Tests for compliance with the specified strength shall be made in the normal way .
Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Concrete Materials Consistence Workability The consistence shall be determined by the Degree of Compactibility Compaction Index test in accordance with BS EN or the Vebe test in accordance with BS EN .
Alternatively for concrete class C or below consistence may be determined by the slump test in accordance with BS EN The sampling for all concrete classes shall be undertaken in accordance with BS EN and the rate of testing in accordance with Table of BS EN .
Consistence shall be carried out at the point of placing in conjunction with tests for strength and any tests for air content .
The consistence shall be maintained at the optimum within the limits specified in BS EN .
If any determination of consistence gives a result outside the tolerance a further test shall be made immediately on the next available load of concrete .
The average of the two consecutive results and the difference between them shall be calculated .
If the average is not within the tolerance or the difference is greater than .
for CI or mm for slump or seconds for Vebe subsequent samples shall be taken from the delivery vehicles which shall not be allowed to discharge into the works until compliance with the specification has been established .
Not Used Separation and Waterproof Membranes A separation membrane shall be used between jointed reinforced concrete surface slabs or unreinforced concrete surface slabs and the subbase .
Separation membranes shall be impermeable plastic sheeting microns thick laid flat without creases .
Where an overlap of plastic sheets is necessary this shall be at least mm .
There shall be no standing water on or under the membrane when the concrete is placed upon it .
Under CRCP and CRCB a waterproof membrane shall be provided which shall be a bituminous spray in accordance with Clause before concreting .
Where a bituminous spray has been used to cure cementbound material or wet lean concrete then only those areas which have been damaged shall be resprayed after making good .
Steel Reinforcement General Reinforcement shall comply with any of the following standards and shall be cut and bent in accordance with BS .
The reinforcement materials shall be obtained from a firm holding a valid CARES or fully equivalent scheme certificate of approval .
Rebending of carbon steel bars and fabric reinforcement on site shall not be permitted Hot Rolled and Cold Worked Carbon Steel Bars i BS EN and BS Grade BB or BC .
Steel Wires ii BS EN and BS Ribbed Grade B .
Steel Fabric iii BS EN and BS Grade BA BB or BC .
Steel fabric reinforcement shall have a minimum nominal bar size of mm mm for Grade BA .
Steel fabric reinforcement shall be delivered to site in flat mats or prebent .
Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Concrete Materials For hot rolled and cold worked carbon steel bars and for steel fabric reinforcement the bond property requirements for BS shall be complied with based on the surface geometry requirements of that standard .
For steel wire the bond property requirements of BS shall be complied with based on the surface geometry requirements of that standard .
Spacing of bars shall not be less than twice the maximum size of aggregate used .
Laps in longitudinal bars shall be not less than bar diameters or mm whichever is greater .
In continuously reinforced concrete slabs CRCP or CRCB only one third of the laps may be in any one transverse section except in single bay width construction where half the laps may be in any one transverse section .
There shall be a minimum of .
m longitudinally between groups of transverse laps or laps in prefabricated reinforcement sheets .
Alternatively the reinforcement may be butt welded in accordance with Clause .
Laps in any transverse reinforcement shall be a minimum of mm .
Where prefabricated reinforcement sheets are used and longitudinal and transverse laps would coincide no lap is required in the transverse bars within the lap of the longitudinal reinforcement .
These transverse bars may be cropped or fabricated shorter so that the requirements for cover are met .
Alternatively prefabricated sheets incorporating splices ie flying ends may be used to provide nesting of reinforcement in both directions at lap positions .
The lengths of the laps shall be the minimum values previously stated .
If the reinforcement is positioned prior to concreting it shall be fixed on supports and retained in position at the required depth below the finished surface and distance from the edge of the slab so as to ensure that the required cover is achieved .
Reinforcement assembled on site shall be tied or firmly fixed at sufficient intersections to provide sufficient rigidity to ensure that the reinforcement remains in the correct position during construction of the slab .
Alternatively when a reinforced concrete slab JRC CRCP or CRCB is constructed in two layers the reinforcement in the form of prefabricated sheets may be placed on or into the bottom layer which shall be spread and compacted to such a level that it will support the reinforcement without distortion at the required position in the slab .
The sheets shall be tied together at overlaps and after the second layer has been spread and compacted the reinforcement shall have the required cover .
When a reinforced concrete slab is constructed at maximum width as in Clause the transverse reinforcement in the centre of each slab width shall be a minimum of mm nominal diameter bars at mm centres .
This reinforcement shall be at least mm longer than one third of the width of the slab and be lapped to other transverse reinforcement bars or sheets or be continuous across the whole width of each slab .
Jointed Reinforced Concrete Slabs The reinforcement shall be so placed that after compaction of the concrete the cover below the finished surface of the slab is mm for slabs less than mm thick mm for slabs mm or more but less than mm thick mm for slabs mm thick or more .
The negative vertical tolerance shall not be permitted beneath road stud recesses .
Where traffic signal detector loops are to be installed the minimum cover to the reinforcement from the surface shall be mm .
The vertical cover between any longitudinal joint groove forming strip and any reinforcement or tie bars shall be a minimum of mm .
Any transverse bars shall be at right angles to the longitudinal axis of the carriageway .
Any transverse reinforcement shall terminate at mm from the edges of the slab and longitudinal joints where tie bars as in Clause are used .
No longitudinal bars shall lie within mm of a longitudinal joint .
The reinforcement shall terminate mm mm from any transverse joint excluding emergency construction joints .
Continuously Reinforced Concrete Slabs CRCP or CRCB The reinforcement shall be Grade deformed steel bars with the diameters and spacings as described in contract specific Appendix .
The reinforcement shall consist of bars assembled on site or of prefabricated sheets .
Except where otherwise shown on the drawings the longitudinal bars shall be parallel to the centreline of the road .
Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Concrete Materials The reinforcement shall be positioned so that after compaction of the concrete it shall be at the mid depth of the specified thickness of the slab mm .
No longitudinal bar shall lie within mm of a longitudinal joint .
In reinforcement assembled on site longitudinal bars shall be placed immediately above any transverse bars which shall be at right angles to the longitudinal axis of the carriageway .
Any transverse reinforcement shall terminate mm from the edges of the slab and longitudinal joints where tie bars as in Clause are used .
Transverse Joints General Transverse joints shall be provided in unreinforced and jointed reinforced concrete slabs and shall be contraction expansion or warping joints at the spacings described in contract specific Appendix such that for unreinforced concrete slabs the lengthwidth ratio shall be not greater than ..
The spacings may be increased by if limestone coarse aggregate is used throughout the depth of the slab .
Joints in the surface slab and subbase shall be staggered so that they are not coincident vertically and are at least m apart .
Transverse joints shall be straight within the following tolerances along the intended line of the joint which is the straight line transverse to the longitudinal axis of the carriageway except at road junctions or roundabouts where the positions shall be as shown on the drawings .
i deviations of the filler board or bottom crack inducer from the intended line of the joint shall be not greater than mm ii the best fit straight line through the joint groove as constructed shall be not more than mm from the intended line of the joint iii deviations of the joint groove from the best fit straight line of the joint shall be not greater than mm .
Transverse joints on each side of a longitudinal joint shall be in line with each other and of the same type and width .
The position of the joints relative to manholes and gullies shall be in accordance with Clause .
Concrete pavement layers shall be isolated from fixed structures by expansion joints or earthworks or a granular layer over the structure or by bridgetype expansion joints or by lengths of fully flexible pavement construction .
End of pavement surface slabs shall have a transition bay as shown on the drawings leading into the fully flexible construction .
Transverse joints shall have a sealing groove which shall be sealed in compliance with Clause .
Contraction Joints Contraction joints shall consist of i a sawn joint groove complying with Clause ii dowel bars complying with Clause iii a sealing groove complying with Clause .
Expansion Joints Expansion joints shall consist of i a joint filler board complying with Clause ii dowel bars complying with Clause iii a sealing groove complying with Clause .
Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Concrete Materials The filler board shall be positioned vertically within the prefabricated joint assemblies along the line of the joint within the tolerances given in subClause of this Clause and at such depth below the surface as will not impede the passage of the finishing beams on the paving machines .
The joint filler board together with the sealing groove shall provide a complete separation of adjacent slabs and any spaces around dowel bars and between the subbase and the filler board shall be packed with a suitable compressible material after fixing the joint assembly .
Warping Joints Warping joints shall consist of i a sawn joint groove complying with Clause ii tie bars complying with Clause iii a sealing groove complying with Clause .
Construction Joints Construction joints made at the end of a working day in unreinforced concrete slabs and jointed reinforced concrete slabs shall be contraction joints .
In the event of mechanical breakdown of the concreting machinery or at the onset of adverse weather emergency joints may be formed .
Emergency joints in unreinforced concrete slabs shall be contraction joints not less than .
m from the preceding or succeeding joint position .
Emergency joints in jointed reinforced concrete slabs shall be not less than .
m from the preceding or succeeding joint position .
The stop end formwork shall be sufficiently rigid to ensure that dowel bars tie bars or reinforcement will be held in position in compliance with the specification and placed in such a position that it permits the longitudinal reinforcement to project through the joint for a distance of at least mm .
Construction joints in continuously reinforced concrete slabs CRCP and CRCB at end of day or in an emergency shall not be constructed within .
m of any lap in the longitudinal reinforcement .
The stop end formwork shall be sufficiently rigid to ensure that the longitudinal reinforcement and the tie bars as required in subClause .
which project through the joint are held in the correct position .
Longitudinal Joints General Sawn or wetformed longitudinal joints shall be provided in surface slabs between or at the centre of traffic lanes within the allowable positions as shown on the drawings so that bay widths are not greater than .
m or .
m with limestone aggregate for unreinforced slabs or m or .
m with limestone aggregate for reinforced concrete surface slabs with transverse reinforcement as in subClause .. Longitudinal joints shall be provided in CRCB between lanes or at the centre of lanes within a tolerance of mm so that bay widths are not greater than m or .
m with limestone aggregate .
Joints in the surface slab base or subbase shall be staggered so that they are not coincident vertically and are at least mm apart .
Wetformed longitudinal joints shall consist of wetformed joint grooves complying with Clause a bottom crack inducer complying with Clause and tie bars complying with Clause except where transverse reinforcement is permitted in lieu .
Longitudinal joints shall be constructed within the following tolerances i deviations of the bottom crack inducer from the intended line of the joint parallel to the axis of the road shall be not greater than mm ii the joint groove shall be located vertically above the bottom crack inducers within a horizontal tolerance of mm Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Concrete Materials iii the best fit line along the constructed joint groove shall be not more than mm from the intended line of the joint iv deviations of the joint groove from the best fit line of the joint shall be not greater than mm .
Sawn longitudinal joints shall consist of joint grooves complying with Clause .
Tie bars may be replaced by continuous transverse reinforcement across the joints in continuously reinforced concrete slabs which are constructed in more than one lane width in one operation provided that the transverse reinforcement is a minimum of mm diameter bars at mm centres .
The transverse reinforcement in these circumstances shall be protected by suitable bituminous paint or equivalent coating for a distance of at least mm either side of the joint .
Longitudinal Construction Joints Longitudinal construction joints between separate slabs shall have tie bars as in Clause with a joint groove as in Clause .
Alternatively if split forms are used the transverse reinforcement if mm diameter or more may be continued across the joint for a minimum of mm or times the diameter of the transverse reinforcement bars whichever is the greater .
The transverse reinforcement in these circumstances shall be protected by suitable bituminous paint or equivalent coating for a distance of at least mm either side of the joint .
A joint sealing groove is not required in construction joints in continuously reinforced concrete bases .
Where the edge of the concrete slab is damaged it shall be made good before the adjacent slab is constructed .
Dowel Bars Dowel bars shall meet the requirements of BS EN with a minimum tensile strength of MPa and shall be free from oil dirt loose rust and scale .
They shall be straight free of burrs and other irregularities and the sliding ends sawn or cropped cleanly with no protrusions outside the normal diameter of the bar .
For expansion joints dowel bars shall be mm diameter at mm spacing and mm long for slabs up to mm thick and mm diameter for thicker slabs .
For contraction joints dowels shall be mm diameter at mm spacing and mm long for slabs up to mm thick and mm diameter at mm spacing and mm long for thicker slabs .
Dowel bars shall be supported on cradles in prefabricated joint assemblies positioned prior to construction of the slab .
For contraction joints as an alternative to prefabricated assemblies dowel bars may be mechanically inserted with vibration into the concrete by a method which ensures full recompaction of the concrete around the dowel bars and the surface finished by a diagonal finishing beam or a longitudinal oscillating float travelling across the slab .
Dowel bars shall be positioned at middepth from the surface level of the slab mm .
They shall be aligned parallel to the finished surface of the slab to the centre line of the carriageway and to each other within the following tolerances i for bars supported on cradles prior to construction of the slab and for inserted bars in two layer construction prior to placing the top layer a all bars in a joint shall be within mm per mm length of bar b two thirds of the bars shall be within mm per mm length of bar c no bar shall differ in alignment from an adjoining bar by more than mm per mm length of bar in either the horizontal or vertical plane ii for all bars after construction of the slab a twice the tolerances for alignment as in i above b equally positioned about the intended line of the joint within a tolerance of mm .
Cradles supporting dowel bars shall not extend across the line of the joint .
Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Concrete Materials Dowel bars supported on cradles in assemblies when subjected to a load of N applied at either end and in either the vertical or horizontal direction upwards and downwards and both directions horizontally shall not deflect more than the following limits i two thirds of the number of bars of any assembly tested shall not deflect more than mm per mm length of bar ii the remainder of the bars in that assembly shall not deflect more than mm per mm length of bar .
The assembly of dowel bars and supporting cradles including the joint filler board in the case of expansion joints shall have the following degree of rigidity when fixed in position i For expansion joints the deflection of the top edge of the filler board shall be not greater than mm when a load of .
kN is applied perpendicular to the vertical face of the joint filler board and distributed over a length of mm by means of a bar or timber packing at mid depth and midway between individual fixings or mm from either end of any length of filler board if a continuous fixing is used .
The residual deflection after removal of the load shall be not more than mm .
ii The joint assembly fixings to the subbase shall not fail under the .
kN load applied for testing the rigidity of the assembly but shall fail before the load reaches .
kN .
iii The fixings for contraction joints shall not fail under a . kN load and shall fail before the load reaches .
kN when applied over a length of mm by means of a bar or timber packing placed as near to the level of the line of fixings as practicable .
iv Failure of the fixings shall be deemed to be when there is displacement of the assemblies by more than mm with any form of fixing under the test load .
The displacement shall be measured at the nearest part of the assembly to the centre of the bar or timber packing .
Dowel bars shall be covered by a flexible polymeric corrosion resistant coating bonded onto the previously cleaned bar .
The coating shall be smooth and free of indentations .
During coating the bar shall be supported at each end .
Minimum thickness shall be .
mm .
The coating shall also be able to withstand hours immersion in a salt fog cabinet complying with BS EN ISO without showing any visible crazing or corrosion of the protected bar .
The coated bar shall comply with the following pull out test i Four bars shall be taken at random from stock and without any special preparation shall be coated as required in this Clause .
The dowel bars which have been coated shall be cast centrally into concrete specimens x x mm made of the same concrete mix proportions to be used in the pavement but with a maximum aggregate size of mm and cured in accordance with BS EN .
At days a tensile load shall be applied to achieve a movement of the bar of at least .
mm .
The average bond stress to achieve this movement shall be not greater than .
Nmm .
For expansion joints a closely fitting cap mm long consisting of waterproofed cardboard or suitable synthetic material shall be placed over one end of each dowel bar .
An expansion space mm greater than the thickness of the joint filler board shall be formed between the end of the cap and the end of the dowel bar .
Tie Bars Tie bars in transverse or longitudinal joints shall conform to Clause in accordance with the requirements given below and Table .
Tie bars for use across joints shall have corrosion protection in the form of a flexible polymeric corrosion resistant coating bonded centrally onto mm of the previously cleaned centre section of the bars .
Where tie bars are to be cranked for construction joints and later straightened the coating shall be shown to be capable of being straightened through degrees without cracking .
The coating for both straight and cranked bars after straightening shall be able to withstand hours immersion in a salt fog cabinet complying with BS EN ISO without showing any visible crazing or cracking or corrosion of the protected part of the bar .
Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Concrete Materials Tie bars in warping joints and wetformed longitudinal joints shall be made up into rigid assemblies with adequate supports and fixings to remain firmly in position during the construction of the slab .
Alternatively tie bars at longitudinal joints may be mechanically inserted by vibration from above using a method which ensures recompaction of the concrete around the tie bars .
At longitudinal construction joints tie bars may be adequately fixed to side forms or inserted into the side of the slab by a method which ensures recompaction of the concrete around the tie bars and adequate bond .
Tie bars in warping joints shall be positioned from the top surface of the slab within mm of the mid depth of the slab .
Tie bars in other joints shall be positioned and remain within the middle third of the slab depth approximately parallel to the surface and approximately perpendicular to the line of the joint with the centre of each bar on the intended line of the joints within a tolerance of mm and with a minimum cover of mm below any top crack inducer of joint groove for slabs mm thick or more or mm for slabs up to mm thick .
At transverse construction joints in continuously reinforced concrete tie bars shall be .
m long and of the same Grade and size as the longitudinal reinforcement and shall be fixed at twice the normal spacing midway between the longitudinal reinforcement bars so that mm mm extends each side of the joint at the same level as the longitudinal reinforcement and be tied to the transverse reinforcement .
Where paving from a construction joint is not resumed within days an extra longitudinal reinforcement bar m long shall be lapped and tied to each tie bar .
These extra bars may be combined with the tie bars .
Where the spacing between longitudinal reinforcement and the extra m long bars is less than mm the nominal size of aggregate shall be mm for a sufficient number of concrete batches to complete that section of pavement .
TABLE Tie Bar Details Joints Diameter mm Grade of Steel Length mm Spacing mm Transverse construction joints in continuously reinforced concrete As for main reinforcement Grade BB or BC Twice the spacing of main reinforcement Emergency construction joints in jointed reinforced concrete slabs other than at contraction or expansion joints Grade BB or BC Warping joints Grade BB or BC Longitudinal All joints except where Transverse reinforcement is permitted in lieu Grade BB or BC or Grade BB or BC or Grade BB or BC Transition from rigid to flexible construction Grade BB or BC NOTE The transverse reinforcement may be continued across the joint in reinforced concrete if the bars are of a minimum nominal diameter of mm and the bars are protected from corrosion and the cover is as required in this Clause .
Where tie bars are used in longitudinal joints in continuously reinforced concrete they shall be placed at the same level as the transverse reinforcement and tied to the longitudinal reinforcement .
Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Concrete Materials Joint Grooves General Transverse contraction or warping joint grooves shall be sawn in the hardened concrete .
Transverse joint grooves which are initially constructed less than the full width of the slab shall be completed by sawing through to the edge of the slab and across longitudinal joints as soon as any forms have been removed and before an induced crack develops at the joint .
Sawn Transverse and Longitudinal Joint Grooves Sawing shall be undertaken as soon as possible after the concrete has hardened sufficiently to enable a sharp edged groove to be produced without disrupting the concrete and before random cracks develop in the slab .
The grooves shall be between and of the specified depth of the slab and of any convenient width not less than mm .
The sealing groove may be sawn to the required width later .
Expansion joint sealing grooves shall be sealed as soon as practical after sawing .
Wetformed Longitudinal Joint Grooves When slabs are constructed in more than one lane width in one operation a joint groove shall be formed by inserting a groove former ahead of the finishing beams from dispenser .
The concrete so displaced shall be recompacted by a vibrating compactor or similar device at least mm wide operating symmetrically along the line of the joint .
After finishing the concrete the groove forming strip shall be in the correct position and alignment within of the vertical and to sufficient depth below the surface to allow for the passage of the finishing beam within the range mm below the finished level of the slab .
Groove forming strips in wetformed longitudinal joint grooves shall be left in place .
Construction Joint Grooves in Surface Slabs The grooves shall be formed by fixing a grooveformer or strip or cork seal along the top edge of the slab already constructed before concreting the adjacent slab .
Where the edge of the concrete is damaged it shall be ground or made good before fixing the groove forming strip .
Alternatively the subsequent slab may be placed adjacent to the first and a sealing groove sawn later in the hardened concrete to the minimum depth required in Table or to the manufacturers instructions if greater and to sufficient width to eliminate minor spalling of the joint arris up to a maximum of mm for longitudinal joints and mm for transverse joints .
The joint shall be sealed in compliance with Clause .
Groove Formers and Bottom Crack Inducers General Except where joint grooves are sawn a bottom crack inducer shall be provided at each longitudinal joint position .
The bottom crack inducer shall be triangular or inverted Yshaped fillet with a base width not less than the height made of timber or rigid synthetic material .
It shall be firmly fixed to the subbase so as to remain in position during the whole process of constructing the slab .
The combined depth of groove formers and bottom crack inducers shall be between and of the depth of the slab and the difference between the depth of the groove former and the height of the bottom crack inducer shall not be greater than mm .
Longitudinal Joints Groove forming sealing strips for wetformed longitudinal joints shall be of firm compressible strips of ethylene vinyl acetate foam of minimum density kgm or synthetic rubber or equivalent material .
They shall have a minimum thickness of mm and shall be sufficiently rigid to remain vertical and straight in the concrete without curving or stretching .
They shall be inserted continuously along the joint .
Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Concrete Materials CRCP Universal Beam Anchorage Transverse Joint One side of the beam shall be separated from the CRCP slab by an expansion joint filler board against the vertical face and ethylene vinyl acetate foam in accordance with HCD Drawing C. Joint Filler Board Joint filler board for expansion joints and manhole and gully slab joints shall be mm thick unless otherwise shown in the drawings within a tolerance of .
mm .
It shall be a selfexpanding cork seal or a firm compressible material or a bonded combination of compressible and rigid materials of sufficient rigidity to resist deformation during the passage of the concrete paving plant .
The depth of the joint filler board for manhole and gully slabs shall be the full depth of the slab less the depth of the sealing groove .
In expansion joints the filler board shall have a ridged top as shown on the drawings except where a sealing groove former is indicated on the drawings .
Holes for dowel bars shall be accurately bored or punched out to form a sliding fit for the sheathed dowel bar .
The joint filler board shall meet the requirements given when tested in accordance with the procedures in the following subClauses i Weathering Test a Three specimens each mm square .
mm shall be placed in a ventilated drying oven maintained at a temperature of C C for days after which they shall immediately be immersed in water at room temperature of between C and C for hours .
They shall then be subjected to five cycles of freezing and thawing in the following manner .
b The specimens shall be placed in a watertight weathering test pan having a ribbed bottom and a fitted slotted lid designed to hold the three specimens vertically on edge .
The pan shall be filled with water to half the depth of the specimens and then frozen to minus C or below for at least four hours after the initial freezing of the water .
The pan shall then be placed in a water bath maintained at C to C without disturbing the specimens and shall remain there for one hour after thawing has completed .
The pan and specimens shall then be returned to the refrigerator and freezing and thawing shall be repeated in precisely the same manner until five cycles of the process have been completed .
The specimens shall be removed from the pan and air dried at room temperature for hours before examination .
c The material shall be deemed to have passed the weathering test if the specimens show no signs of disintegration or shrinkage .
ii Compression and Recovery Test a Two of the specimens which pass the weathering test and two new specimens each trimmed to mm square .
mm maintained at room temperature and humidity for hours shall be subjected to three applications of load at hour intervals in a compression test machine complying with BS EN ISO with auxiliary platens mm minimum mm thick .
During each application of load each specimen shall be compressed to of its original thickness at a rate of strain of .
mm per minute .
The load required to achieve this amount of compression shall be not less than .
Nmm nor more than Nmm for material to be used in pavements and not less than .
Nmm and not more than .
Nmm for material to be used in bridge joints .
The load shall be released immediately the required degree of compression is reached and after the third application a recovery period of minutes shall be allowed after which the thickness of the specimen shall be measured .
Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Concrete Materials b This thickness expressed as a percentage of the original thickness is the recovery value of the specimen .
The thicknesses shall be measured to an accuracy of micron .
The two new specimens shall be weighed before and after testing .
The difference in mass shall be determined with an accuracy of .
and shall be expressed as a percentage of the original mass of the specimen .
c The material shall be deemed to have passed the test if all four specimens have recovery values of at least and the two new specimens have not suffered a reduction of mass in excess of .
iii Extrusion Test a The third sample which passes the weathering test shall be trimmed to mm square .
mm and be subjected to the following extrusion test .
b The extrusion mould shall be mm x mm .
mm internally of sufficient depth to test the sample as received open on one side only and fixed rigidly to a base plate .
The mould shall be provided with a closely fitting pressure plate which shall fit without binding and with an accurate horizontal measuring dial gauge or measuring device accurate to microns .
The specimen shall be mounted in the extrusion mould and loaded once as described in the compression and recovery test .
The extrusion at the open side of the mould shall be measured with the gauge when the specimen is compressed to of its original thickness and before release of the load .
c The material shall be deemed to have passed the test if the extrusion of the free edge does not exceed mm .
iv Immersion Test for Cork Filler Board a Two specimens each mm x mm .
mm shall be prepared and the thickness of each specimen shall be determined to the nearest microns before the specimens are immersed in boiling water for one hour .
After removal from the water the specimens shall be allowed to cool to room temperature and after minutes at this temperature their thickness shall be remeasured to the nearest microns .
b The material shall be deemed to have passed the test if both specimens have a thickness of not less than of their thickness before immersion .
v Acid Test for Cork Filler Board a Two specimens each mm x mm .
mm shall be immersed in hydrochloric acid of a specific gravity of .
at room temperature which is then brought to the boil and maintained thus for one hour when the specimens shall be removed and rinsed in water .
b The material shall be deemed to have passed the test when after examination the specimens show no evidence of serious disintegration friability or lack of resilience .
Discolouration or minor swelling shall not be considered as failure .
Preparation and Sealing of Joint Grooves General All transverse joints in surface slabs except for construction joints in CRCP shall be sealed using one of the joint seals described in Clause .
Additionally longitudinal joints which are sawn or widened shall be sealed .
Preparation of Joint Grooves for Sealing Joint grooves shall be prepared in accordance with BS Part and subClauses to of this Clause .
Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Concrete Materials That part of the groove former used to form the sealing groove or any temporary seal shall be removed cleanly without damaging the joint arrises to a minimum depth of mm where compression seals are used or otherwise to such depth as will provide an applied seal to the dimensions shown in Table after allowing for any necessary caulking material described in subClause of this Clause .
If joint grooves are not initially constructed to provide the minimum dimensions for the joint seals as given in Table they shall be widened by sawing .
Joint grooves formed by tapered formers need not be widened .
The sealing grooves shall be cleaned out immediately after sawing using high pressure water jets to remove all slurry from the joint before the slurry hardens .
If rough arrises develop when grooves are made they shall be ground to provide a chamfer approximately mm wide .
If the groove is at an angle up to from the perpendicular to the surface the overhanging edge of the sealing groove shall be sawn or ground perpendicular .
If spalling occurs or the angle of the former is greater than the joint sealing groove shall be sawn wider and perpendicular to the surface to encompass the defects up to a maximum width including any chamfer of mm for transverse joints and mm for longitudinal joints .
If the spalling can not be so eliminated then the arris shall be repaired by suitable thin bonded arris repair using cementitious materials as specified in Clause .
For applied sealants the sides of the joint sealing groove shall be scoured by dry abrasive blasting .
This shall not be carried out before the characteristic compressive strength of the concrete is expected to reach Nmm .
When compression seals are used the sides of the groove may be ground or wire brushed .
For hot and cold applied sealants compressible caulking material debonding strip or tape or cord compatible with the sealant of a suitable size to fill the width of the sealing groove shall be firmly packed or stuck in the bottom of the sealing groove to such a depth so as to provide the correct depth of seal as described in Table with the top of the seal at the correct depth below the surface of the concrete .
All grooves shall be cleaned of any dirt or loose material by air blasting with filtered oilfree compressed air .
The groove shall be clean and dry at the time of priming and sealing .
For applied sealants the joint grooves shall be primed with the relevant primer for the hot or cold applied sealant in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations and with BS Part except that when necessary the joint grooves may be primed and sealed earlier than days after construction as soon as the grooves have been gritblasted and cleaned .
TABLE Dimensions of Applied Joint Seals Type and Spacing of Joints m Minimum Width Minimum Depth of Seal Note Impregnated Foam Compression Strips Depth of Seal Below the Concrete Surface Cold Applied Hot Applied mm mm mm mm mm Contraction and under Note Over to Over to Expansion Transverse Warping Longitudinal Joints if sealed to Gully and Manhole Slabs to NOTE The depth of seal is that part in contact with the vertical face of the joint groove .
The depth of seal below the surface shall be taken at the centre of an applied seal relative to a short straight edge mm long placed centrally across the joint within days of sealing .
NOTE For cork seals other than in construction joints grooves shall be mm width mm depth .
Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Concrete Materials Sealing with Applied Sealants Sealing shall be carried out continuously along the full length of joint in any one rip except for remedial areas .
When hot or cold applied sealants are used the sealant shall be applied within the minimum and maximum drying times of the primer recommended by the manufacturer .
Priming and sealing with applied sealants shall not be carried out when the naturally occurring temperature in the joint groove to be sealed is below C except between C and C it may be carried out when the temperature is rising .
Hotapplied sealants shall be prepared and applied in accordance with the manufacturers instructions .
The components of coldapplied sealants shall be thoroughly mixed in the correct proportions in accordance with the manufacturers instructions .
As soon as possible after mixing and within the worklife of the sealant the material shall be dispensed into the joint or applied using a caulking gun to the correct level below the concrete surface .
The tackfree time shall be achieved within hours for machine dispensed material or within hours for hand applied material .
Testing of Applied Sealants Test certificates shall be supplied from an appropriate organisation accredited in accordance with subClause .
for testing sealants stating that the sealant conforms to the relevant standard in Clause .
Site testing of coldapplied sealants shall be in accordance with BS .
Site testing of hot applied sealants shall be in accordance with clause and Appendix A of BS and that the reference to BS in clause of BS shall be replaced by BS EN .
Samples of hot applied sealants shall be taken and tested for initial penetration and resilience in accordance with BS EN and BS EN respectively and shall conform to the requirements of BS EN .
Sealing with Compression Seals When compression seals are used the widths of the seal shall be selected in relation to the width of the sealing groove the bay lengths and manufacturers recommendations so that the estimated maximum width of the joint opening shall be not more than of the original width of the seal the estimated maximum width being calculated on the basis of a movement of mm per m run of slab .
The maximum calculated width of sealing groove shall be mm .
The depth of groove shall be such that the contact face of the seal with the side of the groove shall be not less than mm and that the top of the seal shall be a minimum of mm below the surface of the concrete .
Compression seals shall be inserted into the grooves without prior extension or rotation and where recommended by the manufacturer with a lubricant adhesive which is compatible with the seal and the concrete .
The adhesive shall be applied to both sides of the sealing groove or the seal or to both .
The seal shall be positioned with its axis perpendicular to the concrete surface .
Excess adhesive on top of the seal shall be removed to prevent adhesion of the top faces of the seal under compression .
Except when compression seals are used in longitudinal joints the transverse joint seal shall be continuous across the slab and the longitudinal joint groove forming strips shall be cut to the required depth after the concrete has hardened for the transverse seal to be inserted .
If compression seals are used in longitudinal joints where the grooves have been sawn after construction of the slab they shall be continuous across transverse joints with the transverse seals butted and fixed to the longitudinal seals with adhesive .
Joint Seals Joint seals shall consist of hot or cold applied sealants or compression seals complying with this Clause .
The colour of the joint seal material shall comply with the requirements of contract specific Appendix .
Hotapplied Sealants Hotapplied sealants shall be Type N or Type F as stated in contract specific Appendix and conforming to BS EN .
Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Concrete Materials For joints between concrete surface slabs and bituminous surfacing hot applied Type N sealants conforming to BS EN shall be used .
Alternatively polymer modified bitumen sealing strips may be used and shall be applied in accordance with the manufacturers instructions .
Hotapplied Type N sealants may be used in joints in asphalt kerbs laid on concrete pavements .
Coldapplied Sealants Coldapplied sealants shall be Type N conforming to BS except that Type F shall be used for laybys and hardstandings .
For joints in kerbs and joints other than in pavements seals may be any of the pavement sealants if they have the suitable characteristics for the application or gunning grade cold applied plasticised bituminous rubber sealant or gunning grades of two part polysulphidebased sealants complying with BS may be used .
Alternatively polyurethanebased sealing compounds may be used provided their performance is not inferior to BS material .
Compression Seals Compression seals shall be precompressed neoprene impregnated expanding foam sealing strip having a current BBA certificate or rubber seals made of polychloroprene elastomers complying with BS and conforming with the requirements of ASTM Standard D. Seals of butadieneacrylonitrile or other synthetic rubbers may be used if certificates are produced to show that they conform to the performance requirements of ASTM Standard D for oven ageing oil and ozone resistance low temperature stiffening and recovery .
Seals made of ethylene vinyl acetate in microcellular form and other synthetic materials may be used in longitudinal joints and in structures if test certificates are produced to show adequate resistance to heat ageing when tested in accordance with BS EN ISO and resistance to fuel oils .
The compression set of any seal shall not be greater than when the specimen is subjected to a compression in accordance with BS EN ISO .
When immersed in standard oils for hours at C in accordance with BS ISO the volume change shall not be greater than .
Compression seals shall be shaped so that they will remain compressed at all times in accordance with Clause and shall have a minimum of mm contact face with the sides of the sealing groove .
If lubricant adhesive is used it shall be compatible with the seal and the concrete and shall be resistant to abrasion oxidization fuels and salt .
Joints at Manhole and Gully Slabs Manhole covers gullies and their frames shall be isolated from the pavement slabs and be contained in separate small slabs which shall be larger than the exterior of the manhole and gully shafts including any concrete surround less than mm below the underside of the subbase layer .
The joint around the manhole or gully slab shall be vertical and incorporate joint filler board as in Clause but without dowel bars and tie bars .
Gully slabs in unreinforced concrete slabs shall be adjacent to or straddle a transverse joint extending the gully slab as necessary to a maximum of m. Where this is impractical an extra tied warping joint shall be provided adjacent to or within the gully slab and at least m from the next transverse joint .
If the edge of an isolator slab is within m of any longitudinal joint the isolator slab shall be extended to that joint .
Manhole slabs in unreinforced concrete slabs shall be adjacent to or straddle transverse or longitudinal joints .
If the manhole is within the middle third of the bay length a warping joint shall be constructed on one side of the manhole slab across the whole width of the bay to the nearest longitudinal joint .
Reinforcement as shown on the drawings shall be placed in the main concrete slabs in the corners between the manhole and gully slabs and the transverse or longitudinal joints .
Extra reinforcement as described in the Contract shall be placed in reinforced concrete slabs around the manhole or gully slabs .
Manhole and gully slabs shall have square corners at all corners which are not adjacent to a transverse or longitudinal joint in the main slab .
Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Concrete Materials Reinforcement as shown on the drawings shall be placed in the gully or manhole slab and concrete Class CC shall be placed by hand in the space between the main slab and the manhole frame .
The concrete shall be fully compacted and finished in compliance with Clause .
A sealing groove shall be made directly above the joint filler board and sealed in compliance with Clause .
Inspection of Dowel Bars Compliance with Clause for the position and alignment of dowel bars at contraction and expansion joints shall be checked by measurement relative to the side form or guide wires .
When the slab has been constructed the position and alignment of dowel bars and any filler board shall be measured after carefully exposing them across the whole width of the slab .
When the joint is an expansion joint the top of the filler board shall first be exposed sufficiently in the plastic concrete to permit measurement of any lateral or vertical displacement of the board .
During the course of normal working these measurements shall be carried out at a rate of one joint per m length of slab or one per days whichever occurs the sooner .
For small areas the rate shall be one joint for up to each joints .
If the position or alignment of the bars in a single joint in the slab is unsatisfactory then the next two joints shall be inspected .
If only the one joint of the three is defective the rate of checking shall be increased to one joint per day until compliance is being achieved .
In the event of noncompliance in two or more successive joints the Contractor shall revert to the construction of trial lengths and make any necessary alterations to the concrete mix paving plant or methods until the dowel bar position and alignment is satisfactory .
After the dowel bars have been examined the remainder of the concrete shall be removed mm on each side of the line of the joint and reinstated to the requirements of the specification .
Alternatively if the dowels are examined in the penultimate joint of a days work that joint shall be made a construction joint for the next days work and the remainder of the concrete in the last slab may be discarded .
Side Forms Rails and Guide Wires Side Forms and Rails All side forms and rails shall be made of steel and be sufficiently robust and rigid to support the weight and pressure caused by the paving equipment .
Side forms for use with wheeled paving machines shall incorporate metal rails firmly fixed at a constant height below the top of the forms .
The forms shall be secured by using not less than three pins for each m length having one pin fixed at each side of every joint .
Forms shall be tightly joined together by a locked joint free from play or movement in any direction .
Forms shall be cleaned and oiled immediately before each use .
The rails or running surface shall be kept clean in front of the wheels of any paving machines .
The forms shall be straight within a tolerance of mm in m. The forms shall be bedded on low moisture content cement mortar or concrete class C and set to the pavement surface level as shown on the drawings within a tolerance of mm .
The bedding shall not extend under the slab .
There shall be no vertical step between the ends of adjacent forms greater than mm .
The horizontal alignment for forms shall be to the required alignment of the pavement edge as shown on the drawings within a tolerance of mm .
The Contractor shall ensure that the forms are set to the correct profile immediately prior to concreting .
The mortar or concrete bedding shall be broken out after use .
Side forms shall not be removed earlier than hours after the completion of the construction of the slab .
Care shall be taken to prevent damage to the concrete and any projecting tie bars during the removal of the forms .
If the removal of forms results in any damage to the concrete the period of hours shall be increased to that which is necessary to avoid further damage and the Contractor shall make good the damaged areas .
Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Concrete Materials Guide Wires A guide wire shall be provided along each side of the slab to be constructed by slip form paving plant .
Each guide wire shall be at a constant height above and parallel to the required edges of the slab as shown on the drawings within a vertical tolerance of mm .
Additionally one of the wires shall be at a constant horizontal distance from the required edge of the pavement as shown in the drawings within a lateral tolerance of mm .
The guide wires shall be supported from stakes not more than m apart by connectors capable of fine horizontal and vertical adjustment .
The guide wire shall be tensioned on the stakes so that a gramme weight shall produce a deflection of not more than mm when suspended at the midpoint between any pair of stakes .
The ends of the guide wires shall be anchored to fixing points which shall be not closer to the edge of the slab than the row of stakes and in no circumstances shall a guide wire be anchored to a stake .
The stakes shall be positioned and the connectors maintained at their correct height and alignment from hours on the day before concreting takes place until hours after the concrete has been finished .
The guide wire shall be erected and tensioned on the connectors at any section for at least two hours before concreting that section .
to Not Used Transport and Delivery The number of delivery vehicles provided shall be sufficient to ensure a constant supply of concrete to enable the paving plant to proceed continuously .
Construction by Machine The concrete slab shall be constructed in a continuous process by either slipform or by fixed form paving plant in accordance with this Clause or by small paving machines or hand guided methods as in Clause .
The slab may be constructed in either one or two layers .
In two layer construction the thickness of the top layer shall be not less than mm or twice the maximum size of the coarse aggregate whichever is the greater and shall be at least mm thicker than the depth of the groove former if used .
Construction by Fixed Form Paving Machines A fixed form paving train shall consist of separate powered machines which spread compact and finish the concrete in a continuous operation .
Concrete shall be discharged without segregation into a hopper spreader which is equipped with the means of controlling its rate of deposition on to the subbase or on to the lower layer .
The concrete shall be spread in each layer without segregation and to a uniform uncompacted density over the whole area of the slab .
The deposited concrete shall be struck off to the necessary level by the underside of the hopper as it is traversed across the spreading machine .
The machine shall be capable of being rapidly adjusted for changes in average and differential surcharge necessitated by changes in slab thickness or crossfall .
When the slab is constructed in two layers the spreading of the concrete in the top layer shall follow the completion of the bottom layer within the times given in Table .
Prior to being compacted the surface level of each loose spread layer shall be adjusted to the correct surcharge by means of rotating strikeoff blades or a screw device .
The concrete shall be compacted by vibration or by a combination of vibration and mechanical tamping so as to comply with Clause throughout the full depth of the slab .
Poker vibrators shall be used in each layer adjacent to the side forms and the edge of a previously constructed slab .
Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Concrete Materials The initial regulation and finish to the surface of the slab shall be effected by means of a beam oscillating transversely or obliquely to the longitudinal axis of the pavement .
This beam shall be readily adjustable for both height and tilt .
Joint grooves shall be constructed in compliance with Clause .
When grooves are wetformed the concrete shall be recompacted around the former by a hand held vibrating plate compactor drawn along or on each side of the joint prior to the final regulation of the surface by a longitudinal oscillating float .
The regulation and finishing of the surface of the slab shall be carried out by a machine which incorporates twin oblique oscillating finishing beams which shall be readily adjustable for both height and tilt .
The beams shall weigh not less than kgm be of rectangular section and span the full width of the slab .
The leading beam shall be vibrated .
The beams shall be supported on a carriage the level of which shall be controlled by the average level of not less than four points evenly spaced over at least .
m of the supporting rail beam or slab on each side of the slab that is being constructed .
Except for CRCB slabs the final regulation of the surface of the slab shall be provided by a longitudinal oscillating float travelling across the slab .
After the final regulation and before the macrotexture is applied any excess concrete on top of the joint groove former where present shall be removed .
Additionally the longitudinal oscillating float shall complete the traverse of the slab in both directions within the length of the float and shall have a total longitudinal stroke of mm to mm .
The longitudinal oscillating float shall have a minimum length of m and a minimum constant width of mm with a maximum weight of kgm .
The edges of the float shall be curved or chamfered .
A minimum length of mm of longitudinal oscillating float shall be within the length of the machine tracks or wheels .
When a concrete slab is constructed in more than one width flanged wheels on the paving machines shall not be run directly on the surface of any completed part of the slab .
The second or subsequent slabs shall be constructed either by supporting machines with flanged wheels on flatbottom section rails weighing not less than kgm laid on the surface of the completed slab or by replacing the flanged wheels on that side of the machines by smooth flangeless wheels .
Before flangeless wheels or rails are used the surface regularity of the slab over which they are to pass shall comply with Clause and its surface shall be thoroughly cleaned and brushed to remove all extraneous matter .
Flangeless wheels or rails shall be positioned sufficiently far from the edge of the slab to avoid damage to that edge .
Construction by Slipform Paving Machine A slipform paving train shall consist of powered machines which spread compact and finish the concrete in a continuous operation .
The slipform paving machine shall compact the concrete by internal vibration and shape it between sliding side forms or over fixed side forms by means of either a conforming plate or by vibrating and oscillating finishing beams .
The concrete shall be deposited without segregation in front of the slipform paver across its whole width and to a height which at all times is in excess of the required surcharge .
The deposited concrete shall be struck off to the necessary average and differential surcharge by means of a strikeoff plate or a screw auger device extending across the whole width of the slab .
The equipment for striking off the concrete shall be capable of being rapidly adjusted for changes of the average and differential surcharge necessitated by changes in slab thickness or crossfall .
The level of the conforming plate and finishing beams shall be controlled automatically from the guide wires by sensors attached at the four corners of the slip form paving machine .
The alignment of the paver shall be controlled automatically from the guide wire by at least one sensor attached to the paver .
The alignment and level of ancillary machines for finishing texturing and curing of the concrete shall be automatically controlled relative to the guide wire or to the surface and edge of the slab .
Slipform paving machines shall have vibration of variable output with a maximum energy output of not less than .
kW per metre width of slab per mm depth of slab for a laying speed of up to .
m per minute or pro rata for higher speeds .
The machines shall be of sufficient mass to provide adequate reaction on the traction units to maintain forward movements during the placing of concrete in all situations .
Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Concrete Materials Except for CRCB slabs the final regulation of the surface slab shall be provided by a longitudinal oscillating float travelling across the slab .
The longitudinal float shall comply with the requirements of subClauses and of this Clause .
Additionally the longitudinal float shall either be a separate machine closely following a slipform paver or alternatively it shall be attached to a slipform paver in such a manner that it functions effectively and does not adversely affect the performance of the paver or the surface of the slab .
Joint grooves shall be constructed in compliance with Clause .
Where grooves are wetformed the concrete shall be compacted around the former by a separate vibrating plate compactor with twin plates .
The groove former shall be compacted to the correct level by a vibrating pan which may be included with the transverse joint finishing beam .
Final finishing shall be carried out in accordance with subClause of this Clause .
Any excess concrete on top of the groove former shall be removed before the surface is macrotextured .
Where a concrete slab is constructed in more than one width or where the edge needs to be matched for one level to another section of surface slab and the surface levels at the edges are not achieved the slab shall be supported by separate side forms placed before or after the paver to ensure that edge levels meet the required tolerances .
General While the concrete is still plastic its surface shall be brushed to comply with the macrotexture requirements specified in Clause .
The surface and edges of surface slabs and CRC bases shall be cured in compliance with Clause .
Wet lean concrete bases and subbases shall be cured in compliance with Clause .
The spreading compacting and finishing of the concrete shall be carried out as rapidly as possible and the paving operation shall be so arranged as to ensure that the time between the mixing of the first batch of concrete in any transverse section of the slab and the application of the sprayed curing membrane to the surface of that section shall not exceed those given in Table .
Each bay in jointed concrete surface slabs shall be consecutively numbered near the verge next to a transverse joint while the concrete is plastic .
In continuously reinforced concrete pavement the slab shall be marked with the chainage at intervals not greater than m apart .
Construction by Small Paving Machines or Hand Guided Methods As an alternative to fixed form or slipform paving trains the concrete slab may be constructed using parts of trains small paving machines truss type finishing beams or hand guided methods .
Hand tamping beams may only be used for short lengths or infill bays or tapers .
Reinforcement dowel bars and tie bars shall be supported in position in accordance with Clauses and respectively except where two layer construction is used and reinforcement is placed on the bottom layer .
TABLE Maximum Working Times Temperature of concrete at discharge from the delivery vehicle Reinforced concrete slabs constructed in two layers without retarding admixtures All other concrete slabs Mixing first layer to finishing concrete Between layers Mixing first layer to finishing concrete Between layers in two layer work Not more than C hours half hour hours .
hours Exceeding C but not exceeding C hours half hour hours hour Exceeding C Unacceptable for paving Unacceptable for paving The concrete shall be spread uniformly without segregation or varying degrees of precompaction by conveyor chute blade or auger .
The concrete shall be struck off by a screed or auger so that the average and differential surcharge is sufficient for the surface of the slab to be at the correct levels after compaction of the concrete .
Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Concrete Materials The concrete shall be compacted by vibrating finishing beams across the slab and with vibrating pokers adjacent to the side forms or the edge of a previously constructed slab .
In addition internal poker vibration shall be used for slabs thicker than mm and may be used for lesser thicknesses .
When used the pokers shall be at points not more than mm apart over the whole area of the slab or drawn continuously across the slab in front of the finishing beams .
The finishing beams shall be metal with a contact face at least mm wide .
They shall be rigid or supported by a frame or truss without sag across the width of slab being paved .
The beams shall be supported on rails or forms or an adjacent slab and shall be moved forward at a steady speed of .
m to m per minute whilst vibrating to compact the concrete and to produce a smooth surface finished to the correct crossfalls crowns and levels relative to the top of the forms or adjacent slab .
Joint grooves shall be constructed in compliance with Clause .
Any irregularities at wetformed joint grooves shall be rectified by means of a vibrating float at least .
m wide drawn along the line of the joint .
The whole area of the slab shall be regulated by two passes of a scraping straight edge not less than .
m wide or by a further application of a twin vibrating finishing beam .
Any excess concrete on top of the groove former shall be removed before the surface is macrotextured .
The surface shall be brushtextured as described in Clause .
The surface shall be cured in compliance with Clause within the time to completion given in Table .
Finished Surface Requirements Macrotexture of Running Surfaces The finished surface of the pavement shall comply with the requirements of Clause .
Where a pavement area does not comply with the specification in any respect the full extent of the surface which does not comply shall be rectified in accordance with Clause .
Brush Finish Macrotexture SubClauses to of this Clause shall only apply to the reconstruction of existing concrete pavements .
All new concrete pavement constructions shall comply with subClauses to .
After the final regulation of the surface of the slab and before the application of the curing membrane the surface of concrete slabs to be used as running surfaces shall be brushmacrotextured in a direction at right angles to the longitudinal axis of the carriageway .
The macrotexture shall be applied evenly across the slab in one direction by a brush not less than mm wide .
The macrotexture shall be uniform both along and across the slab .
The macrotexture depth shall be determined by the volumetric patch technique as described in BS EN .
Tests shall be taken within m of commencement of paving and thereafter at least once for each days paving at the times after construction as given below and in the following manner individual measurements of the macrotexture depth shall be taken at least m apart anywhere along a diagonal line across a lane width between points m apart along the pavement .
No measurement shall be taken within mm of the longitudinal edges of a concrete slab constructed in one pass .
Macrotexture depths shall be as required in Table .
Where the required macrotexture depth is found to be deficient the Contractor shall make good the texture across the full lane width over lengths necessary to comply with the requirements of Table by retexturing the hardened concrete surface as described in Clause .
Failure to achieve a satisfactory minimum macrotexture depth by random grooving shall result in the removal of the full thickness of the slab to the extent required to permit reconstruction of the slab in accordance with the specification .
If the macrotexture depth is excessive the surface shall be planed or ground or otherwise treated over lengths necessary to comply with the requirements of Table .
The treatment shall not affect the requirements of Clause in respect of surface levels or surface regularity .
Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Concrete Materials TABLE Macrotexture Depths Time of Test Required Macrotexture Depth mm Specified value Tolerance i Between hours and days after the construction of the slab or until the slab is first used by vehicles An average of measurements . . ii Not later than weeks before the road is opened to public traffic An average of measurements .
. .
Performance Characteristics of Concrete Road Surfaces A System Installation Method Statement for the concrete road surface being assessed shall be provided by the Contractor .
The SIPT shall be undertaken during daylight hours and shall be a minimum of metres in length and .
metres wide .
The SIPT shall demonstrate and enable verification of the performance of the road surface .
Trial Installation Stage Trial The SIPT shall be observed by an appropriate Technical Approval Body TAB .
The Technical Approval Body shall i verify that the system installation trial has been undertaken in accordance with the method statement ii assess the visual condition of the completed system iii assess the data from the site performance tests detailed in subClause .
The installed performance of the system over the twoyear trial period shall be assessed at the intervals specified in Table .
In the case of visual condition this shall be assessed by the TAB itself while data relating to the other properties in Table shall be provided to the Overseeing Organisation .
TABLE Installed Performance Characteristics Property Frequency Clause Table average locked wheel friction measured at km hr .
by Pavement Friction Tester Initial and month .
Noise Voluntary assessment and declaration Between and months Table The Technical Approval Body shall be UKAS accredited for product approval to BS EN .
The Technical Approval Body shall provide a SIPT inspection protocol to the satisfaction of the Overseeing Organisation and the system provider designed to assess qualitatively andor quantitatively the applicability of the SIPT for the system in order to satisfy the performance requirements .
SIPT and Initial Performance Requirements General The initial performance requirements shall be as stated in contract specific Appendix .
Friction Measurement The average locked wheel friction of the road surface macrotexture depth of the surface shall be measured in accordance with ASTM EEM at a speed of kmhr rather than mph in the test method using a tyre that complies with ASTM E . Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Concrete Materials Noise For the purposes of voluntary declaration by the system producer as part of the SIPT the roadtyre noise level of the concrete shall be assessed to subclauses to of this clause and declared as NR or as described in Table .
If the SIPT site conditions are not appropriate for testing an alternative site shall be selected and nominated .
TABLE RoadTyre Noise Levels Level Equivalence to Traditional Surfacing Materials Road Surface Influence RSI Very quiet surfacing material .
dBA Quieter than HRA surfacing materials .
dBA Equivalent to HRA surfacing materials .
dBA Equivalent to Cold Applied Ultra Thin Surfacing .
dBA NR No requirement No requirement The default specification level shall be NR unless a clearly identified and quantified noise sensitive site requirement is deemed absolutely essential in contract specific requirements Appendix .
The influence of the road surface on traffic noise using the statistical passby method shall be established at the SIPT site between and months after opening to traffic in accordance with ISO Sections and .
Acoustic measurements shall only be carried out when the road surface is dry and the meteorological condition specified in ISO Section are met .
The air and surface temperatures are monitored in accordance with the procedure described in ISO Clause ..
The road surface temperature T surface must be within C to C during acoustic measurements .
The air temperature T air must be within C to C. The test location road speed category shall be classified as either Medium or High as defined in ISO clause .. Not less than two test locations are selected for each road speed category which may be at the same site provided the locations are at least m apart or on different carriageways .
Each test location shall be representative in terms of road speed category and traffic level .
Each of the test sites selected must meet the requirements of ISO Section and ISOCD .
The road must be essentially straight or bends with a radius of curvature greater than m for mediumspeed and m for highspeed road categories .
The crossfall of the test lane at the test site must not exceed .
The apparatus described in ISO Section are used .
The frequency range of between and Hz centre frequencies of the onethird octave bands shall be covered .
The macrotexture of the road surface used for the noise assessment shall be measured in the nearside wheeltrack along the whole length of test material in accordance BS EN .
The macrotexture depth of the nearside wheeltrack in front of a test location must be within per cent of the average macrotexture measured along the site .
The microphone location at each measurement site shall be recorded accurately and marked with appropriate methods such that the position can be readily identified for a period of at least two years .
When sufficient vehicle passbys have been measured a linear regression analysis shall be performed in accordance with ISO Clause ..
In the case of the highspeed road category measurements must not be taken of vehicles travelling at speeds of less than kmh in accordance with AFNOR Standard S. For each category of vehicle defined in Table the Vehicle Sound Level Lveh shall be calculated as the ordinate sound level of the regression line at the reference speed for the category of road .
All levels shall be calculated to two decimal places and rounded to one decimal place .
Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Concrete Materials TABLE Reference speeds kmh for different road speed categories Vehicle category Road speed category kmh Medium High L H H Category L vehicles light vehicles including passenger cars and car derived vans excluding vehicles towing trailers .
Category H vehicles commercial trucks with axles and greater than .
tonnes .
Category H vehicles commercial trucks with more than axles and greater than .
tonnes .
Texture of Concrete Bases The surface of wetlaid concrete bases shall be roughened before the application of any curing compound by brushing with a wire brush or stiff broom .
Curing Immediately after the surface treatment described in Clause the surface and exposed edges of surface slabs shall be cured for a minimum period of days by the application of an approved resin based aluminised curing compound or polythene sheeting or an approved sprayed plastic film which hardens into a peelable plastic sheet and which shall be removed before road marking and opening to traffic .
Where the concrete is to receive a thin surfacing overlay the surface and exposed edges shall be cured for a minimum of days by the application of a curing agent which is compatible with the bond coat specified on the HAPAS Roads and Bridges Certificate or equivalent for the thin surfacing .
Resin based aluminised curing compound shall contain sufficient flake aluminium in finely divided dispersion to produce a complete coverage of the sprayed surface with a metallic finish .
The compound shall become stable and impervious to evaporation of water from the concrete surface within minutes of application and shall have an efficiency index of when tested as described in BS .
The curing compound shall not react chemically with the concrete to be cured and shall not crack peel or disintegrate within three weeks after application .
Prior to application the contents of any containers shall be thoroughly agitated .
The curing compound shall be mechanically applied using a fine spray on to the surface at a rate of at least .
m .
For the sides of slipformed slabs or when the side forms are removed within hours and for small areas where mechanical application can not be used the compound shall be sprayed by hand lance at a rate of at least .
m .
The rate of spread shall be checked during construction of each trial length and for each m of treated slab .
The mechanical sprayer shall incorporate an efficient mechanical device for continuous agitation and mixing of the compound in its container during spraying .
Continuously reinforced concrete bases shall be cured in accordance with this Clause .
Immediately prior to laying the bituminous surfacing or upper base a cationic bituminous tack coat shall be applied in accordance with Clause at a rate between .
lm to .
lm .
To achieve high early strength for early use by vehicles insulation blankets as described in Clause shall be used for accelerated curing .
Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Concrete Materials Trial Length General Except in rapid construction projects and unless otherwise described in contract specific Appendix at least three months prior to the construction of the trial length of surface slabs or CRCB the Contractor shall submit a detailed description of the proposed constituent materials concrete proportions plant equipment and construction methods .
No trials of new constituent materials plant equipment or construction methods nor any development of them shall be permitted either during the construction of the trial length or in any subsequent paving work unless they form part of further satisfactory trials .
Unless otherwise described in contract specific Appendix the Contractor shall demonstrate the constituent materials concrete proportions plant equipment and methods of construction that are proposed for concrete paving by first constructing a trial length of slab at least m but not more than m long for mechanised construction and at least m long for hand guided methods .
The concrete proportions decided by trial concrete mixes may be adjusted during the trial but shall not be changed once the trial length has been satisfactorily completed unless the Contractor lays a further trial area to assess the suitability of the proposed changes .
The trial length shall be constructed in two parts over a period comprising at least part of two separate working days with a minimum of m constructed each day when mechanised paving plant is used and a minimum of m on each day for hand guided methods .
The trial length shall be constructed at a similar rate to that which is proposed for the main construction in the permanent works .
At least two transverse joints and one longitudinal joint of each type that are proposed for unreinforced concrete slabs and jointed reinforced concrete slabs in the main construction in the permanent works shall be constructed and assessed in the trial length .
If in the trial length expansion joints are not demonstrated the first expansion joints and at least the first m of longitudinal construction joint for mechanised paving or m for hand guided method of construction laid in the main construction in the permanent works shall be considered the trial length for these joints .
One construction joint shall be demonstrated in each trial length of CRCP or CRCB .
Assessment The trial length shall comply for strength and density with the specification in all respects with the following additions and exceptions Surface Levels and Irregularity i In checking for compliance with Table the levels shall be taken at intervals of not more than .
m along any line or lines parallel to the longitudinal centre line of the trial length .
ii The maximum number of permitted irregularities of pavement surfaces shall comply with the requirements of Table for m lengths .
Shorter trial lengths shall be assessed prorata based on values for a m length .
Joints iii At least cores of minimum diameter mm shall be taken from the slab at joints to check the lateral and vertical location of joint grooves and bottom crack inducers .
iv Alignment of dowel bars shall be inspected as described in Clause in any two consecutive transverse joints .
If the position or alignment of the dowel bars at one of these joints does not comply with Clause but if that joint remains the only one that does not comply after the next consecutive joints of the same type have been inspected then the method of placing dowels shall be deemed to be satisfactory .
In order to check sufficient joints for dowel bar alignment without extending the trial length unduly the Contractor may construct joints at more frequent joint intervals than the normal spacing required in contract specific Appendix .
Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Concrete Materials v If there are deficiencies in the first expansion joint that is constructed as a trial the next expansion joint shall be a trial joint .
Should this also be deficient further trial expansion joints shall be made as part of a trial length .
Deficient expansion joints shall not form part of the permanent works .
Position of Reinforcement and Tie Bars vi Compliance with Clause for the position of steel reinforcement and Clause for the position and alignment of tie bars shall be checked by drilling additional cores from the slab unless they can be determined from cores taken for density assessment .
Completion of Trial The Contractor shall not proceed with normal working unless the trial length complies with the specification and any earlier defective trial lengths have been removed unless they can be remedied to comply with the specification .
After satisfactory completion of the trial length the constituent materials concrete proportions plant equipment and construction methods shall not thereafter be changed except for normal adjustments and maintenance of plant unless the Contractor lays a further trial length as described in this Clause to demonstrate that the changes will not adversely affect the permanent works or agrees the changes with the Overseeing Organisation .
Rejection and Further Trials Trial lengths which do not comply with the specification with the exception of areas within the pavement surface which can be remedied in accordance with Clause shall be removed and the Contractor shall construct a further trial length .
Texturing of Hardened Concrete Worn rain damaged or inadequately textured surface slabs shall be macrotextured by sawing grooves in the hardened concrete surface at right angles to the longitudinal axis of the pavement with machines using diamond or other abrasive cutting discs .
Grooves shall be irregularly spaced and shall be not less than mm and not more than mm wide .
The sequence of distances between groove centres in mm shall be .
A tolerance of mm shall be allowed on each of the spacings .
The minimum width of grooving head shall be mm and a head not providing a complete sequence of spacings shall use the number of spacings appropriate to its width commencing at the start of the sequence .
Groove depths shall be measured using a tyre tread depth gauge and measurements shall be taken as follows i At locations at least m apart along a diagonal line across a lane width between points m apart longitudinally .
No measurement shall be taken within mm of the longitudinal edge of a slab .
ii At each of the locations the depth of adjacent grooves shall be measured .
iii Where a grooved area is less than m in length the locations where measurements are taken shall be as i but the number shall be proportional to the requirements for m. iv The average of each set of measurements shall be not less than mm nor greater than mm .
Slurry from the sawing process shall be prevented from flowing into joints drains or into lanes being used by traffic and all resultant debris from the grooving shall be removed .
Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Concrete Materials Wet Lean Concrete Grades and Constituents The strength for wet lean concrete shall be as described in Clause with the following constituents i cements as described in subClause .
and watercement ratio as described in subClause .
ii aggregate shall be in accordance with subClause .. Consistence Workability Consistence shall comply with Clause .
Placing Wet lean concrete shall be spread uniformly without segregation and without varying degrees of precompaction .
The concrete shall be struck off to a level so that the surcharge is sufficient to ensure that after compaction the surface is at the required level .
Compaction The spread wet lean concrete shall be compacted using internal or external vibration or a combination of both to meet the required density .
Compaction and finishing to level shall be completed within the times given in Table .
Joints At transverse and longitudinal construction joints between two separately constructed slabs the previously laid slab end or edge shall present a vertical face before construction of subsequent slabs .
Longitudinal joints in wet lean concrete shall be staggered by at least mm from the position of longitudinal joints in any superimposed concrete slab and by m for transverse joints .
Curing Curing of wet lean concrete shall comply with BS EN as appropriate .
Sampling for Testing Sampling shall be as specified in Clause .
Density The density shall be determined as required in Clause .
Strength The strength shall be determined as in Clause .
Trial Concrete Mixes Trial concrete mixes shall conform with BS for designed concretes for strength class C and above or CC and above unless recent data relating entirely to the proposed concrete satisfies the requirements of the specification .
Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Concrete Materials Trial Length At least days before the start of the main wet lean concrete works a trial length of at least m for mechanised construction and m for handguided methods shall be constructed .
The trial length shall be laid to assess the suitability of the proposed material plant equipment and construction methods to meet the requirements of the specification .
The main construction in the permanent works shall not start unless the trial length complies with the specification .
If any trial length does not conform to the specification another trial length shall be constructed .
Trial lengths not complying shall be removed unless they can be rectified to comply with the specification .
After satisfactory completion of the trial the material plant equipment and construction methods shall not be changed unless the Contractor lays a further trial length to assess the suitability of the proposed changes or agrees the changes with the Overseeing Organisation .
Surface Finish The surface of the wet lean concrete after compaction and finishing and before overlaying shall be free from ridges loose material pot holes ruts or other defects .
The surface macrotexture shall comply with subClause ..
Measurement of Macrotexture Depth Volumetric Patch Technique The macrotexture depth of the road surface will be determined using the method described and the equipment specified in BS EN .
Thin Bonded Repairs Materials Cement mortar shall be used for depths less than mm and fine concrete for greater depths .
Resin mortar may only be used for small patch repairs less than metre long and less than mm in depth and where insufficient time for adequate curing of a cementitious cement mortar exists .
The cements aggregates admixtures and water shall comply with Clause .
The sand ie fine aggregate for mortars or fine concrete shall be within the limits of CP MP MP or FP of BS EN .
Coarse aggregate for fine concrete shall be single sized aggregate complying with BS EN .
All aggregates shall have the same thermal properties as the aggregate in the original concrete and match other properties as closely as possible .
Filler and aggregate for resin mortars shall be prepacked in the correct proportions and mixed with the resin all in accordance with the manufacturers instructions .
The proportions of cement admixtures additives to water and aggregates shall be sufficient to provide high early strength mortar or fine concrete or concrete complying with Clauses and .
For cement mortar the sand ie fine aggregate to cement ratio shall not be greater than .
For resin mortar the sand content shall be in accordance with the manufacturers requirements in the range between and to of resin .
High early strength concrete shall be able to achieve Nmm in less than hours .
For thin bonded repairs using high early strength concrete less than mm depth air entrainment is not required .
Procedure Mark out the area to be rectified parallel and perpendicular to the axis of the road .
Cut a groove around the perimeter at least mm deep without overcutting into the adjacent slab .
Carefully cut out the concrete to the required depth with a vertical face without undercutting the adjacent slab .
If a joint is included in the area to be rectified fix a groove former or cork seal along the line of the joint by chasing out a groove .
For joints on the perimeter fix the groove former or cork seal by adhesive to the adjacent slab .
Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Concrete Materials For cementitious repairs wet the area of the patch .
Keep it wet until the repair material is ready to be placed .
Remove excess water prime the surfaces with cement grout or bonding agent spread the repair material immediately before the primed surface is dry with sufficient surcharge .
Thoroughly compact it by vibration ensuring full compaction at the edges and corners .
Retexture the surface to match the surrounding concrete and cure in accordance with Clause .
For resin mortar repairs ensure the area is dry before application of the primer .
Place the repair material within the time allowed by the manufacturer for the primer and compact it well into the edges to the patch .
Apply a brush texture to match the original .
Full Depth Repairs and Reinstatements General Full depth repairs shall be repairs which will require full depth reinstatement of the concrete slab in accordance with this Clause to the extent instructed by the Overseeing Organisation which repairs may also require reinstatement of subbase .
Full width repairs shall be repairs over the full width of a bay or bays .
Part width repairs shall be repairs over part of the width of a bay or bays .
A bay shall be that portion of the concrete pavement bounded by adjacent longitudinal and transverse joints .
The area of concrete to be removed shall be marked out perpendicular to and parallel to the axis of the road .
For continuously reinforced concrete slabs CRCP or CRCB the edge of the repair shall be not less than .
m from the nearest crack and not less than m from a transverse construction joint at ground beam anchorages .
Where this and the provisions of subClause of this Clause would otherwise require a longitudinal repair joint within m of the existing longitudinal joint or edge the repair shall be extended to align with that longitudinal joint or edge .
Part Width Repairs Providing all the following criteria are met part width repairs may be carried out in accordance with subClause of this Clause i the transverse width of the repair shall not exceed of the width of the slab under repair and ii the longitudinal joint which would be formed by the repair shall not occur within the wheeltrack and iii the minimum transverse width of the repair shall not be less than .
m. If these criteria and those in subClause of this Clause can not be met a fullwidth repair shall be made in accordance with this Clause .
Full Width Repairs For full width repairs the following criteria shall apply unless otherwise specified in contract specific Appendix i Repair lengths which do not replace an existing transverse joint shall be constructed with two transverse contraction joints and the longitudinal joint shall have tie bars in repair lengths which are greater than metre .
ii Repair lengths which replace a single existing transverse joint shall be constructed with two transverse joints one expansion and one contraction .
The new expansion joint shall be formed at the end which will have the shortest longitudinal distance between this joint and the joint in the adjacent lanes .
The longitudinal joints between the existing joints and the new expansion joint shall be constructed without tie bars and shall have mm thick compressible foam within the joint for the full depth of the concrete slab .
The longitudinal joint between the new contraction joint and the joint in the adjacent bays shall be constructed with tie bars where the exposed length so permits .
Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Concrete Materials iii Repair lengths which replace more than one existing transverse joint shall be constructed with transverse joints to match expansion and contraction joints in the adjacent bays .
Where the repair length does not replace an existing expansion joint one end joint shall be formed as an expansion joint .
Except for the end joints all transverse joints shall be formed to coincide with the existing transverse joints .
Where one end joint is an expansion joint the longitudinal joints between the existing joints and the new expansion joint shall be constructed without tie bars and shall have mm thick compressible foam within the joint for the full depth of the concrete slab .
All other longitudinal joints shall be constructed with tie bars .
Repair Work A groove of mm nominal depth but less than the depth of any reinforcement shall be sawn around the perimeter .
For jointed slabs the sawcut shall be full depth to provide the face for a new joint .
There shall be no overcutting into the adjacent slab .
Additional cuts within the repair area may be made to ease removal of the redundant portion of the slab .
At internal corners full depth holes across the corners at the limits of the saw cuts shall be drilled prior to breaking out .
The line of cut shall not vary by more than mm throughout its length from the set out line .
All sawn edges shall be perpendicular or parallel to the sides and surfaces of the slab .
When sawing operations have been completed and before any other operations are commenced the surface of the carriageway shall be thoroughly cleaned of the slurry produced by sawing and of any other detritus .
The concrete shall be carefully broken out without undercutting the slab or damaging adjoining slabs .
If reinforcement has to be removed sufficient shall be left for a lap length except where a dowelled joint is being made .
Reinforcement shall not be bent and subsequently straightened .
Slurry from sawing slab breaking repair materials and other debris shall be prevented from entering joints and grooves in adjacent areas .
When a new joint is required holes shall be drilled of the appropriate size and depth for dowels or tie bars according to the type of joint .
These holes shall be thoroughly cleaned of debris and dust .
This shall include but not be limited to the use of oilfree compressed air at a pressure of not less than .
Nmm .
Dowels and tie bars shall comply with the requirements of Clauses and respectively .
Epoxy mortar shall be to the manufacturers recommendation for this specific application .
The holes shall be filled with epoxy mortar the mortar being injected to the rear of the hole to avoid air entrapment .
The dowel bars shall be inserted into the holes before the initial set of the mortar .
If cartridges of epoxy mortar are used they shall be inserted into each hole the dowel bar inserted through the cartridges and rotated for minute to ensure that the epoxy mortar is well mixed .
After insertion the dowels and tie bars shall be within the specified tolerances for alignment .
Where repairs straddle a movement joint with an adjacent slab tie bars shall be omitted and the joint between the slabs debonded to ensure that movement patterns are not restricted .
Where contract specific Appendix or the drawings so require full bay replacement shall be made and this may require an expansion joint or a contraction joint to be provided at the ends of the replaced bay .
Expansion joint filler shall be fixed to one of the transverse joints .
In the other transverse joint contraction joint groove forming strips or cork seal shall be fixed to the edges of the adjacent concrete .
If the repair is adjacent to another slab bond between the two slabs shall be prevented by providing full depth mm thick compressible foam strips to Clause along the longitudinal joint between them .
The subbase layer and any separation membrane shall be reinstated as necessary to comply with Series and Clause respectively .
Defective subbase material shall be removed and the subbase reinstated to the correct level with the material described in contract specific Appendix .
Reinstatement of the subbase shall be completed before new dowel and tie bars are fixed at the joints .
Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Concrete Materials New reinforcement shall be lapped and welded or tied .
The length of tied laps shall be bar diameters or mm whichever is the greater for longitudinal bars and mm for transverse bars .
Welded laps shall be mm minimum length unless a buttweld process has been permitted in contract specific Appendix .
The reinstated concrete shall be placed spread compacted and finished as specified in Clause .
Particular care shall be taken to ensure full compaction at the edges .
The concrete shall be normal or high early strength pavement concrete complying with Clauses to and shall achieve the required characteristic strength prior to opening to traffic .
Crack Repairs Stitched crack repairs shall be either Type Staple Tie Bar Repair Type Diagonal Tie Bar Repair as described in contract specific Appendix and compliant with subClauses and of this Clause .
The extent of crack repairs shall be determined by inspection after the surface has been cleaned .
For Type crack repairs slots mm wide by mm long at mm centres and at right angles to the line of the crack shall be chased out to a depth such that when bedded the tie bars lie between and of the depth of the slab below the surface .
Holes of mm mm diameter by mm deep shall be drilled at each end of the slot and the slots cleaned out using oil free compressed air .
When in a dry state the slots shall be primed and the staple tie bars placed into beds of epoxy mortar and covered to a minimum depth of mm with the same material .
The sides of the slots shall be cleaned of loose material and the slots filled with thoroughly compacted epoxy or cementitious mortar as described in contract specific Appendix .
After curing a groove shall be sawn along the line of the crack and sealed in accordance with Clause .
For Type crack repairs drilling points shall be marked out at a distance from the crack equivalent to the depth of the slab at mm intervals along the crack with alternate points on opposite sides of the crack .
Holes of mm minimum diameter shall be drilled at right angles to the crack and at approximately to the surface of the slab to a depth which allows mm cover at the bottom of the slab .
These holes shall be thoroughly cleaned of debris and dust .
mm diameter Grade deformed steel tie bars shall be notched at a point which will ultimately be mm below the slab surface when the bars are fully inserted into the hole .
Each hole shall be filled with epoxy mortar and its quantity adjusted to ensure that when the tie bar is fully inserted the level of the mortar is up to a point which is mm below the notch on the tie bar .
Such adjustment of the epoxy mortar and the final insertion of the tie bar shall be done rapidly to ensure its completion before the initial set of the mortar .
After the epoxy mortar has set the length of tie bar above the notch shall be broken off .
Once all these bars have been broken off the tops of all these holes shall be filled with epoxy mortar .
If cartridges of epoxy mortar are used the bars shall be inserted through the cartridges and rotated for minute to ensure that the adhesive is well mixed .
Joint Grooves and Seals Longitudinal joint grooves shall be recut where directed in contract specific Appendix using the following procedure .
The longitudinal joint shall be saw cut to a nominal width of mm to encompass the existing joint and to sufficient depth to remove the existing sealant approximately mm deep .
Where existing sealant or traces thereof can not be removed within the mm saw cuts the groove shall be widened to enable all existing sealant to be removed .
Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Concrete Materials The groove sides shall be vertical and the horizontal alignment of the groove shall be straight and parallel to the edge of the slab .
The concrete and sealant shall be removed between the saw cuts without damaging the sides of the groove .
The base of the groove shall be formed to a uniform profile suitable for the application of debonding tape or caulking material .
Any residual traces of sealant or detritus shall be removed from the groove and the groove prepared for sealing in accordance with Clause .
Transverse joint grooves shall be recut where directed in contract specific Appendix using the following procedure .
The transverse joint shall be saw cut to form a groove to satisfy the dimension of applied joint seals as specified in Table allowing for debonding tape or any necessary caulking material of at least mm uncompacted depth and to encompass the existing joint .
The groove sides shall be vertical and the horizontal alignment of the groove shall be straight and parallel to the line of the joint .
The concrete and sealant shall be removed between the saw cuts without damaging the sides of the groove .
The base of the groove shall be formed in accordance with Clause .
Any residual traces of sealant or detritus shall be removed from the groove and the groove prepared for sealing in accordance with Clause .
Unless cork sealants complying with Clause have been used the joints shall be sealed in accordance with Clause .
Bay Replacement For the replacement of concrete pavement bays the Contractor shall undertake the work listed in this Clause .
Make a vertical saw cut around the perimeter of the repair through the full depth of the slab taking care to ensure that saw cuts do not extend into the adjacent bays .
Further saw cuts may be made to enable the concrete to be removed in convenient pieces .
Carefully break out and remove the existing concrete from within the repair area without damaging the remaining slab and with the minimum amount of damage to the subbase .
Reinstate or regulate the subbase as necessary .
Drill for and fix new dowel and tie bars at transverse and longitudinal joints .
Provide new separation layer .
Position reinforcement if required .
Stick groove forming strips along the top edges of the existing slab .
Place spread compact and finish pavement quality concrete in accordance with the requirements of this Series and the contract specific Appendices flush with the surface of the adjacent slab and to within a tolerance of mm and with a difference of not more than mm between the surface of the repair and a m straight edge .
Apply a wire brushed surface texture as specified in Clause and cure immediately by the application of a sprayed resin based aluminized curing compound .
Seal joints as specified in Clause .
Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Concrete Materials Slab Lifting Using Space Frames For concrete pavement slab lifting using space frames the Contractor shall undertake the work listed in this Clause .
Make a full depth saw cut along the longitudinal joint or joints to separate the bays that are to be raised from the adjacent slab .
Drill mm diameter lifting holes into the bay at positions to suit the lifting frame and to straddle joints or cracks .
Drill mm to mm diameter holes through the slab and bound subbase on a m x m grid for grout injection .
Position hydraulically operated lifting frames transversely astride the bay with lifting bolts over the lifting holes .
Fix threaded female sleeves into the lifting holes with resin grout or mortar .
Ensure the sockets remain vertical during setting of the mortar .
Screw the lifting bolts into threaded sleeves at the lifting points .
Establish a level reference datum across the bay that is to be raised .
Slowly raise the bay by controlled operation of the hydraulic jack at each corner of the lifting frames in sequence for a few millimetres .
Start grout injection using a Portland CementPFA dry mix in the ratio of to using the pressure grouting system for larger voids or the vacuum grouting system for small voids see procedure for pressure or vacuum grouting .
Lift and grout in stages until the correct level is reached or for a maximum lift of mm .
If more than a mm lift is needed raise adjacent areas along the carriageway before returning to complete the process to the required level .
Repeat the process for adjacent lanes .
Clean out the injection and lifting holes and plug them with a cementitious mortar .
Remove any excess grout or dry material .
For long lengths of more than m where the longitudinal joint tiebars have been cut use either of the crack stitching methods to tie the joint with a minimum of bars at mm centres placed in the centre of each unreinforced slab .
The spacing of bars in reinforced slabs shall be agreed with the Overseeing Organisation for each site .
Pressure Grouting For pressure grouting the Contractor shall undertake the work listed in this Clause .
Avoiding services drill mm to mm diameter grout injection holes through the slab and any bound subbase on a m x m grid extending over the whole area of the void under the slab .
Remove any water from the void by blowing with compressed air at each end of the grout holes in sequence working progressively across and along the bay down crossfalls and longitudinal gradients .
Inject fluid grout or dry mix mortar under pressure at each of the grout holes in sequence working progressively across and along each bay .
Grouting shall continue at each hole until refusal .
Temporarily plug adjacent holes when excess grout or plumes of dry mortar emanate from them .
Upon completion of the pressure grouting process any surplus grout shall be removed from the surface of the slab and the holes cleaned out and made good with resin or cementitious mortar .
Any resin grout which can not be removed from the surface of the slab may be blinded with calcined bauxite if this can be done before the grout has gelled .
The appropriate minimum curing period shall elapse before the carriageway is trafficked .
Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Concrete Materials Vacuum Grouting For vacuum grouting the Contractor shall undertake the work listed in this Clause using the layout shown in Figure .
Avoiding services drill mm to mm diameter grout injection holes through the slab and any bound subbase on a m x m grid extending over the whole area of the void under the slab .
Temporarily plug the holes and sweep the surface clear of all debris .
Remove the temporary plugs and place vacuum channels in position .
Place clear flexible plastic sheeting over the area to be grouted and on top of the vacuum channels .
Effectively seal around the vacuum and injection holes and around manholes to gully openings to prevent ingress of air into the voids or grout into the services .
Apply a vacuum to holes at edge of treatment area and draw off any water from the void beneath the slab .
With the vacuum applied puncture the plastic sheeting at the injection holes pour grout into them in the required sequence and continue the process until the grout ceases to be drawn into the void .
If grout begins to be drawn up through any of the vacuum points that hole should be plugged to avoid grout flowing on to the surface of the slab .
Upon completion of the vacuum process any surplus grout shall be removed from the surface of the slab and the holes cleaned out and made good with resin or cementitious mortar .
Any resin grout which can not be removed from the surface of the slab may be blinded with calcined bauxite if this can be done before the grout has gelled .
The appropriate minimum curing period shall elapse before the carriageway is trafficked .
FIGURE Vacuum Grouting Diagram Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Concrete Materials Continuously Reinforced Slabs and Roadbases Full Depth Repair For full depth repairs of continuously reinforced slabs and road bases the Contractor shall undertake the work listed in this Clause .
Mark out a square or rectangular area encompassing the defect .
The edges of the repair shall be at least .m from the nearest transverse crack and m from any transverse construction joint .
The minimum length of repair shall be .m .
Saw a groove around the perimeter of the repair not more than mm deep and to a depth less than that of the reinforcement .
Particular care shall be taken to ensure that the reinforcement is not cut at the edge of the repair .
Carefully break out the defective concrete in order to form a sound vertical edge to the repair care being taken to limit damage to and bending of the reinforcement to a minimum .
Should it become necessary to cut the reinforcement in order to remove the concrete the cut must be made at least one lap away from the edge .
Bars made of high yield steel shall not be bent and subsequently straightened .
Reinstate the subbase as necessary .
Lap and tie or weld in any new or additional reinforcement that may be required to replace that which has been damaged or removed .
The length of tied laps shall be at least bar diameters or mm whichever is the greater for longitudinal bars and mm for transverse bars .
The minimum length of any welded lap shall be mm .
Erect side forms where necessary .
Stick groove forming strips or cork seals along the top edges of the surrounding slab .
Clean out the area with compressed air and thoroughly dampen the subbase and edges of the repair .
Place and evenly spread high early strength pavement quality concrete to the appropriate surcharge compact using internal and surface vibration and finish flush with the surface of the adjacent slab and to within a tolerance mm and with a difference of not more than mm between the surface of the repair and a m straight edge .
Particular care shall be taken to ensure thorough compaction around the reinforcement and the edges of the repair .
Apply a wire brushed surface texture or texture to match surrounding pavement surface and cure immediately by the application of resin based aluminized curing compound .
Seal joints as specified in Clause .
Summary of Rates for Sampling and Testing Concrete for Pavement Layers Unless otherwise stated in contract specific Appendix Table summarises the minimum rates of sampling and testing of specimens to the specification .
Samples for testing shall be taken at the point of placing or from the relevant pavement layer .
Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Concrete Materials TABLE Rates for Sampling and Testing Concrete for Pavement Layers Clause Test Rate the greater number shall be used Air content a Main slab per m or per day b Slabs less than m per m length or per day Density a Main slab and trial length A minimum of cores at a rate of core per m Strength a Main slab cores for areas up to m and additional core per further m b Trial length At least cores half to be tested days and half at days Consistence a Main Slab Initial m Subsequently samples per m or per production day b Slabs less than m samples in the first m then more Hot or cold applied joint sealants Penetration test One sample per m joint or at least one per day Inspection of dowel alignment a Main slab joint per m length or joint per days whichever is the sooner b Slabs less than m in length At a rate of one joint for up to each joints c Trial lengths consecutive joints If one defective inspect next consecutive joints Macrotexture depth Each lane width One within m of commencement of paving and thereafter at least one set of measurements per days work .
Wet lean concrete As in Clause and In situ density A minimum of cores at a rate of core per m Strength a Main slab cores for areas up to m and additional core per further m b Trial length At least cores half to be tested at days and half at days to Not Used Foamed Concrete Foamed concrete used in reinstatements shall comply with the requirements of the Specification for the Reinstatement of Openings in Highways issued by the Highway Authorities and Utilities Committee .
Foamed concrete used for backfilling excavations including trench reinstatement under road pavements shall have the following compressive strengths i A minimum cube compressive strength of Nmm at an age of days .
ii A maximum cube compressive strength of Nmm at an age of days .
The compressive strength shall be determined by testing foamed concrete cubes which have been made in accordance with BS EN except that the foamed concrete shall be placed in the mould without any tamping or vibration other than gently rocking the mould on a firm base .
The test cubes shall be cured in accordance with BS EN and tested for compressive strength in accordance with BS EN .
Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Concrete Materials All aggregate used in foamed concrete shall pass a . mm sieve and shall comply with the MP and FP grading limits given in BS EN .
Larger size aggregate may be used provided it can be shown to be practicable .
After placing foamed concrete shall not be tamped or otherwise compacted .
Reinstatement of the subbase and base over the foamed concrete shall not be carried out until the foamed concrete has attained sufficient strength to allow compaction of the subbase and base material .
Pavements with an Exposed Aggregate Concrete Surface General Pavements with an exposed aggregate concrete surface shall comply with all the requirements of this Series except where otherwise specified in this Clause .
The Contractor shall complete contract specific Appendix and submit this with his tender documents .
If after acceptance the Contractor wishes to change the proposals contained in contract specific Appendix this change shall only be with the consent of the Overseeing Organisation .
The concrete slab shall be laid in either a single layer or in two layers as stated in contract specific Appendix .
If laid in two layers the surface layer shall be laid monolithically with the lower layer .
The Contractor shall carry out trials as specified in subClauses to of this Clause to demonstrate that the materials concrete proportions and methods for exposing the aggregate will meet the requirements of this Clause .
Quality of Concrete in the Slab The surface layer concrete shall comply with the following requirements i The surface layer shall be not less than mm thick .
The coarse aggregate shall comply with the size requirements of contract specific Appendix .
ii For .
mm coarse aggregate or mm coarse aggregate as required in contract specific Appendix the amount of aggregate retained on the mm sieve and mm sieve respectively shall not exceed by mass .
The aggregate passing the .
mm sieve and mm sieve respectively shall not exceed by mass .
iii The fine aggregate grading shall comply with the FP or FP grading in BS EN except that not less than of the mass of the material shall pass the mm sieve .
iv The coarse aggregate shall comprise at least by mass of the oven dry constituents of the concrete .
v The polished stone value PSV and the aggregate abrasion value AAV of the coarse aggregate determined in accordance with BS EN shall be as specified in contract specific Appendix .
The Category of flakiness index of the aggregate is FI .
vi Hardness and durability of the coarse aggregate shall be as described in subClause .. vii The type of cement used in the concrete shall be limited to Class .N.R Portland cement CEM I complying with BS EN .
The minimum cement content of the concrete shall be kgm and the maximum free watercement ratio shall be .. viii The air content density and strength requirements shall be as required in Clauses and respectively .
Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Concrete Materials General Construction Requirements The concrete paving equipment shall comply with contract specific Appendix as completed by the Contractor and submitted at Tender stage for approval by the Overseeing Organisation before the work commences .
The general construction requirements shall be in accordance with the requirements of this Series except where otherwise stated in this Clause i The concrete carriageway paving operation shall be undertaken as not less than a single lane width of construction using either slipform paving machines or fixed form paving machines .
ii The concrete surface layer shall be fed spread compacted regulated and finished using equipment with elements to obtain the required uniform distribution and bonded embedment of the selected aggregate in the finished road surface .
iii The spread concrete shall be compacted in such a manner that base layer concrete is not drawn into the surfacing and selected aggregate is uniformly present in the finished road surface .
iv The surface layer shall be compacted and shaped to line and level by a combination of either internal vibration and fixed conforming plate or vibrating conforming plate .
v The final regulation of the surface layer shall be provided by a transverse finishing screed in advance of a longitudinal oscillating float in accordance with Clause travelling across the slab before the application of a retarder complying with BS EN .
Finished Surface Requirements The finished surface of the pavement shall comply with the requirements of Clause .
Where a pavement area does not comply with the specification for regularity surface tolerance thickness material properties or compaction or contains surface depressions the full extent of the surface which does not comply with the specification shall be rectified by cutting out the full depth of the slab .
It shall be replaced with a new slab complying with the procedures set out in Clause to the extent required to obtain compliance with the specification .
Production of an Exposed Aggregate Surface In order to obtain a suitable exposed aggregate surface the main requirement shall be the removal of the surface mortar from the top of the slab to produce an exposed aggregate finish .
This objective may be achieved by the application of a suitable cement set retarder which is sprayed on the surface of the fresh concrete immediately after it has been levelled and finished .
Retarded mortar shall be removed by wet or dry brushing as stated in contract specific Appendix generally no sooner than when the surface concrete has reached a maturity of hours at C or after a suitable interval determined by trial to achieve the requirements of subClause of this Clause .
Retarder The composition and viscosity of the retarder shall be such that it can be spread at an adequate and uniform rate over the surface of the concrete slab in order to ensure adequate aggregate exposure during the subsequent brushing operation .
The retarder shall contain a pigment in sufficient quantity to give an even uniform colour after it has been sprayed on to the slab surface .
The pigment shall be fully degraded by exposure to ultraviolet light without leaving any residue that is detrimental to the surface of the concrete .
The chemical composition of the retarder and of the curing compound shall be such that they do not react adversely following the application of the curing compound to the exposed aggregate surface .
The Contractor shall use the retarder which he has nominated in contract specific Appendix .
This shall be of a type and composition to satisfy the requirements of this Clause .
Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Concrete Materials Application of the Retarder The retarder shall be spread evenly on to the surface of the wet concrete slab as soon as practicable after the surface layer has been levelled and finished by a spray bar over the full width of the slab in one pass .
To achieve this uniformity of spread the spraying system shall consist of a spray bar provided with nozzles mounted on a machine spanning the slab .
Temporary works materials and equipment shall be chosen in order to permit inspection to ensure adequate coverage of retarder immediately after spraying and before protection of the surface .
Before commencing work the level of the spray bar the rate of delivery of the retarder from the nozzles of the spray bar and the forward speed of the spraying machine shall be adjusted to achieve the required rate of spread .
Means shall be provided and steps shall be taken to avoid excess retarder flowing on the surface of the slab .
Backup spraying equipment shall be available on the site at all times for use in case of a breakdown of the spraying machine .
Protection of the Surface after the Application of the Retarder The finished surface of the pavement concrete after application of retarder shall be protected against precipitation moisture loss contamination and dispersal of the retarder by air movements as stated in contract specific Appendix .
This protection shall be applied immediately after the application of the retarder .
Where waterproof sheeting is used it shall be laid onto the surface of the concrete immediately after the retarder has been sprayed .
It shall be retained in position until immediately prior to exposing of the aggregate .
The protection system shall not adversely affect either the finish the line or the level of the concrete surface or the even distribution of the retarder in any way .
Where sheeting is used any air bubbling or blistering shall be prevented .
Exposing the Aggregate Surface Brushing equipment shall be used to expose the concrete surface aggregate .
Where the brushing equipment runs on the slab the concrete shall have gained sufficient strength to avoid any damage to the concrete .
Removal of the protection system shall take place as brushing proceeds .
If waterproof sheeting is used as a protection system it shall be maintained in position until immediately in advance of the brushing operation .
The Contractor shall complete the process of exposing the aggregate before the retarder becomes ineffective .
Failure to do so shall entail the remedial measures specified in subClauses and of this Clause .
Brushing System Sufficient brushing capability shall always be maintained on site to complete the exposure of the aggregate before the retarder becomes ineffective .
An adequate backup brushing facility shall be available on the site at all times for use in case of a breakdown of the brushing equipment .
The brushing equipment nominated by the Contractor in contract specific Appendix shall be used to produce an even macrotexture on the surface of the slab .
Brushing shall be carried out in the longitudinal direction of the concrete slab .
The brushing equipment shall be capable of maintaining an adequate brush rotational speed which in conjunction with the forward working speed is sufficient to remove the surface mortar .
Adequate dust suppression and collection measures shall be in operation at all times .
When complying with the requirements of subClause of this Clause the wheels of any brushing equipment which may run on the slab shall be fitted with tyres with a shallow tread pattern and a low inflation pressure and be sufficiently wide to avoid damage to the concrete .
Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Concrete Materials Protection of the Surface Layer After Exposure of the Aggregate Within one hour of completing exposure of the aggregate the surface shall be dampened with water .
A curing compound shall be applied to the entire exposed aggregate surface of the slab in accordance with Clause .
In wet weather the curing compound shall be applied as soon as practicable after the rain stops .
The surface may alternatively be covered by hessian provided it is maintained in a wet condition at all times during the curing period of the concrete .
Surface Macrotexture Depth and Remedial Measures The texture depth of the surface of the concrete shall be measured using a volumetric patch technique described in BS EN .
The average macrotexture depth of each m section of carriageway lane or each carriageway lane where less than m shall comply with the requirements of contract specific Appendix .
Any individual result shall be neither greater than the maximum nor be less than the minimum value of macrotexture depth stated in contract specific Appendix .
During brushing initial interim spot check measurements of the surface macrotexture depth shall be made as soon as it is considered that the required texture depth has been reached .
This shall continue until the specified macrotexture depth has been achieved .
In the event that it is not possible to achieve the specified minimum macrotexture depth by further exposure the Contractor shall treat the surface in accordance with Clause to achieve the specified macrotexture depth .
This treatment shall not be applied until the concrete has reached an age of days and shall not affect the requirements of subClauses .
to .
and .
to .. Failure to achieve a satisfactory minimum macrotexture depth by mechanical means shall result in removal of the full thickness of the slab to the extent required to permit reconstruction of the slab in accordance with the specification .
Where the maximum macrotexture depth is exceeded suitable remedial measures shall be employed .
Preliminary Trials The Contractor shall carry out preliminary trials to demonstrate to the Overseeing Organisation not less than one month prior to the commencement of the trial length referred to in subClauses to of this Clause the materials concrete proportions and methods for achieving the macrotexture depth requirements defined in contract specific Appendix .
Preliminary trial panels shall be constructed offline incorporating a top surface of exposed aggregate concrete similar to that specified for the permanent works .
These panels shall be m long and not less than mm deep and the maximum intended paving width .
They shall be used to enable the Contractor to determine the required application rate of the retarder and the amount of brushing required to achieve the specified macrotexture depth .
The trial panels may alternatively be constructed onsite but in this case they may only form part of the permanent works if they meet all the requirements of the specification otherwise they shall be removed after they have served their purpose .
The surface macrotexture depth shall be determined by volumetric patch technique at approximately m spacings along a diagonal line across each trial panel and shall follow the procedure described in BS EN .
The average value of each set of individual measurements shall be taken as the resulting macrotexture depth which shall be assessed against the specification .
The materials including all the aggregates plant and equipment used in the preliminary trials shall be equivalent to that which will be used in the Trial Length .
Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Road Pavements Concrete Materials F Trial Length In addition to the requirements of Clause the macrotexture depth shall be tested for compliance in accordance with subClauses and of this Clause .
Macrotexture depth shall be assessed by the volumetric patch technique for each m length of the trial length and for each lane and shall follow the procedure in BS EN .
During the construction of the Trial Length spot checks shall be made as soon as it is considered that the required macrotexture depth has been reached .
Should the texture depth be found to be inadequate further exposure of the aggregate shall be undertaken until the specified macrotexture depth has been achieved .
Where the macrotexture depth is not achieved and the trial was intended to form part of the running surface of the permanent works the remedial measures described in subClauses and of this Clause shall apply .
Weather Conditions for Laying of Cementitious Materials Road pavement materials in a frozen condition shall not be incorporated in the works but may be used if acceptable when thawed .
Road pavement materials shall not be laid on any surface which is frozen or covered with ice .
The temperature of concrete in any pavement layer shall not be less than C at the point of delivery .
These materials shall not be laid when the air temperature falls below C and laying shall not be resumed until the rising air temperature reaches C unless all surfaces of the concrete slabs are protected by thermal insulation blankets laid immediately after placing and finishing the concrete .
The insulation shall be placed before the temperature of the concrete surface has dropped below C and shall be retained for a minimum of days or until the concrete is assessed to have reached of the specified characteristic compressive strength provided the air temperature is above C and rising at that time .
Thermal insulation blankets shall be closed cell polyethylene foam sheets minimum mm thick with a U value of wattsm C or K value of .
wattsm Kelvin or suitable material with an equivalent or lower thermal conductivity .
They shall be sufficiently robust and capable of being held in place against variations in wind and weather conditions for the necessary curing time .
to Not Used Use of Surfaces by Traffic and Construction Plant Construction plant and traffic used on pavements under construction shall be suitable in relation to the material condition and thickness of the courses it traverses so that damage is not caused to the subgrade or the pavement courses already constructed .
The wheels or tracks of plant moving over the various pavement courses shall be kept free from deleterious materials .
Concrete slabs may be used by traffic when the cube compressive strength is assessed to have reached Nmm for pavement surface slabs or Nmm for bases with asphalt surfacing .
The method of assessing the time when this strength is reached shall be as described in Clause .
In the absence of test data establishing compliance with subClause of this Clause no vehicle with an axle loading greater than tonnes shall run on concrete slabs within a period of days after placing the concrete .
Vehicles with rubber tyres with an axle loading less than tonnes or wheels or tracks of concreting plant shall not use any part of a newly constructed pavement within days .
The above periods before traffic may run on the pavement shall be increased if the day cube strength is below that required in the specification .
These periods shall be extended by one day for each night on which the temperature of the layer falls to C or below .
MANUAL OF CONTRACT DOCUMENTS FOR HIGHWAY WORKS VOLUME THE SPECIFICATION FOR HIGHWAY WORKS Amendment February SERIES KERBS FOOTWAYS AND PAVED AREAS Contents Clause Title Page General Precast Concrete Kerbs Channels Edgings and Quadrants InSitu Asphalt Kerbs Freestanding InSitu Concrete Kerbs Channels and Edge Details Footways and Paved Areas Precast Concrete Flags and Natural Stone Slabs Footways and Paved Areas Flexible Surfacing Footways and Paved Areas InSitu Concrete Footways and Paved Areas Concrete Block Paving Footways and Paved Areas Clay Pavers Grass Concrete Paving Access Steps NATIONAL ALTERATIONS OF THE OVERSEEING ORGANISATIONS OF SCOTLAND WALES AND NORTHERN IRELAND Clause Title Page NI Precast Concrete Kerbs Channels Edgings and Quadrants NF denotes a Clause or Sample Appendix which has a substitute National Clause or Sample Appendix for one or more of the Overseeing Organisations of Scotland Wales or Northern Ireland .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Kerbs Footways and Paved Areas Amendment February KERBS FOOTWAYS AND PAVED AREAS General This Series is part of the Specification for Highway Works .
Whilst this Series is particularly relevant to the subject matter in its title it must be read in conjunction with the general requirements in Series and and with all other Series relevant to the specification for the particular works to be undertaken .
Precast Concrete Kerbs Channels Edgings and Quadrants Except where otherwise specified in this Clause precast concrete kerbs channels edgings and quadrants shall conform to BS EN and their dimensions type designations and performances and classes shall be as described in this Clause and Appendix .
They shall be laid and bedded in accordance with BS on a mortar bed on a concrete pavement slab a base or a C or ST in accordance with BS concrete foundation .
The mortar bed may be omitted if units are bedded onto a concrete slab or foundation that is still plastic .
All precast units laid on a mortar bed or bedded onto plastic concrete shall be backed with a strength class C or ST concrete in accordance with BS .
Precast concrete kerbs which are to be bonded to the pavement surface shall conform to BS EN .
The bonding materials and methods of bonding shall be to the manufacturers recommendations for this specific application .
Bonded kerbs shall not be less than mm in width at the base their height shall not exceed their width and they shall be bonded over their full width .
Kerbs shall be precast to the dimensions described in Appendix .
The clear distance between unsupported pavement edge and back of kerb shall be not less than mm .
The bending strength of units shall be established by testing in accordance with BS EN and shall not be less than class in Table of BS EN .
Units shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturers instructions .
They shall be bonded to the pavement surface with a resilient adhesive compatible with the pavement materials and be capable of withstanding a static pushoff load of kNm applied parallel to the pavement surface at right angles to the kerb .
Joints shall be provided in kerbs channels edgings and backing which are laid on or adjacent to a concrete pavement to coincide with the pavement transverse contraction warping and expansion joints .
The joints shall be the same width as the joint sealing grooves of the pavement and shall be caulked and sealed as described in Clauses and .
Concrete foundations to kerbs channels and edgings laid adjacent to a concrete pavement shall be provided with joint filler board complying with Clause placed vertically through the full extent of the concrete foundation at positions coinciding with the pavement joints .
At expansion joints in bridge decks the kerb joints shall be as described in Appendix .
Where the details of bridge expansion joints are proposed by the Contractor such details shall include the intended treatment at kerbs and footways .
For curves of radius m or less kerbs of appropriate radius shall be used as per BS EN .
The surface level of units of kerb channel edging and quadrant shall not deviate from the design level mm nor shall the longitudinal surface regularity deviate more than mm in m when checked with a m straight edge .
Horizontal alignment shall comply with Clause .
InSitu Asphalt Kerbs The materials for and making and placing of insitu asphalt kerbs shall comply with the recommendations of BS .
In addition a tack coat shall be used and they shall be laid by a machine capable of producing a dense smoothsurfaced kerb to true line and level .
Kerbs shall be constructed to the dimensions described in Appendix .
Vertical expansion and contraction joints shall be formed in kerbs laid on unreinforced concrete slabs and jointed reinforced concrete slabs to coincide with the pavement transverse expansion and contraction joints .
All joints shall be sealed in compliance with Clauses and .
Freestanding InSitu Concrete Kerbs Channels and Edge Details Freestanding insitu concrete kerbs channels and edge details shall comply with the recommendations of BS except where otherwise specified in this Clause .
They shall be laid by a machine capable of forming dense kerbs or surface water channels or edge details with regular sides arrises and chamfers finished to a fine surface free from blow holes and dragging and constructed to the dimensions described in Appendix .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Kerbs Footways and Paved Areas Amendment August For kerbs channels and edge details i Constructed before the adjacent road pavement surface the surface level adjacent to the future road surface shall not deviate from the design level by more than mm .
ii Constructed after the adjacent road pavement surface the surface level shall not deviate from the finished level of the adjacent pavement surface by more than mm .
The longitudinal surface regularity shall not deviate by more than mm in m when measured with a m straight edge .
The concrete shall be a strength class C to BS and airentrained in accordance with BS .
Coarse aggregate used in kerbs and channels shall be partially crushed or crushed materials .
The concrete shall be cured by one of the methods specified in Clause unless otherwise described in Appendix .
Kerbs channels and edge details shall be firmly secured to the surface on which they are laid .
Vertical expansion and contraction joints shall be formed in kerbs channels and edge details laid on integral with or adjacent to unreinforced concrete slabs and jointed reinforced concrete slabs to coincide with the pavement transverse expansion warping and contraction joints .
Joints may be omitted from channels cast integral with a CRCP concrete pavement .
Vertical expansion joints at m spacings and intermediate contraction joints at m spacings shall be formed in kerbs channels and edge details laid on or adjacent to other types of concrete and flexible pavement .
Expansion joints may be replaced by contraction joints and installed in accordance with the manufacturers instructions during the summer period from April until October .
All joints in kerbs channels and edge details shall be sealed in compliance with Clauses and .
Footways and Paved Areas Precast Concrete Flags and Natural Stone Slabs Precast concrete flags shall conform to BS EN .
Natural stone slabs shall conform to BS EN .
Type designations thicknesses and performances and classes shall be as described in Appendix .
Precast concrete flags and natural stone slabs shall be laid in accordance with BS to the required cross falls with a bond as described in Appendix and with joints at right angles to the kerb .
Flags and natural stone slabs shall be bedded on a layer of mortar not less than mm and not more than mm thick .
Where permitted in Appendix flags and natural stone slabs mm x mm and smaller may be laid on a layer of sand comforming to BS EN designation mm mm mm thick .
Joints to be filled with sand conforming to BS EN designation .
On circular work where the radius is m or less all flags and natural stone slabs shall be radially cut on both edges to the required line .
The laying course shall be laid on subbase composed of one of the materials complying with Clause or laid and compacted to Clause or as appropriate and to the thickness described in Appendix .
Footways and Paved Areas Flexible Surfacing Flexible surfacing and subbase for footways and paved areas shall be constructed using the materials and layer thicknesses described in Appendix .
Bituminous mixtures used in flexible surfacing shall be made in accordance with BS EN the detailed requirements from the example specifications in BS PD and Clause .
Flexible surfacing shall be laid and compacted in accordance with BS .
Subbase shall be composed of an unbound mixture conforming to Clause or or a cement bound granular mixture conforming to Clause or .
Subbase shall be laid and compacted to Clause or as appropriate .
Footways and Paved Areas InSitu Concrete Insitu concrete for footways and paved areas shall be made laid and cured as described in Appendix .
The grade of concrete and surface finish shall be as described in Appendix .
Insitu concrete shall be laid to true levels and crossfalls and be of the thickness described in Appendix .
Insitu concrete shall be laid on a subbase composed of one of the materials conforming to Clause or laid and compacted in compliance with Clause or as appropriate and to the thickness described in Appendix .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Kerbs Footways and Paved Areas Amendment February Footways and Paved Areas Concrete Block Paving Precast concrete paving blocks shall be chamfered and shall comform to BS EN and the shapes dimensions colours and performances and classess described in Appendix .
Precast paving blocks shall be laid in accordance with BS except that the subbase shall be one of the materials permitted in subClause ..
The layout of blocks and details at edges chamber covers gullies and other openings shall be as described in Appendix .
Footways and Paved Areas Clay Pavers Clay pavers shall conform to BS EN with chamfers .
The shapes dimensions colours and performances and other required classes of clay pavers shall be as described in Appendix .
Clay pavers shall be laid in accordance with BS except that the subbase shall be one of the materials permitted in subClause ..
The layout of pavers and details at edges chamber covers gullies and other openings shall be as described in Appendix .
Grass Concrete Paving Grass concrete paving shall consist of a reinforced perforated insitu concrete slab or a precast panel system as specified in Appendix and in the locations shown on the Drawings .
Insitu grass concrete paving shall be cast and cured as described in Appendix .
The strength class of concrete and surface finish shall be as described in Appendix .
Perforations shall be formed in insitu grass concrete paving as described in Appendix .
Concrete panels shall conform to the shape dimensions and colour described in Appendix .
Concrete used shall have compressive strength class of and panels when tested in accordance with BS EN the characteristic bending strength shall be class to Table of BS EN .
The water absorption when tested in accordance with BS EN shall be class of Table ..
The layout of panels and details at edges chamber covers gullies and other openings shall be as described in Appendix .
Grass concrete paving shall be laid to true levels and crossfalls and be of the thickness described in Appendix .
Grass concrete paving shall be laid on a bed of Type unbound mixtures conforming to Clause laid and compacted in accordance with Clause and to the thickness described in Appendix .
In addition panels shall be bedded on a layer of sand conforming to BS EN to the thickness specified in Appendix .
Perforations shall be filled with friable soil free from deleterious matter or with other material as described in Appendix levelled off mm below the top surface sown with grass seed as described in Appendix covered with a layer of fine soil and levelled .
The seed shall be sown while soil is still loose after filling .
Access Steps The Contractor shall provide the access steps identified in contract specific Appendix and where identified in contract specific Appendix shall undertake the design of the access steps or elements thereof .
The access steps shall comply with the requirements of BS EN ISO and BS EN ISO contract specific Appendix and the performance requirements described hereafter .
Where required in contract specific Appendix the steps shall be installed in accordance with HCD drawing MCX sheet numbers and .
For the purpose of this Clause i The term access steps shall mean access steps provided for highway maintenance purposes to communication cabinets and other roadside items and shall include landings and guardrails .
ii The term Machinery referred to under BS EN ISO and BS EN ISO shall mean communication cabinets and other roadside items .
Where required by contract specific Appendix working and fabrication drawings indicating material and fabrication of components and fittings shall be submitted to the Overseeing Organisation for approval .
The alignment and location for access steps shall enable the safe access to and egress from any communication cabinet and other roadside items .
The steps shall be located where possible such that they will not require removal for access to services or supplies including motorway communication systems .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Kerbs Footways and Paved Areas Amendment February Durability The access steps must achieve as a minimum a serviceable life as detailed in contract specific Appendix .
The serviceable life shall be obtained without the requirement for any maintenance other than that resulting from accidental damage and routine maintenance .
Materials Material for access steps shall conform to BS EN ISO section requirements stated in contract specific and the following i All components of the steps shall be resistant to theft tampering and fire .
ii Where two or more materials are used they shall be compatible and include measures to avoid galvanic action and avoid differential movement .
Materials shall be able to resist corrosion provoked by the surrounding atmosphere and ground conditions to achieve its serviceable life .
iii Unless otherwise stated in contract specific Appendix materials listed in Table shall conform to the requirements listed in Table and shall comply with the standards andor Clauses listed .
Where materials are covered by the Construction Products Regulation the Declaration of Performance and CE marking shall demonstrate that the product meets or exceeds the performance requirements of the specification .
Table Access Step Materials Material Requirements General Detailed Paving slabs or flags BS EN or BS EN Laid in accordance with BS Concrete flags shall be Class or Class as detailed in Annex NA of BS EN and shall have a minimum breaking strength of .
MPa .
Natural stone slabs shall have a minimum Class of and minimum breaking load of .
kN Flags or slabs to be bedded on a layer of mortar of mm to mm thick or sand mm mm .
Engineering bricks BS EN Class B Compressive strength Nmm Water absorption by mass .
Freezethaw resistance category F Active soluble salts content category S Mortar BS EN BS EN Durability designation M or S Bedding sand BS EN Designation mm Precast concrete edgings BS EN Concrete Landings Series BS EN Exposure class reinforced XC or XC XD XF unreinforced XF Minimum strength class C or greater Maximum aggregate size mm Ancillary concrete BS Bedding and backing to precast concrete edgings ST Backing to steps ST Fill material Series Table Class General Fill Galvanised steel guardrails BS EN Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Kerbs Footways and Paved Areas Amendment February F Particular Access Step Criteria Unless otherwise stated in contract specific Appendix the design of access steps shall conform to the following i The steps shall have a minimum clear width of mm .
ii Subject to the requirements of paragraph vi below no part of the steps excluding guardrails shall protrude more than the step rise height plus mm above or below the adjacent finished ground level measured along a line at right angles to the embankment or cutting slope except where necessary to accommodate a landing .
iii In accordance with BS EN ISO the steps shall have at least one guardrail unless the width of the steps is greater or equal to mm when two guardrails are required .
Where one guardrail is to be used it shall be located on the right hand side going up the steps .
iv The steps shall have a rise and going which achieves the safety requirements formulae of BS EN ISO Steps with an angle of pitch greater than degrees are not permitted .
v The step going shall maintain the as constructed finished level for the serviceable life of the steps .
vi Steps with solid edging shall have edging laid at the slope of batter with the top edge set slightly above but not more than mm above adjacent ground level measured perpendicular to the slope .
The top edge shall also be mm minimum above the leading edge of the step going measured perpendicular to the slope .
vii There shall be a change in horizontal direction of not less than degrees after not more than steps or a climbing height of m whichever is the lesser by means of a landing .
viii Steps shall have adequate drainage for their safe use .
There shall be no areas of standing water on the steps .
ix Open steps where a solid riser is not provided are not acceptable .
The step going and landings shall also be solid .
x Kneerails are required on landings and steps .
Environment The access steps shall conform to the environmental requirements stated in contract specific Appendix .
The access steps shall be visually acceptable have a nonintrusive appearance and be suitable for the location .
The alignment of the steps shall minimise the impact on the environmental assets in the soft estate .
Geotechnical Requirements Where required in contract specific Appendix the Contractor shall determine the geotechnical classification of the works in accordance with HD Managing Geotechnical Risk DMRB .. and agree the classification with the Overseeing Organisation in accordance with HD .
Records The Contractor shall provide asbuilt drawings of the access steps to the Overseeing Organisation .
These shall include details of materials fabrication components and fittings .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Kerbs Footways and Paved Areas Amendment November NF NI Precast Concrete Kerbs Channels Edgings and Quadrants Except where otherwise specified in this Clause precast concrete kerbs channels edgings and quadrants shall conform to BS EN and their dimensions type designations and performances and classes shall be as described in this Clause and Appendix .
They shall be laid and bedded in accordance with BS on a mortar bed on a concrete pavement slab a base or a strength class C or ST in accordance with BS concrete foundation .
The mortar bed may be omitted if units are bedded onto a concrete slab or foundation that is still plastic .
All precast units laid on a mortar bed or bedded onto plastic concrete shall be backed with a strength class C or ST concrete in accordance with BS .
Precast concrete kerbs which are to be bonded to the pavement surface shall conform to BS EN .
The bonding materials and methods of bonding shall be to the manufacturers recommendations for this specific application .
Bonded kerbs shall not be less than mm in width at the base their height shall not exceed their width and they shall be bonded over their full width .
Kerbs shall be precast to the dimensions described in Appendix .
The clear distance between unsupported pavement edge and back of kerb shall be not less than mm .
The bending strength of units shall be established by testing in accordance with BS EN and shall not be less than class in Table of BS EN .
Units shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturers instructions .
They shall be bonded to the pavement surface with a resilient adhesive compatible with the pavement materials and be capable of withstanding a static pushoff load of kNm applied parallel to the pavement surface at right angles to the kerb .
Joints shall be provided in kerbs channels edgings and backing which are laid on or adjacent to a concrete pavement to coincide with the pavement transverse contraction warping and expansion joints .
The joints shall be the same width as the joint sealing grooves of the pavement and shall be caulked and sealed as described in Clauses and .
Concrete foundations to kerbs channels and edgings laid adjacent to a concrete pavement shall be provided with joint filler board complying with Clause placed vertically NATIONAL ALTERATIONS OF THE OVERSEEING ORGANISATION OF NORTHERN IRELAND through the full extent of the concrete foundation at positions coinciding with the pavement joints .
At expansion joints in bridge decks the kerb joints shall be as described in Appendix .
Where the details of bridge expansion joints are proposed by the Contractor such details shall include the intended treatment at kerbs and footways .
For radii of m or less kerbs of appropriate radius shall be used as per BS EN .
Where radii kerbs are not available straight kerbs shall be used .
For radii of m to m kerbs with a maximum length of mm shall be used and for radii less than m kerbs with a maximum length of mm shall be used .
The ends of straight kerbs shall be splayed where necessary to form the required radius .
The surface level of units of kerb channel edging and quadrant shall not deviate from the design level mm nor shall the longitudinal surface regularity deviate more than mm in m when checked with a m straight edge .
Horizontal alignment shall comply with Clause .
Amendment May MANUAL OF CONTRACT DOCUMENTS FOR HIGHWAY WORKS VOLUME SPECIFICATION FOR HIGHWAY WORKS SERIES TRAFFIC SIGNS Contents Clause Title Page Regulations Sign Classification and Standards General Requirements for Permanent Traffic Signs Foundations for Permanent Traffic Signs and Signals Posts for Permanent Traffic Signs Sign Plates for Permanent Traffic Signs Faces for Permanent Traffic Signs Construction and Assembly of Permanent Traffic Signs Location and Erection of Permanent Traffic Signs Covering of Permanent Traffic Signs Permanent Bollards Permanent Marker Posts Road Markings Road Studs Traffic Cones Traffic Cylinders Flat Traffic Delineators and Other Traffic Delineators Road Danger Lamps and High Intensity Flashing Beacons Temporary Traffic Signs Traffic Signals Detector Loops Controlled and Uncontrolled Crossings Traffic Signs on Gantries Preparation and Finish of Metal and Other Surfaces NATIONAL ALTERATIONS OF THE OVERSEEING ORGANISATIONS OF SCOTLAND WALES AND NORTHERN IRELAND Clause Title Page Wales NAW Regulations Sign Classification and Standards W Northern Ireland NI Regulations Sign Classification and Standards N NI Road Markings N NI Road Studs N denotes a Clause or Sample Appendix which has a substitute National Clause or Sample Appendix for one or more of the Overseeing Organisations of Scotland Wales or Northern Ireland .
Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Traffic Signs TRAFFIC SIGNS Regulations Sign Classification and Standards Regulations Subject to paragraphs and below all traffic signs used including retroreflecting road studs and road markings whether permanent or temporary shall be of the size shape colour and type prescribed for that use in The Traffic Signs Regulations and General Directions Statutory Instrument No .
including Working Drawings for Traffic Sign Design and Manufacture Volumes and the Zebra Pelican and Puffin Pedestrian Crossings Regulations and General Directions Statutory Instrument No .
and subsequent amending Regulations .
Other relevant requirements are contained in the above Regulations and General Directions .
Signs that are not prescribed in Regulations need to be specially authorised by the Secretary of State .
Where the Contractor proposes to use nonprescribed temporary traffic signs he shall obtain the agreement of the Overseeing Organisation to their intended design and location .
Where the Contractor proposes to use prescribed temporary traffic signs he shall obtain the agreement of the police and the highway authority to their intended location .
The Contractor shall obtain authorisation and approval from the Overseeing Organisation for the use of the signs at the specific locations proposed .
Signs that are changeable by means other than the purely mechanical require statutory type approval for their construction and operating mechanisms by the Secretary of State .
This requirement is in addition to the need for the design of the sign to be prescribed or specially authorised .
The Contractors proposal for signs that require statutory type approval shall include the reference numbers of any approval already issued in respect of that equipment .
The signs shall not be installed until appropriate approval or confirmation of existing approval by the Overseeing Organisation has been obtained .
Sign Classification For the purposes of the Contract the following classifications apply i permanent traffic signs .
Any of the traffic signs prescribed in the Regulations or specially authorised by the Secretary of State or any part thereof designed to remain in position at the completion of the Permanent Works or a traffic cone cylinder or other traffic delineator to be retained by the Employer ii prescribed temporary traffic signs .
Any of the traffic signs defined in the Regulations or specially authorised by the Secretary of State or any part thereof described in Appendix which unless otherwise described in Appendix comply with the requirements of a permanent traffic sign but which will not remain in position at the completion of the Permanent Works iii temporary traffic signs .
Any of the traffic signs defined in the Regulations or specially authorised by the Secretary of State or any part thereof designed by the Contractor in compliance with Clause which will not remain in position at the completion of the Permanent Works .
General Requirements for Permanent Traffic Signs Materials for permanent traffic signs and their construction assembly location and erection shall comply with this Series Series and the requirements described in Appendix .
The manufacture and installation of traffic signs shall be in accordance with the quality management scheme described in Appendix A .
Each complete traffic sign or part thereof shall be capable of passing the tests in BS Part .
Sign panels of internally illuminated signs and luminaire face panels shall unless otherwise described in Appendix comply with impact Category of BS Part .
All lit traffic signs shall comply with Category luminance of BS Part unless otherwise described in Appendix .
Before the commencement of fabrication of any traffic sign unless otherwise stated in Appendix the Contractor shall submit for the Overseeing Series Traffic Signs Amendment August Organisations approval i fabrication drawings for directional informatory and informatory signs as required in Appendix ii the information about warning regulatory and other traffic signs required in Appendix .
All traffic sign housings shall be provided with vandal and weather resistant locks .
Keys in the quantities stated in Appendix shall be provided to the Overseeing Organisation .
Types of lock shall be kept to a minimum .
The backs of traffic signs shall have a location identifying mark as described in Appendix .
Traffic signs shall be carefully handled to prevent damage transported and stored in accordance with the sign face manufacturers instructions .
Foundations for Permanent Traffic Signs and Signals The type and size of foundations for permanent traffic signs and signals shall be as described in and unless otherwise stated therein shall comply with this Clause .
All excavations for foundations shall be carried out in compliance with Clause and shall be cleared of all loose material before placing of concrete and backfilling .
Unless otherwise described in Appendix traffic signs and signals supported by a single post placed in the ground shall have the post installed centrally in mm diameter or square holes filled in compliance with Clause with mix ST concrete to within mm of the ground surface .
Unless otherwise described in Appendix posts shall be supported for a minimum of days after placing the concrete and backfilling shall not take place until at least hours after placing .
For traffic signals and illuminated signs provision shall be made for cable entry through the foundation by means of ducting as described in Appendix .
Where pockets are formed in concrete foundations their plan dimensions shall be sufficiently larger than those of the post to allow for positioning and bedding of the post and backfilling of the pocket .
All backfilling of foundations shall comply with Clause except that where pipes or buried cables are installed it shall comply with Clauses and respectively .
Reinstatement of existing surfaces above foundations shall comply with Clause .
Posts for Permanent Traffic Signs Posts for permanent traffic signs shall be as described in Appendix and shall comply with BS Part the surface protection requirements of BS Part and with the following i steel posts shall be tubular or rectangular hollow section complying with BS EN joists universal beams or columns complying with BS and shall be manufactured from steel complying with grade S JO or S J ii aluminium posts shall be of tubular or rectangular hollow section iii concrete for reinforced or prestressed concrete posts shall comply with Series and Appendix .
Posts shall not protrude above the top of the sign unless supporting an external luminaire in which case the protrusion shall be kept to a minimum .
Internally illuminated posts for pedestrian crossing beacons shall comply with this Clause and where appropriate with BS Part .
Signs erected on a single post shall be positioned so that the post is in the centre of the sign unless otherwise described in Appendix .
Compartments for electrical equipment shall be as described in Appendix and wherever practicable access doors shall be on the side of the compartment furthest from approaching traffic .
In the case of signs supported by more than one post such compartment shall be on the post furthest from the carriageway unless otherwise described in Appendix .
Flange plates shall have holes or slots as described in Appendix to accommodate the attachment system .
Sign Plates for Permanent Traffic Signs All permanent sign plates shall comply with BS Part and with this Clause .
Plate signs not exceeding .
m in height and .
m width shall be made of a single sheet .
Where more than one sheet is used to make up a sign the number of sheets shall be kept to a reasonable minimum and the separate sheets shall be rectangular and of comparable size and shape .
Amendment August Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Traffic Signs Extruded plank signs up to .
m wide shall have no vertical joints .
Above this size joints in extruded planks shall preferably be positioned at a vertical support if not then the vertical joints in adjacent planks shall not be less than .
m apart and only one joint per extruded plank is permitted .
Fabricated plank signs up to .
m wide shall have no vertical joints but each plank may be constructed from a maximum of two pieces of sub strate material producing one split line .
Split lines shall be lined up vertically or horizontally .
Above .
m wide joints in the stiffening extrusions of adjacent planks shall preferably be positioned at a vertical support if not then the vertical joints in the stiffening extrusions of adjacent planks shall not be less than .
m apart and only one such joint per fabricated plank shall then be permitted .
Where top and bottom light spill screens are required in Appendix these shall extend for the whole width of the sign and be fabricated out of the same material as the sign plate .
Top and bottom light spill screens shall be considered as part of the sign plate and any stiffeners and mounting fittings shall be designed to accommodate the combined size .
Faces for Permanent Traffic Signs Faces for permanent traffic signs shall be as described in Appendix .
They shall comply with BS Part and with this Clause .
All plastics sheeting shall be fixed in accordance with the sheeting manufacturers instructions .
Only vertical and horizontal joints shall be permitted and all joints in plastics sheeting shall be overlapped by not less than mm .
The overlap in the horizontal joints shall be from the top .
Butt joints in plastics sheeting shall not be used except between individual planks or in electro cutable overlay film or as recommended by the sheeting manufacturer .
All materials comprising the sign face including the background border and legends shall be carefully matched for colour at the time of sign fabrication to provide uniform appearance both by day and night .
The sheeting manufacturers recommendations on colour matching methods shall be observed .
Letters numerals symbols and borders shall be clear cut sharp edged and without cracks .
Any cutout letters numerals symbols and borders shall be of material compatible with the sheeting to which they are applied .
They shall be applied in accordance with the sheeting manufacturers instructions .
Screen processed letters numerals symbols and borders shall be screen printed with materials in accordance with the sheeting manufacturers instructions .
Any inks pastes and finishing coats used shall be compatible with the sheeting material or the face panel of internally illuminated signs .
Sheeting materials including letters numerals symbols and borders shall be fully adhered and there shall be no air bubbles creases cracks or other blemishes .
Where the sheeting manufacturer requires the assembled materials to be provided with a coat of clear lacquer it shall be uniform and continuous .
All lacquer shall be applied at the time of fabrication of the sign face and shall be of a type specified or supplied by the sheeting manufacturer .
Construction and Assembly of Permanent Traffic Signs General Construction and assembly of traffic signs shall comply with BS Part and with this Clause .
All sign plates and planks frames purlins posts and other components shall be deburred prior to assembly .
Where framing and stiffening are not an integral part of the sign plate their joints shall be welded or joined with suitable brackets utilising nuts bolts and washers .
Where purlins are adopted they shall be attached to each vertical member of the sign frame and the sign stiffening and framing shall be continuous in the vertical direction .
Purlins shall be spaced equally apart .
Connections shall be made at every point where a purlin crosses a post .
Where purlins are not adopted the sign stiffening and framing shall be continuous in the horizontal direction .
Rivets and other devices used for fixing sheet sign plates to their stiffeners or framework or in the construction of housings shall be of a material compatible with the materials being joined .
Spacing of rivets or other fixing devices shall be uniform and shall not exceed mm around the outside edge of any sheet or section of sheet and shall not exceed mm on cross braces .
Hollow rivets shall not be used .
Where sign plates need to be stiffened this shall be achieved in a manner such that the sign face material is not punctured or otherwise damaged to accommodate the stiffening .
Amendment May Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Traffic Signs Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Traffic Signs An additional washer of neoprene nylon or other suitable material shall be used between the sign face and any metal nuts bolts washers and screws to protect it from corrosive or other damaging effects .
Where supports to traffic signs including external lighting luminaires are required to have flange plates these shall be secured by anchorages and attachment systems complying with Series .
The bolts shall be lightly greased before final installation and they and their anchorages shall be installed so as to achieve the loadings torque settings and other requirements described in Appendix .
Sheet and plank signs shall be connected to posts by an appropriate method .
Banding systems shall be of stainless steel complying with AISI Grade .
Plank signs shall be assembled in accordance with the manufacturers instructions .
Where ferrous components are permitted any drilling of them shall be completed before the application of any finish .
Any hole drilled in plates with plastics sheeting to accommodate a rivet or bolt shall immediately prior to the insertion of the rivet or bolt have a clear lacquer recommended by the plastics sheeting manufacturer applied to its edge to prevent the ingress of moisture .
The surfaces of rivets or bolts exposed on the sign face shall be covered by a suitable material of a colour to match that part of the face .
Prior to fitting any sign to any lighting column the Contractor shall ensure that the sign is included in the technical approval of the lighting column in accordance with the Technical Approval Scheme adopted by the Overseeing Organisation and with Standard BD .
No holes shall be drilled in the lighting column except those whose location and size are included in the technical approval .
Traffic signs to be erected on road lighting columns shall have fixings compatible with the column cross section and finish .
Wiring shall be contained in external conduit complying with BS .
Conduits shall be affixed to concrete lighting columns with stainless steel banding systems complying with AISI Grade .
Conduits shall be affixed to other lighting columns with stainless steel clamps which shall be screwed with stainless steel screws into tapped holes in the lighting column .
Alternatively permanent cabling shall be placed on the inside of the lighting column and shall exit via a bushed drilled hole .
Variable Message Traffic Signs Variable message traffic signs shall comply with this Clause .
Location and Erection of Permanent Traffic Signs The approximate location of each traffic sign is described in Appendix .
All traffic signs shall have their exact location determined and recorded in compliance with Clause .
All posts shall be erected plumb and where two or more posts are provided for any one sign the faces of the posts shall be lined up .
Signs erected on two posts shall have each post positioned so that the distance from the centre of the post to the edge of the sign plate is mm unless otherwise described in Appendix .
Any pockets formed in concrete foundations to receive the posts shall be cleaned out immediately prior to erection .
The posts shall be placed centrally in the pockets and be bedded on mortar designation i complying with Clause and unless otherwise described in Appendix the pockets shall be filled up to finished foundation level with mix ST concrete .
Traffic signs mounted on posts except those on gantries shall be erected to have their face plumb and be orientated in relation to the carriageway in accordance with Chapter of the Traffic Signs Manual .
Traffic signs mounted on gantries shall be erected as described in Appendix and all other traffic signs shall be erected as described in Appendix .
The site records required by Clause shall include daily records for nonlit traffic signs .
No traffic sign shall be dismantled resited or removed without the prior approval of the Overseeing Organisation .
Covering of Permanent Traffic Signs Where it is required in Appendix that permanent traffic signs be blankedout or have an alternative message the method to be adopted shall comply with the following unless otherwise described in Appendix i for plate signs A cover plate compatible with the plate signs material or a covering of a suitable opaque non damaging material or for covering periods of up to one year a self adhesive plastic film to support the temporary sign face sheeting ii for other traffic signs A covering of a suitable opaque non damaging material .
Amendment May Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Traffic Signs Cover plates shall be suitably fixed to give a mm minimum air gap between the sign face and cover plate .
The fixing method shall not cause damage or staining to the sign face .
Any holes remaining in the finished sign face after removal of the plate shall be filled with a suitable material of a colour to match that part of the face .
Where self adhesive plastic film is used it shall be compatible with the sign face materials and be applied and removed in compliance with the manufacturers instructions .
Any loose covering used must be sufficiently opaque to prevent reflection from and legibility of the covered sign and be securely fastened to the back of the sign .
Under no circumstances shall tape or other adhesive material be applied to the face of the sign .
Sufficient space shall be left between the covering and the face to permit air flow over the sign .
Traffic signs which are to be covered shall not be erected on trafficked highways without the covering in place .
Removal of any covering shall be carried out with the minimum disturbance to traffic .
Irrespective of any requirement in Appendix to cover signs any traffic sign erected at such a time that its legend does not relate either wholly or in part to the traffic movement and route in operation shall have its sign face securely covered with one of the materials in subClause of this Clause until such time as its legend is applicable .
Permanent Bollards Permanent bollards shall be as described in Appendix and shall comply with appropriate Clauses of this Series .
Internally illuminated bollards and unless otherwise described in Appendix reflectiveonly bollards shall be secured by stainless steel holding down bolts nuts and washers .
Holding down bolts and anchorages cast into the foundation shall be capable of complying with the performance requirements of BS Part when tested as described therein .
All bolts shall be lightly greased before final installation and tightening to the bollard manufacturers torque setting .
Permanent Marker Posts General Permanent marker posts shall be constructed to the dimensions and be installed in the locations and by methods described in Appendix and shall comply with this Series and subClauses and of this Clause .
Distance Marker Posts Distance marker posts shall be made from plastics timber or other materials described in Appendix .
Hazard Marker Posts Hazard marker posts shall comply with BS Part .
Post construction and colour and type of reflective marker shall be as described in Appendix .
Road Markings General Road markings shall be white or yellow Classes Y and Y complying with BS EN Table as appropriate except where an alternative shade has been specified in Appendix .
The markings shall consist of continuous or intermittent lines letters figures arrows or symbols and comply with sub Clauses to of this Clause .
Statutory requirements controlling road markings are contained in The Traffic Signs Regulations and General Directions Statutory Instrument No .
and subsequent amending Regulations .
Permanent Road Markings Permanent road markings shall be one of the following materials and comply with the colour location and material type requirements described in Appendix i thermoplastic road marking material or paint in accordance with BS EN ii permanent preformed road markings in accordance with BS EN iii other materials as described in Appendix .
They shall be also tested in road trials to the Rollover class P in accordance with the procedure stated in BS EN to demonstrate compliance with the performance requirements as stated in subClauses to .
The test report shall give particulars of the quality and quantity of the material including drop on glass beads laid at the test site for future reference and comparison purposes should such a need arise .
Road markings shall have the following road performance as defined in BS EN for the period of the functional life starting from the date of application or when the road is trafficked whichever is later .
The materials to be used shall be to the same mix material quality quantity and rate of application as used on the test site .
Amendment November Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Traffic Signs Property BS EN Reference Requirement Value Colour Table .
White .
Yellow Class Y Y x y coordinates given x y coordinates given Luminance Factor Table .
Class B .
Class B . . Skid Resistance Table .
Class S . Class S Retroreflect ivity Table Class of RL for dry markings .
Class R . Class R Note White Yellow The width tolerances and thickness for screed spray preformed and extruded white or yellow lines shall be in accordance with The Traffic Signs Regulations and General Direction .
With the exception of the road markings listed in Regulation of The Traffic Signs Regulations and General Directions in no case shall any materials be laid more than mm thick .
Unless specified all white markings shall be reflectorised with glass beads in accordance with BS EN and BS EN by incorporation apart from preformed markings into the road marking mixture and to the wet surface of the marking .
The glass beads shall not have more than ppm of Arsenic Trioxide ppm of Lead and ppm of Antimony .
The Contractor shall supply test certificates showing compliance with these requirements .
Where there is requirement for improved visibility in wet conditions at night products showing the following performance in addition to that stated in subClause shall be used .
Property BS EN Reference Requirement Value Retroreflect ivity Table Class RW Where there is a requirement for improved skid resistance as referred to in Appendix products showing the following performance in addition to that stated in subClause shall be used .
Property BS EN Reference Requirement Value Skid Resistance Table Class S The pavement shall be prepared in accordance with the following i Where the marking is to be applied on concrete carriageways the transverse texturing shall be freed from all traces of curing compound by wire brushing or other approved means .
Prior to the application of the thermoplastic material a tack coat compatible with the road surface and the marking material shall be applied in accordance with the manufacturers instructions .
ii On surface dressed carriageways all loose chippings where the marking is to be applied shall be removed prior to application .
The application of permanent road markings shall be in accordance with the Sector Scheme described in Appendix A .
Road marking materials shall only be applied to surfaces which are clean and dry .
Markings shall be free from raggedness at their edges and shall be uniform and free from streaks .
Longitudinal road markings shall be laid to a regular alignment .
Raised Rib Road Markings Raised Rib Road Markings shall only be used on motorways with full width hardshoulders or allpurpose roads both single and dual carriageway with at least metre wide hardstrips .
They shall comply with subClauses i and of this Clause .
Raised Rib Road Markings shall be white lines which are continuous over the sections where they are specified in Appendix .
Where specified in Appendix gaps shall be provided for drainage purposes .
Raised Rib Road Markings shall be in accordance with The Traffic Signs Regulations and General Directions Statutory Instrument No .
Diagrams .
and .
as appropriate .
Spacing of the transverse raised ribs shall be mm or mm as specified in Appendix .
Raised Rib Road Markings shall not be used adjacent to hatched areas or central reserve crossings except as prescribed for use with diagrams . . and .
Temporary Road Markings Temporary road markings shall only be adopted with the prior approval of the Overseeing Organisation .
They shall comply with subClauses to of this Clause or if required to be removable be constructed only from a proprietary preformed road marking material complying with BS EN .
Amendment November Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Traffic Signs When temporary road markings are used on surfaces that will continue to be used by public traffic after their removal any shadow trace remaining after their removal shall be permanently obliterated .
Preformed materials shall not be used for this obliteration .
Temporary road markings constructed from a proprietary preformed road marking material shall only be adopted in locations and on types of road surface as described in Appendix and shall comply with any other requirement therein .
The marking material shall be new and together with any primer shall be stored and installed in accordance with the manufacturers instructions and within the recommended shelf life .
Temporary preformed road markings shall only be applied to surfaces that are clean and dry .
Upon removal they shall be disposed of off Site and if any making good is necessary to the road surface it shall be satisfactorily carried out before the road is opened to traffic .
Road Markings on Porous Asphalt Surfacing Spray paint thermoplastic applied by machine screed spray or extrusion or preformed road markings shall be used for carriageway markings on porous asphalt surfacing .
Manual screeding shall not be permitted except for directional arrows and similar markings .
Removal of Road Markings The removal of road markings on surfaces that will continue to be used by traffic shall be undertaken in a manner that will avoid damage to the surface .
The removal of temporary road markings shall comply with subClauses and of this Clause .
For bituminous running surfaces the removal of permanent road markings shall be by mechanical means or forced air abrasive shot blasting only .
Hot Compressed Air HCA lance shall be permitted on other types of running surfaces .
In all cases the Contractor shall submit details of the proposed method for the Overseeing Organisations consent .
Masking of Road Markings When black masking materials are required to cover existing permanent road markings they shall comply with BS .
The total thickness of original and masking materials shall not exceed mm .
Longitudinal Road Markings Lateral Tolerances For longitudinal road markings the lateral tolerance shall be within mm from the designed position .
Any discontinuities between road markings shall be replaced with a smooth taper from one road marking to the other .
The length of the transition shall be derived from table below .
All road markings shall comply with the dimensions angles and proportions stated in the Traffic Signs Regulations and General Directions Statutory Instrument No .
and any subsequent amending Regulations .
Speed Limit mph Taper in in in in in Road Studs Retroreflecting Road Studs Statutory requirements controlling retroreflecting road studs both permanent and tempoarary are contained in the Traffic Signs Regulations and General Directions Statutory Instrument No .
regulations and directions and the Traffic Signs Amendment General Directions Statutory Instrument No .
and any subsequent amending Regulations and General Directions .
All retroreflecting road studs shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturers instructions and with the Sector Scheme described in Appendix A. Retroreflecting road studs and components which are not within the scope of BS EN but which have statutory type approval by the Secretary of State under direction of the Traffic Signs Regulations and General Directions Statutory Instrument No .
and any subsequent amending General Directions can be incorporated into the Works .
Not used .
Amendment May Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Traffic Signs Permanent Retroreflecting Road Studs Permanent retroreflecting road studs shall be installed in the locations and to any other requirements as described in Appendix .
Temporary Retroreflecting Road Studs Temporary retroreflecting road studs shall not be used for a second application .
Adhesive used for the temporary retroreflecting road studs shall be removed from the carriageway on completion of the Works .
Non retroreflecting Road Studs All non retroreflecting road studs shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturers instructions in locations and complying with any other requirements described in Appendix .
Retroreflecting Road Studs on Porous Asphalt Surfacing The edges of recesses for inset retroreflecting road studs in porous asphalt surfacing shall be milled when the material has cooled to ambient temperature .
Care shall be exercised when removing porous asphalt to form the recess to prevent damage occurring to the cut edges and to prevent detritus clogging the porous asphalt surfacing .
Surface applied road studs shall not be applied if there is evidence of moisture present on the surface of porous asphalt nor shall inset road studs be installed if moisture is present in the recess after milling of the asphalt .
Traffic Cones Traffic Cylinders Flat Traffic Delineators and Other Traffic Delineators General Traffic cones and traffic cylinders hereinafter termed cones and cylinders shall comply with Designation or Designation of BS EN .
Cones shall be to Category A .
Flat Traffic Delineators hereinafter termed FTDs shall comply with subClauses to of this Clause .
An FTD shall comprise a flat blade fixed to a base .
The flat blade may incorporate stiffeners provided that they do not encroach into the white retroreflective area .
FTDs shall be constructed of rubber or plastic materials .
It shall be possible to insert and remove blades without requiring a special tool .
The height of the FTD shall be mm or mm as stated in Appendix .
The width of the top of the blade shall be mm .
Other dimensions shall be in accordance with Diagram of TSRGD or the Traffic Signs Regulations Northern Ireland as appropriate .
FTD bases shall be so designed that they will stack without binding and without causing damage to the retroreflective surfaces .
Additionally the blades and their attachment to the base or fixing shall be so designed that the blades face presents throughout its design life a plane to the approaching traffic no more than .
from the vertical .
FTD bases may be coloured red black grey or brown .
They may have a mm wide white reflective line placed on one edge of the base provided i the edge of the base where the white line is to be attached comprises a sloping surface which is at an angle to the road surface of no more than and is of such dimensions either to fully accommodate the mm wide white line or where the angle between the road surface and the sloping surface exceeds to accommodate at least mm of the width of the white line the excess maximum mm being returned onto the top surface of the base ii the material from which the base is manufactured allows proper adhesion or attachment of the white reflective line to prevent it becoming detached during normal use iii the coverage of white reflective material is maintained at more than of the area treated .
The white reflective strip material shall comply with BS EN and BS EN or BS EN as appropriate .
Additionally when tested using a portable retroreflectometer the white line shall have a coefficient of retroreflectance of Class R or better to Table of BS EN .
FTD blades shall be coloured red and white as indicated in Diagram of TSRGD or the Traffic Signs Regulations Northern Ireland as appropriate .
The white portions of the FTD blades shall comply with the chromaticity coordinates and luminance factor given in BS Part .
The red portions of the FTD shall comply with the chromaticity coordinates and luminance factor for traffic cones given in BS EN when measured in accordance with BS Part .
Amendment May Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Traffic Signs That part of the blade coloured white shall comprise retroreflective material complying with the requirements for Class or Class as specified in BS Part which shall be securely applied or attached to the blade to prevent it becoming detached during normal use .
The red portions may also be retroreflective .
The minimum mass of the FTD including any ballast recommended by the manufacturer shall comply with the mass of a traffic cone as defined in BS EN .
FTDs shall be clearly and durably marked with the following information in the following order a the name trade mark or other means of identification of the manufacturer or vendor b the title and date of this document ie .
Specification for Highway Works with appropriate date .
The marking shall be in characters legible at a normal reading distance such that the total area of the marking does not exceed cm .
Additionally the legend DUAL CARRIAGEWAY AND MOTORWAY USE ONLY shall be applied to the lowermost red portion of the blade using block capitals of minimum height mm in such a location that it can be clearly seen when the FTD is in position .
All markings shall be sufficiently durable to last the expected life of the FTD to which they are applied and in no case less than years .
When checked by inspection and by rubbing lightly first for seconds with a piece of cloth soaked in water and then for seconds with a piece of cloth soaked in petroleum spirit followed by seconds with a piece of cloth soaked in diesel oil the marking shall still be legible .
FTDs shall be supplied with the following information a instructions for ballasting if required b instructions for fixing blades to bases .
Other traffic delineators hereinafter termed delineators shall be as described in Appendix .
The Contractor shall submit to the Overseeing Organisation a copy of a test certificate confirming that samples of the identical type of cone cylinder FTD or delineator as those to be used in the Works and supplied as permanent cones cylinders FTDs or delineators under the Contract have been tested and found to comply with subClauses to of this Clause .
Permanent Cones Cylinders FTDs and Other Delineators Where required in Appendix the Contractor shall arrange for the tests described in sub Clauses to of this Clause for cones cylinders FTDs and other delineators to be carried out at a UKAS approved testing laboratory .
The numbers to be tested as given in Appendix are to be selected at random from the batch to be supplied under the Contract .
Failure of any test will result in rejection of the batch .
Temporary Cones Cylinders FTDs and Other Delineators The Contractor shall submit to the Overseeing Organisation certification substantiating that at least in every of any batch of cones cylinders FTDs and delineators to be used in the Temporary Works have passed the tests described in subClauses to of this Clause as appropriate .
Testing Cones and cylinders shall be tested in compliance with BS EN .
FTDs shall be tested in compliance with subClauses to of this Clause .
Test procedures shall be carried out on each size of FTD and each method of attachment between blade and base .
When tested in accordance with subClauses to of this Clause with the exception of the white retroreflective material no part of the FTD shall crack split or deform .
When samples with retroreflective portions attached are tested in accordance with subClauses to of this Clause the coefficient of luminous intensity R as defined in Publication CIE No Retroreflection definition and measurement after testing shall be not less than of the value previous to the test .
When tested in accordance with subClauses to of this Clause no part of the FTD with the exception of white retroreflective material shall crack fracture or split and any ballast or ballast container shall not have become displaced within the base or separated from it .
Any ballast container as either an integral part of the base or enclosed within it shall not have been damaged to the extent that ballast is discharged .
Caps or bungs to ballast containers shall not have been forced from their sockets or other fixings .
Amendment May Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Traffic Signs When tested in accordance with subClauses to of this Clause no part of the FTD with the exception of white retroreflective material shall crack fracture or split .
Bases shall remain in contact with the reference surface .
When tested in accordance with subClauses to of this Clause no part of the FTD with the exception of the white retroreflective material shall crack fracture or split .
Bases shall remain in contact with the reference surface .
Throughout the tests in subClauses to to and to of this Clause the blade shall remain fixed in position .
On completion of the testing in accordance with subClauses to and to of this Clause the residual deflection of the top of the blade in any horizontal direction measured seconds to seconds after completion of the tests shall be not more than .
of the height of the FTD .
The height of the FTD H is as measured from the reference surface .
Low Temperature Impact Test The test shall be conducted using a steel ball swung on a pendulum .
The apparatus shall be as shown in HCD Drawing Number K. The steel ball shall have a mass of . . kg and be suspended by one or two steel pendulum wires of not more than mm diameter so that the pendulum radius is mm .
The point of impact shall be vertically beneath the centre of radius of the pendulum and at a height on the specimen of H mm where H is the height of a FTD above the reference surface .
FTDs shall be fixed to the reference surface using the base .
The test shall be carried out on specimens with and without retroreflective portions attached .
For samples with retroreflective portions attached the coefficient of luminous intensity R of every such face at an observation angle of and at an entrance angle normal to the face of the blade prior to the conditioning shall be determined the definitions of observation angle and entrance angle being those given in BS Part .
All test samples shall be conditioned for a period of not less than hours at a temperature of C. Impact testing shall be carried out within seconds after conditioning .
Impact shall be made in ambient conditions of not greater than C. Within hour of impacting samples shall be immersed with retroreflective portions attached in water at C for minutes .
After draining for minutes the coefficient of luminous intensity R shall be measured in accordance with subClause of this Clause .
The sample shall be examined and any damage percentage change in the coefficient of luminous intensity or any detachment of a blade from its base shall be reported .
Drop Test FTDs requiring the addition of ballast shall be ballasted as instructed by the manufacturer .
The FTD shall be conditioned for a period of not less than hours at a temperature of C. Within minute after conditioning the FTD shall be suspended with its normal vertical axis horizontal any cap or bung to a ballast container forming an integral part of the FTD shall be positioned uppermost and with its lowest part mm above a solid horizontal surface and dropped once vertically from rest onto the solid surface .
The test detailed in subClause shall be repeated after conditioning at a temperature of C. Any damage observed shall be reported .
Bending Test The test shall be carried out on specimens with and without retroreflective portions attached .
The blade shall be fixed to the base in accordance with the manufacturers instructions .
The blade and its base shall be conditioned for a period of not less than hours at a temperature of C. Within minute after conditioning the blade shall be bent over about its base line by applying a force to the face of the blade at a point on its vertical centre line H mm from the top so that the top edge touches the reference surface or a surface coplanar with it as indicated in the HCD Drawing Number K. H is the height of the FTD .
When the top edge of the blade touches the reference surface the bending force shall be removed immediately .
From seconds to seconds after completion the maximum residual horizontal deflection of the top of the blade shall be measured from the vertical axis passing through the centre of the base of the blade and perpendicular to the reference surface .
The test shall be repeated in the opposite direction .
The procedure in subClauses to of this Clause shall be repeated at a temperature of C. Amendment May Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Traffic Signs The deflections any damage observed any detachment of the blade from its base and any movement of the base shall be reported .
Fatigue Test The test shall be carried out on specimens with and without retroreflective portions attached .
This test is to be carried out on a different specimen to that or those tested in subClauses to and to of this Clause .
The blade shall be fixed to the base in accordance with the manufacturers instructions .
The test shall be carried out after conditioning the blade and its base for a period of not less than hours at a temperature of C. By applying a force to the face of blade at a point on its vertical centre line H mm from the top the top of the blade shall be oscillated as indicated in the HCD Drawing Number K at a frequency of oscillations per minute to oscillations per minute at an amplitude of H for minutes with the reference surface held in a horizontal position .
H is the height of the FTD .
One oscillation is the movement from the upright position to the maximum amplitude in one direction then to the maximum amplitude in the opposite direction and then the return to the upright position .
From seconds to seconds after completion the maximum residual horizontal deflection of the top of the blade shall be measured from the vertical axis passing through the centre of the base of the blade and perpendicular to the reference surface .
The procedure in subClauses to of this Clause shall be repeated at a temperature of C. The deflection any damage observed and any detachment of the blade from its base shall be reported .
Other traffic delineators shall be tested in compliance with Appendix .
Road Danger Lamps and High Intensity Flashing Beacons Road danger lamps and high intensity flashing beacons shall be used in accordance with Regulations and respectively of TSRGD or Regulations and respectively of the Traffic Signs Regulations Northern Ireland as appropriate .
Temporary Traffic Signs Temporary traffic signs shall be designed by the Contractor comply with Clause satisfy Clause have the consent of the Overseeing Organisation prior to installation and comply with sub Clauses to of this Clause .
Temporary traffic signs shall comply with The Traffic Signs Regulations and General Directions or The Traffic Sign Welsh and English Language Provisions Regulations and General Directions or The Traffic Signs Regulations Northern Ireland as appropriate and be designed in accordance with Working Drawings for Traffic Sign Design and Manufacture Volumes and and where appropriate Local Transport Notes and Chapter and any other relevant Chapters of the Traffic Signs Manual .
Temporary traffic signs shall be constructed as follows i plate signs and internally illuminated signs a the coefficient of retroreflection of the material for the faces of signs used for Standard and Relaxation works as defined in Chapter Part Design of the Traffic Signs Manual and any amendment thereto including the amendments specified in subClause .
shall be as given in BS Part for Class material b where the sign is to be erected for less than months it shall unless Appendix requires it to be constructed to a similar standard as a permanent sign be either a portable sign complying with BS Part or a fixed short life sign complying with subClause of this Clause c where the sign is to be erected for periods of months or more or where Appendix requires it to be constructed to the standard for a permanent sign it shall comply with the requirements for permanent traffic signs d in addition to either b or c above electrical work related to temporary traffic signs shall comply with the Series except Clauses and ii bollards and marker posts shall comply with Clauses and iii road studs a temporary retroreflecting road studs shall comply with Clause and only be installed for periods of up to months and thereupon be replaced Amendment November Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Traffic Signs b if permanent retroreflecting road studs are used for temporary purposes they shall comply with Clause iv road markings cones cylinders and delineators road danger lamps and high intensity flashing beacons shall comply with Clauses and as appropriate v portable traffic signals and haul route crossing signals shall where relevant comply with Clause vi any other signal lamp barrier or device shall be suitable for its intended purpose and where relevant shall comply with appropriate British Standards .
Fixed short life signs shall be constructed as follows i materials a sign plates may be constructed of materials to the standard for a permanent sign or alternatively shall be constructed of timber hardboard plywood or chipboard b stiffening frames for sign plates constructed of timber hardboard plywood or chipboard shall be constructed of timber mild steel or aluminium sections c mounting posts shall be constructed of steel cast iron aluminium alloy reinforced or prestressed concrete or timber d fittings for signs made of materials to the standard for a permanent sign shall be similar to those used for permanent signs .
For signs made of timber hardboard plywood or chipboard fittings shall be of steel stainless steel or brass wood screws or wire nails .
Adhesives may be used for fixing provided they are weatherproof and are not affected by variations in temperature e sign plates constructed of timber hardboard plywood or chipboard shall be sealed or otherwise treated to ensure that the final finish will provide a satisfactory appearance and will not deteriorate during the period the sign is expected to be in use ii construction a sign plates shall be constructed on similar principles to those required for permanent signs although stiffening may be omitted provided the sign plate passes the bending test given in BS Part b stiffening frames constructed of timber members shall be jointed so that they withstand adverse weather conditions c mounting posts constructed of timber shall have dimensions that are sufficient to withstand the estimated loading on the sign d fixing of signs to the stiffening frame where required and to the mounting posts shall be by screwing nailing or gluing e timber sign plates stiffening frames and mounting posts shall be preserved with copperchromearsenic CCA complying with BS .
The sign plate face shall be finished to comply with BS Part .
Erection of temporary traffic signs mounted on posts shall comply with Clause .
Any temporary covering of temporary traffic signs shall comply with Clause .
Any temporary covering of road studs and road markings shall comply with any requirements described in Appendix .
Removal of temporary traffic signs shall be carried out as soon as they become superfluous or a hazard to traffic .
Methods of removal shall ensure the minimum disturbance to traffic consistent with safety .
Making good shall be carried out immediately after removal of the traffic sign .
Posts shall not protrude above the top of the sign unless supporting an external luminaire in which case the protrusion shall be kept to a minimum .
Traffic Signals General Traffic signals shall comprise road junction signals pelican and puffin pedestrian crossing signals haul route signals and wigwag signals and shall be of the type described in Appendix .
Traffic signals shall comply with sub Clauses to of this Clause and the requirements described in Appendix .
The installation and Amendment May Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Traffic Signs maintenance of traffic signals shall be in accordance with the quality management scheme described in Appendix A .
Traffic signal equipment shall comply with BS AMD as amended by Specification TR .
It shall consist of control equipment including detector loops of a type which has received statutory type approval by the Secretary of State in accordance with the procedure described in Specification TRG .
Traffic signal equipment with such statutory type approval shall be deemed valid for use in Northern Ireland .
They shall be maintained and serviced as described in Appendix .
All traffic safety and management measures associated with work on traffic signals shall comply with Clause and any work entailing the switching off of existing signals shall not be carried out until the highway authority has been informed and until agreed alternative traffic management measures are in operation to safeguard and control vehicles using the highway .
Controllers Controllers shall be provided and installed as described in Appendix .
The cabinet shall be mounted on a foundation with or without an adjacent inspection chamber as described in Appendix .
The foundation shall make provision for the entry of the appropriate number of cable ducts .
Traffic signal controllers shall in addition to any testing carried out in compliance with Clause be tested before delivery to Site and again after installation but before commissioning to ensure they comply with the specification in Appendix .
Cabling and Electrical Requirements Traffic signal equipment on each post shall be connected to the controller in accordance with the requirements described in Appendix .
The installation shall comply with BS Regulations for Electrical Installations IEE Wiring Regulations and the rules and regulations of the electricity supplier which provides the supply .
Cables shall be PVC insulated and sheathed V grade with steel wire armouring to BS and shall be installed in ducts in compliance with Clause and terminated in compliance with Clause .
Reinstatement shall be in compliance with Clause .
Earthing of all posts pushbutton boxes and the controller cabinet shall comply with Clause .
One conductor in each cable between a post and the equipment cabinet shall be a protective conductor and shall bond the earth terminal at the post to the main earth terminal .
Cable testing shall be in accordance with Clause .
Tests a b c e f g h and j as defined in subClause .
shall be conducted and all measurements recorded .
Telecommunications Carrier Interface Where a connection interface to the plant of a telecommunications carrier is specified in Appendix the installation shall comply with the rules and regulations of that carrier .
Posts Posts for traffic signals shall be installed in compliance with Clause and in the locations specified in Appendix .
Signal Heads All backing boards shall have a border of Class retroreflective material white .
Pressure sensitive material shall normally be supplied but vacuum applied material may be used in accordance with the manufacturers process .
Application of pressure sensitive material shall take place only on dry surfaces .
An ambient temperature of C minimum is recommended for satisfactory adhesion .
The material shall have a mm width throughout .
Where the continuous border bridges each backing boardsignal head a distinct cut edge shall be made to avoid any subsequent stretching shrinkage of dissimilar surfaces .
The finished border shall be of a neat appearance and not made up of short lengths of cuttings .
Road Markings Road markings associated with traffic signals shall comply with Clause .
Detector Loops The installation and testing of detector loops shall be in accordance with Specification MCH .
Controlled and Uncontrolled Crossings The location of controlled and uncontrolled crossings shall be as described in Appendix .
Details shall be as described in Appendix .
Surfacing of Zebra crossing areas shall be laid with materials and to methods specified in Appendix .
The finished surfacing shall have a Amendment May Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Traffic Signs minimum skid resistance Class of S when tested in compliance with BS EN .
Non retroreflecting road studs shall comply with Clause .
Road markings shall be white and comply with Clause for permanent markings and be of the material described in Appendix .
Traffic signals related control and other equipment where incorporated in controlled crossings together with installation and reinstatement shall comply with Clause for permanent traffic signals .
Traffic Signs on Gantries Where traffic signs including signals are erected on gantries the signs shall comply with the requirements of the relevant Clauses of this Series .
Fabricated steel gantries shall be constructed to the requirements described in Appendix and to comply with Series .
Reinforced or prestressed concrete gantries shall be as described in Appendix and shall comply with Series .
Preparation and Finish of Metal and Other Surfaces General Permanent traffic signs and where specified in Appendix prescribed temporary traffic signs shall be prepared protected against corrosion and finished in compliance with BS Part and with subClauses to of this Clause .
Faces Faces of sign plates shall be prepared to receive sign face materials in compliance with BS Part and to the recommendations of the sign face material manufacturer following completion of any preparation and finish in subClauses and of this Clause .
Steel Sign Plates Purlins Frames and Fittings Steel sign plates frames and fittings and purlins shall be prepared and protected in compliance with BS Part and be as described in Appendix .
Preparation to clean steel nd Quality and painting of surfaces shall comply with Series .
Steel Posts and Post Housings Steel posts and post housings shall be prepared and protected in compliance with BS Part .
Painting shall comply with Series and be as described in Appendix .
Aluminium or Aluminium Alloy Posts and Post Housings Aluminium or aluminium alloy posts and post housings shall unless otherwise required in Appendix be left unpainted except for the bituminous coating required by BS Part below ground level .
A matt appearance shall be achieved in accordance with subClause ii of this Clause .
Aluminium or Aluminium Alloy Sign Plates Framework and Stiffening and Luminaire Housings Backs of aluminium or aluminium alloy sheet and planks forming plate signs and external parts of luminaire housings and other permanently exposed components shall to prevent specular reflection be dulled using a method to be agreed by the Overseeing Organisation or be coated with either paint or plastics as follows i plastics coating and pretreatment before its application shall be in compliance with BS Part ii surfaces to be painted shall be lightly abraded in accordance with subClauses .
and .
or degreased and etch primed with primer detailed in Standard BD Item No . .
Except for etch primed surfaces all surfaces shall be immediately cleaned in accordance with subClause .. All surfaces including etch primed surfaces shall be applied with one coat of matt polyurethane paint to Standard BD Item No .
and colour as described in Appendix .
The paint application shall comply with the appropriate recoat times over etch primer as detailed in the paint manufacturers data sheet and Clauses in Series .
Internally Housed Electrical Components and Ancillary Equipment Ferrous steel shall be finished inside and out by galvanizing electroplating or zinc or aluminium spray all in accordance with Series or other equivalent preparation and finish .
Aluminium and other metals shall unless otherwise required in Appendix be left untreated .
Amendment May Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Traffic Signs Stainless Steel Components Unless otherwise required in Appendix stainless steel shall be left untreated except where the component is visible against the sign face when it shall be covered by a suitable material of a colour to match that part of the face .
Cast Iron and Cast Steel Components External surfaces shall be prepared and protected as described in Appendix .
Cabinets and feeder pillars shall have final coats of paint applied on Site after final installation including the fitting of any internal apparatus required as part of the Permanent Works .
Internal surfaces shall unless otherwise specified in Appendix receive the same treatment as for external surfaces except that final paint coats shall be applied before internal components are installed .
F Amendment May Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Traffic Signs WF NAW Regulations Sign Classification and Standards Regulations Subject to paragraphs and below all traffic signs used including retroreflecting road studs and road markings whether permanent or temporary shall be of the size shape colour and type prescribed for that use in The Traffic Signs Regulations and General Directions Statutory Instrument No .
The Traffic Signs Welsh and English Language Provisions Regulations and General Directions Statutory Instrument No .
the Zebra Pelican and Puffin Pedestrian Crossings Regulations and General Directions Statutory Instrument No .
and subsequent amending Regulations .
Other relevant requirements are contained in the above Regulations and General Directions apart from bilingual sign layouts which shall be as stated in Appendix .
Signs that are not prescribed in Regulations need to be specially authorised by the Welsh Assembly Government .
Where the Contractor proposes to use nonprescribed temporary traffic signs he shall obtain the agreement of the Overseeing Organisation to their intended design and location .
Where the Contractor proposes to use prescribed temporary traffic signs he shall obtain the agreement of the police and the highway authority to their intended location .
The Contractor shall obtain authorisation and approval from the Overseeing Organisation for the use of the signs at the specific locations proposed .
Signs that are changeable by means other than the purely mechanical require statutory type approval for their construction and operating mechanisms by the Welsh Assembly Government .
This requirement is in addition to the need for the design of the sign to be prescribed or specially authorised .
The Contractors proposal for signs that require statutory type approval shall include the reference numbers of any approval already issued in respect of that equipment .
The signs shall not be installed until appropriate approval or confirmation of existing approval by the Overseeing Organisation has been obtained .
NATIONAL ALTERATIONS OF THE OVERSEEING ORGANISATION OF WALES Sign Classification For the purposes of the Contract the following classifications apply i permanent traffic signs .
Any of the traffic signs prescribed in the Regulations or specially authorised by the Welsh Assembly Government or any part thereof designed to remain in position at the completion of the Permanent Works or a traffic cone cylinder or other traffic delineator to be retained by the Employer ii prescribed temporary traffic signs .
Any of the traffic signs defined in the Regulations or specially authorised by the Welsh Assembly Government or any part thereof described in Appendix which unless otherwise described in Appendix comply with the requirements of a permanent traffic sign but which will not remain in position at the completion of the Permanent Works iii temporary traffic signs .
Any of the traffic signs defined in the Regulations or specially authorised by the Welsh Assembly Government or any part thereof designed by the Contractor in compliance with Clause which will not remain in position at the completion of the Permanent Works .
Amendment August Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Traffic Signs N NI Regulations Sign Classification and Standards Subject to subClauses and below all traffic signs used including retroreflecting road studs and road markings whether permanent or temporary shall be the size shape colour and type prescribed for that use in The Traffic Signs Regulations Northern Ireland the Zebra Pelican and Puffin Pedestrian Crossings Regulations Northern Ireland and subsequent amending Regulations .
Signs that are not prescribed in Regulations need to be specially authorised by the Overseeing Organisation .
Where the Contractor proposes to use nonprescribed temporary traffic signs he shall obtain the agreement of the Overseeing Organisation to their intended design and location .
Where the Contractor proposes to use prescribed temporary traffic signs he shall obtain the agreement of the police and the highway authority to their intended location .
The Contractor shall obtain authorisation and approval from the Overseeing Organisation for the use of the signs at the specific locations proposed .
Signs that are changeable by means other than the purely mechanical require type approval by the Overseeing Organisation .
This requirement is in addition to the need for the design of the sign to be prescribed or authorised .
The Contractors proposal for signs that require type approval shall include the reference numbers of any approval already issued in respect of that equipment .
The signs shall not be installed until appropriate approval or confirmation of existing approval by the Overseeing Organisation has been obtained .
Sign Classification For the purpose of the Contract the following classifications apply i permanent traffic signs .
Any of the traffic signs prescribed in the Regulations or specifically authorised by the Overseeing Organisation or any part thereof designed to remain in position at the completion of the Permanent Works or a traffic cone cylinder or other traffic delineator to be retained by the Employer ii prescribed temporary traffic signs .
Any of the traffic signs defined in the Regulations NATIONAL ALTERATIONS OF THE OVERSEEING ORGANISATION OF NORTHERN IRELAND or specifically authorised by the Overseeing Organisation or any part thereof described in Appendix which unless otherwise described in Appendix comply with the requirements of a permanent traffic sign but which will not remain in position at the completion of the Permanent Works iii temporary traffic signs .
Any of the traffic signs defined in the Regulations or specifically authorised by the Overseeing Organisation or any part thereof designed by the Contractor in compliance with Clause which will not remain in position at the completion of the Permanent Works .
NI Road Markings General Road markings shall be white or yellow Classes Y and Y complying with BS EN Table as appropriate except where an alternative shade has been specified in Appendix .
The markings shall consist of continuous or intermittent lines letters figures arrows or symbols and comply with subClauses to of this Clause .
Statutory requirements controlling road markings are contained in The Traffic Signs Regulations Northern Ireland and subsequent amending Regulations .
Permanent Road Markings Permanent road markings shall be one of the following materials and comply with the colour location and material type requirements described in Appendix i thermoplastic road marking material or paint in accordance with BS EN ii permanent preformed road markings in accordance with BS EN iii other materials as described in Appendix .
They shall be also tested in road trials to the Rollover class of P in accordance with procedure stated in BS EN to demonstrate compliance with the performance requirements as stated in subClauses to .
The test report shall give particulars of the quality Amendment November Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Traffic Signs N and quantity of the material including drop on glass beads laid at the test site for future reference and comparison purposes should such a need arise .
Road marking shall have the following road performance as defined in BS EN for the period of the functional life starting from the date of application or when the road is trafficked whichever is later .
The materials to be used shall be to the same mix material quality quantity and rate of application as used on the test site .
Property BS EN Requirement Value Reference Colour Table .
White x y coordinates given .
Yellow Class x y coordinates Y Y given Luminance Table .
Class B .
Factor .
Class B . Skid Table .
Class S Resistance .
Class S Retroreflect Table Class .
Class R ivity of RL for dry .
Class R markings Note White Yellow The width tolerances and thickness for screed spray preformed and extrusion white or yellow lines shall be in accordance with the Traffic Signs Regulations Northern Ireland .
With the exception of the road markings listed in Regulation of The Traffic Signs Regulations Northern Ireland in no case shall any materials be laid more than mm thick .
Unless otherwise specified all white markings shall be reflectorised with glass beads in accordance with BS EN and BS EN by incorporation apart from preformed markings into the road marking mixture and to the wet surface of the marking .
The glass beads shall not have more than ppm of Arsenic Trioxide ppm of Lead and ppm of Antimony .
The Contractor shall supply test certificates showing compliance with these requirements .
Where there is requirement for improved visibility in wet conditions at night products showing the following performance in addition to that stated in sub Clause shall be used .
Property BS EN Requirement Value Reference Retroreflect Table Class RW ivity Where there is a requirement for improved skid resistance as referred to in Appendix products showing the following performance in addition to that stated in sub clause shall be used .
Property BS EN Requirement Value Reference Skid Table Class S Resistance The pavement shall be prepared in accordance with the following i where the marking is to be applied on concrete carriageways the transverse texturing shall be freed from all traces of curing compound by wire brushing or other approved means .
Prior to the application of the thermoplastic material a tack coat compatible with the road surface and the marking material shall be applied in accordance with the manufacturers instructions ii on surface dressed carriageways all loose chippings where the marking is to be applied shall be removed prior to application .
The application of permanent road markings shall be in accordance with the Sector Scheme described in Appendix A .
Road marking materials shall only be applied to surfaces which are clean and dry .
Markings shall be free from raggedness at their edges and shall be uniform and free from streaks .
Longitudinal road markings shall be laid to a regular alignment .
Raised Rib Road Markings Raised Rib Road Markings shall only be used on motorways with full width hardshoulders or allpurpose roads both single and dual carriageway with at least metre wide hardstrips .
They shall comply with sub Clauses i and of this Clause .
Raised Rib Road Markings shall be white lines which are continuous over the sections where they are specified in Appendix .
Where specified in Appendix gaps shall be provided for drainage purposes .
Raised Rib Road Markings shall be in accordance with The Traffic Signs Regulations Northern Ireland Diagrams .
and .
as appropriate .
Spacing of the transverse raised ribs shall be mm or mm as specified in Appendix .
Raised Rib Road Markings shall not be used adjacent to hatched areas or central reserve crossings Amendment November Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Traffic Signs N except as prescribed for use with diagrams . . and .
Temporary Road Markings Temporary road markings shall only be adopted with the prior approval of the Overseeing Organisation .
They shall comply with subClauses to of this Clause or if required to be removable be constructed only from a proprietary preformed road marking material complying with BS EN .
When temporary road markings are used on surfaces that will continue to be used by public traffic after their removal any shadow trace remaining after their removal shall be permanently obliterated .
Preformed materials shall not be used for this obliteration .
Temporary road markings constructed from a proprietary preformed road marking material shall only be adopted in locations and on types of road surface as described in Appendix and shall comply with any other requirement therein .
The marking material shall be new and together with any primer shall be stored and installed in accordance with the manufacturers instructions and within the recommended shelf life .
Temporary preformed road markings shall only be applied to surfaces that are clean and dry .
Upon removal they shall be disposed of off Site and if any making good is necessary to the road surface it shall be satisfactorily carried out before the road is opened to traffic .
Road Markings on Porous Asphalt Surfacing Spray paint thermoplastic applied by machine screed spray or extrusion .
or preformed road markings shall be used for carriageway markings on porous asphalt surfacing .
Manual screeding shall not be permitted except for directional arrows and similar markings .
Removal of Road Markings The removal of road markings on surfaces that will continue to be used by traffic shall be undertaken in a manner that will avoid damage to the surface .
The removal of temporary road markings shall comply with subClauses and of this Clause .
The removal of permanent road markings shall be by mechanical means only .
The Contractor shall submit details of the system he proposes to use to the Overseeing Organisation for approval .
Masking of Road Markings When black masking materials are required to cover existing permanent road markings they shall comply with BS .
The total thickness of original and masking materials shall not exceed mm .
Longitudinal Road Markings Lateral Tolerances For longitudinal road markings the lateral tolerance shall be within mm from the designed position .
Any discontinuities between road markings shall be replaced with a smooth taper from one road marking to the other .
The length of the transition shall be derived from table below .
All road markings shall comply with the dimensions angles and proportions stated in the Traffic Signs Regulations Northern Ireland and any subsequent amending Regulations .
Speed Limit mph Taper in in in in in NI Road Studs Retroreflecting Road Studs Statutory requirements controlling retroreflecting road studs are contained in The Traffic Signs Regulations Northern Ireland and subsequent amending Regulations .
All retroreflecting road studs shall comply with BS EN and and shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturers instructions and the Sector Scheme described in Appendix A. Retroreflecting road studs and components which do not fall into a category of BS EN but which have type approval of the Overseeing Organisation can be incorporated into the Works .
They shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturers instructions .
The Contractor shall submit details of the retroreflecting road studs he proposes to use in the Works to the Overseeing Organisation for approval .
Amendment November Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Traffic Signs NF Permanent Retroreflecting Road Studs Permanent retroreflecting road studs shall be installed in the locations and to any other requirements as described in Appendix .
Temporary Retroreflecting Road Studs Temporary retroreflecting road studs shall be of the fluorescent greenyellow type to BS EN and shall be appropriate for the situation concerned .
They shall not be used for a second application .
Adhesive used for the temporary retroreflecting road studs shall be removed from the carriageway on completion of the Works .
Non retroreflecting Road Studs All non retroreflecting road studs shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturers instructions in locations and complying with any other requirements described in Appendix .
Retroreflecting Road Studs on Porous Asphalt Surfacing The edges of recesses for inset retroreflecting road studs in porous asphalt surfacing shall be milled when the material has cooled to ambient temperature .
Care shall be exercised when removing porous asphalt to form the recess to prevent damage occurring to the cut edges and to prevent detritus clogging the porous asphalt surfacing .
Surface applied road studs shall not be applied if there is evidence of moisture present on the surface of porous asphalt nor shall inset road studs be installed if moisture is present in the recess after milling of the asphalt .
Amendment November Amendment November MANUAL OF CONTRACT DOCUMENTS FOR HIGHWAY WORKS VOLUME SPECIFICATION FOR HIGHWAY WORKS SERIES ROAD LIGHTING COLUMNS AND BRACKETS CCTV MASTS AND CANTILEVER MASTS Contents Clause Title Page General Design of Lighting Columns Brackets CCTV Masts Cantilever Masts Foundations Anchorages and Attachment Systems Data Sheets Identification and Location Markings Installation of Foundations Anchorages and Attachment Systems Site Tests on Anchorages in Drilled Holes Materials and Surface Finishes Handling Transport and Erection Amendments and Additions to BS AMD for Lighting Columns Amendments and Additions to BS EN and BS EN for Lighting Columns and Brackets CCTV Masts and Cantilever Masts Amendments and Additions to BS for Lighting Columns CCTV Masts and Cantilever Masts Attachments to Lighting Columns CCTV Masts and Cantilever Masts Laminated Glass Fibre Reinforced Plastic GFRP Lighting Columns Brackets for Laminated GFRP Lighting Columns NATIONAL ALTERATIONS OF THE OVERSEEING ORGANISATIONS OF SCOTLAND WALES AND NORTHERN IRELAND Northern Ireland NI General N NI Handling Transport and Erection N denotes a Clause or Sample Appendix which has a substitute National Clause or Sample Appendix for one or more of the Overseeing Organisations of Scotland Wales or Northern Ireland .
Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Road Lighting Columns and Brackets CCTV Masts and Cantilever Masts ROAD LIGHTING COLUMNS AND BRACKETS CCTV MASTS AND CANTILEVER MASTS General This Series shall apply to the design supply and installation of lighting columns and brackets and CCTV masts and cantilever masts for traffic signals andor speed cameras hereafter called cantilever masts within the following dimensional limitations i For steel aluminium and concrete lighting columns a post top columns not exceeding m nominal height b columns with brackets not exceeding m nominal height c bracket projections not exceeding .
x nominal height or m whichever is the lesser .
ii For glass fibre reinforced plastic lighting columns a columns not exceeding m nominal height b bracket projections not exceeding .
m. iii For steel CCTV masts a post top masts not exceeding m nominal height .
iv For steel cantilever masts a nominal height not exceeding .
m b cantilever projection not exceeding .
m. Where nominal height is taken as the distance between of the underside of the flange plate and the highest point of the mast see Figure of BD DMRB The Contractor shall propose lighting columns and brackets CCTV masts and cantilever masts which have been designed by the manufacturer .
The manufacture supply and verification of lighting columns and bracket arms shall comply with the quality management scheme described in Appendix A .
The Contractor shall design foundations for planted lighting columns and cantilever masts in accordance with BD Chapter DMRB .. or of BD Chapter DMRB .. using the soil type information as described in Appendices and .
The Contractor shall where required design i anchorages and attachment systems for columns and masts with flange plates to foundation or bridge deck ii foundations for columns and masts with flange plates as described in Appendices and .
Lighting columns and brackets CCTV masts and cantilever masts shall be supplied and installed in compliance with the relevant requirements of BS EN BS EN BS EN BS EN BS EN BS EN and BS BS and BS together with the amendments and additions stated in Clauses and and all the other requirements of this Series .
Brackets for lighting columns shall include wall mounted brackets and fixtures .
Temporary lighting on temporary diversions for traffic and crossovers shall comply with this Series .
Where lighting columns CCTV masts and cantilever masts are to be in the vicinity of overhead power lines the Contractor shall ensure that the appropriate Electricity Authorities are notified and give written agreement to the specific clearances to be provided and that warning notices as described in Appendices and are permanently fixed to these columns prior to erection .
Headroom over the carriageway for cantilever mast shall be in accordance with the requirements of paragraph .
of Standard BD DMRB Design of Lighting Columns Brackets CCTV Masts Cantilever Masts Foundations Anchorages and Attachment Systems Lighting columns brackets CCTV masts cantilever masts the foundations of both planted columns and columns and masts with flange plates and the anchorages and attachment systems for columns and masts with flange plates shall be designed to comply with the requirements of Standards BD DMRB .. BD DMRB .. BD DMRB .. and the technical approval scheme adopted by the Overseeing Organisation .
Amendment May Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Road Lighting Columns and Brackets CCTV Masts and Cantilever Masts The Contractor shall submit to the Overseeing Organisation a copy of the design and check certificates for lighting columns brackets CCTV masts cantilever masts and foundations .
The design of the foundations shall be appropriate to the soil types encountered on site as identified in Appendices and .
Aesthetic Requirements The aesthetic design of lighting columns luminaires including those with bracket arms CCTV masts and cantilever masts shall be submitted by the Contractor to the Overseeing Organisation .
The design of lighting columns and luminaires including those with bracket arms shall comply with the general advice given in BS for the appearance of lighting installations by day and by night both from the viewpoint of the road and from the surrounding neighbourhood .
Data Sheets The Contractor shall complete the details in Appendices and in accordance with the instructions given in Appendices and .
The Contractor shall provide the Overseeing Organisation with triplicate copies of the completed Data Sheets for each type of column and bracket CCTV mast and cantilever mast not later than the date stated in Appendices and .
The columns and brackets CCTV masts and cantilever masts shall not be ordered or erected until the Overseeing Organisation has notified its acceptance of the completed Data Sheet in writing to the Contractor .
Identification and Location Markings All lighting columns and brackets CCTV masts and cantilever masts shall carry unique identification marks which indicate the name of the manufacturer year of manufacture the unique product code and other relevant information to enable details of the lighting column and bracket CCTV masts and cantilever masts to be determined by reference to the appropriate Lighting Column and Bracket CCTV masts and cantilever masts Data Sheets .
The column and mast identification marks shall be permanent legible and clearly visible and be i on a permanent fixed label or ii hard stamped or iii formed in the material of the columnmast on an external face only .
It shall be located either within the base compartment or except in the case of hard stamping immediately above or below the door .
It shall not be located on the door .
All hard stamping shall be made only in a secondary member of the columnmast and shall be done in a manner which will not induce any stresses in the material of the main member of the columnmast .
The bracket identification mark shall be permanent and legible and be i hard stamped or ii formed in the material of the bracket on an external face only .
The mark shall be located either on the luminaire spigot or on the underside of the bracket adjacent to the column shaft or wall or pole mounting plate .
Alternatively the bracket identification mark shall be hard stamped or formed in a detachable label supplied fixed to the bracket .
This label shall be moved from its temporary position and fixed on erection to a suitably provided hole next to the label on the column .
In addition location marks for inspection and maintenance purposes shall be applied to each column as described in Appendices and .
Installation of Foundations Anchorages and Attachment Systems Planted Lighting Columns and Cantilever Masts A layer of ST concrete mm thick complying with Clause shall be placed and compacted in the bottom of the excavation up to the base of the column or mast post .
The cable entry slot shall be temporarily plugged as necessary in order to prevent any ingress of concrete or filling material during the concreting and backfilling operations .
The hole into which the lighting column or cantilever mast is placed shall be backfilled as follows i in the case of metal and glass fibre reinforced plastic columns with concrete or other material described in Appendix ii in the case of concrete columns with concrete or earth fill complying with subClause of this Clause or other material described in Appendix iii in the case of cantilever masts with concrete or other material described in Appendix .
Amendment November Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Road Lighting Columns and Brackets CCTV Masts and Cantilever Masts Concrete backfill shall be ST concrete complying with Clause well compacted by vibration over the full planting depth of the column mast post .
A duct equal in size to the width of the cable entry hole shall be formed through the concrete filling using a suitable preformed lining tube capable of retaining its crosssectional shape during compaction .
The concrete shall be placed mm above ground level adjacent to the columnmast post and taper to ground level mm from the columnmast post face .
Earth backfill shall be Class material complying with Clause Table unless otherwise described in Appendices and .
The material shall be placed in mm thick layers and shall be well rammed and compacted in order to provide full lateral support to the planting depth of the columnmast post .
If the backfilling is disturbed for any reason it shall be reinstated in compliance with this Clause .
A duct equal in size to the width of the cable entry hole shall be made through the backfill material using a suitable preformed lining tube capable of retaining its cross sectional shape during compaction .
Columns CCTV Masts and Cantilever Masts with Flange Plates Concrete in the foundations shall comply with Series .
The bedding mortar between the underside of the columnmast flange plate and the top of the concrete base shall comply with Clause .
The bearing stresses in any bedding mortar under the flange plates shall not exceed Nmm .
A cable duct mm diameter shall be provided through the foundation or bridge component as described in Appendices and .
Steel anchorages and attachment systems shall be used and the anchorage shall include an internally threaded component to receive the attachment system i.e .
holding down bolt .
Where anchorages in drilled holes are to be used the Contractor shall unless otherwise described in Appendices or submit to the Overseeing Organisation at least weeks before installation well attested and documented evidence that the proposed anchorage is i capable of complying with the test requirements specified in Clause and ii capable of resisting pulsating loading .
Anchorages in drilled holes of an expanding type shall not be used .
For anchorages in drilled holes the hole location shall be checked to ensure that the hole will be clear of reinforcement before drilling is carried out .
Before installation of anchorages in drilled holes the hole shall be sound clean and dry and the tolerance of the hole shall be within the values given by the anchorage manufacturer .
The threads of steel anchorages shall be lined with grease having a high resistance to creep and being suitable for hot or cold smearing .
The grease shall provide protection to the threads for a minimum of either months under cover or months exposed on Site .
Attachment systems shall be tightened to the appropriate torque and have the minimum thread engagement calculated in accordance with the requirements of BS Amd .
No .
March subClause All voids in anchorages attachment systems and flange plates shall be filled with a nonsetting passive filler to prevent the collection of water .
Site Tests on Anchorages in Drilled Holes The Contractor shall carry out site tests on anchorages in drilled holes .
For the purpose of this subClause the types of fixing referred to in clause of BS shall include anchorages .
Where anchorages are tested they shall be loaded incrementally in tension in accordance with BS except that they shall be capable of resisting a test load equal to per cent above the nominal tensile load to be resisted by the anchorage in lieu of testing to failure .
The tensile load shall be determined in accordance with the criteria given in subClauses .
to .
of Standard BD DMRB .. Chapter of Standard BD DMRB .. and Chapter of BD DMRB Incremental loads shall be held for not less than half a minute and the test load for not less than five minutes .
Readings shall be taken immediately after applying load and at the end of the time intervals stated above .
The total movement of the anchorage shall not exceed .
mm during the test .
Any evidence of slip during loading up to the test load as demonstrated by a significant change in the slope of the loadextension curve shall constitute failure .
The Contractor shall test anchorages selected on behalf of the Overseeing Organisation at the testing frequency in accordance with Appendix .
Amendment November Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Road Lighting Columns and Brackets CCTV Masts and Cantilever Masts Materials and Surface Finishes All steel fixings including doors door hinges chains and locks shall be stainless steel to BS EN BS or BS EN ISO and BS EN ISO as appropriate or steel to BS EN BS EN or BS EN and BS EN as amended in Clause galvanized in compliance with Series .
Where different metals are in contact consideration shall be given to the necessary measures to avoid galvanic corrosion .
The surface preparation and protection of steel lighting columns brackets and wall mountings steel CCTV masts and steel cantilever masts mountings and housings shall comply with Appendix and the relevant Clauses in Series .
The exterior and interior surfaces of the intended planted depth of an aluminium alloy lighting column shaft and a length of mm above the ground level shall be coated with a nonporous electrically insulating bitumen with a minimum layer thickness of microns .
The coating shall only be applied after degreasing and after an approved preliminary treatment in order to ensure adhesion .
The underside of an aluminium alloy flange plate shall be treated before erection with bituminous paint complying with BS or BS .
The finish to concrete lighting columns and brackets shall be Class F in compliance with Clause .
Handling Transport and Erection Lighting columns and brackets CCTV masts and cantilever masts shall be handled transported and stored in such a way as to avoid any structural damage or damage to the surface protection system .
Any damage incurred shall be made good in such a way that the structural performance and durability of the item shall be in no way reduced .
Lighting columns and brackets CCTV masts and cantilever masts shall be stored clear of the ground in such a way that contact with cement groundwater soil or ash or other deleterious material is prevented and that water does not accumulate on any surfaces or inside sections .
Suitable packings shall be placed between the columnsmasts to allow a free passage of air and dispersion of water .
All rivets bolts nuts washers screws small plates and small articles generally shall be suitably packed and identified .
All such items shall be stored under cover .
Columns and masts shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
The door shall face the direction described in Appendices and .
Wall mounted lighting brackets and fixtures shall be fixed as described in Appendix .
Amendments and Additions to BS AMD for Lighting Columns Page Clause Delete Note Lantern fixing angle or and Insert Note Lantern fixing angle or .
In the Table insert additional bracket projections w of .
m . m . m and .
m. Page Clause Figure Delete cable entry slot width dimension mm and Insert cable entry slot width dimension X. Insert additional note as follows Cable entry slot width dimension X shall be either mm or mm as described in Appendix .
Page Clause Delete existing Tables and replace by the following h sa a d a d m min min min M M M Delete from Figure and c from Figure .
Insert additional notes as follows Unless otherwise described in Appendix circumferential slotted holes shall be used instead of round holes in the flange plates in order to allow of rotational adjustment .
Where slotted holes are required in the flange plate to allow for rotational adjustment of the column then the flange plate sizes shall be increased to give a suitable edge distance .
Amendment November Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Road Lighting Columns and Brackets CCTV Masts and Cantilever Masts The distance from the edge of the hole or slot to the edge of the plate shall be not less than d. Washers complying with BS shall be used between the holding down fastener and the flange plate .
Page Clause Delete existing Table for post top lanterns and replace by the following d b l . . . . Delete existing Table for side entry lanterns and replace by the following d b l . . . .
Page Note b Delete ISO and insert ISO Page Clause .
Column crosssection Insert additional subClause as follows Material thickness tolerance unspecified .
Deviation in shape Delete content of entire subClause and insert the following Crosssection dimensional tolerances with a maximum of mm .
..
Diameter of lantern connection ungalvanised Delete ISO and insert ISO Amendments and Additions to BS EN and BS EN for Lighting Columns and Brackets CCTV Masts and Cantilever Masts .
For Lighting Columns and Brackets BS EN and BS EN shall apply subject to the following amendments and additions Page Clause BS EN Delete the last five lines in subClause .
and replace with The steel shall be equivalent to or better than BS EN BS EN Grade S JR or BS EN Grade S JOH .
Page Clause BS EN and BS EN Delete subClause .
and replace with The steel used for foundation bolts shall be equivalent to or better than BS EN BS EN Grade S JR .
Page Clause BS EN and BS EN replace prEN with BS AMD Page Clause BS EN and BS EN replace prEN with BS Pages and Clause BS EN and BS EN Delete subClauses . . and .
and insert the following .. Steel and Aluminium Lighting Columns .. General .
Arc welding of ferritic steels shall comply with BS EN and BS EN Welding Recommendations for welding of metallic materials .
Arc welding of stainless steels shall comply with BS .
Arc welding of aluminium alloys shall comply with BS EN and BS EN .
..
Procedures .
Written welding procedures shall be used with testing to BS EN ISO BS EN ISO and BS EN ISO for steel and BS EN ISO BS EN ISO and BS EN ISO for aluminium alloys and shall apply to all production and repair procedures .
These shall be subject to reapproval after a period of seven years .
When applying BS EN ISO BS EN ISO and BS EN ISO the welding consumables and procedures used for steel shall be such that the mechanical properties of deposited weld metal will not be less than the respective minimum specified values of the parent metal being welded .
Weld testing shall be undertaken by an appropriate organisation accredited in accordance with subClauses .
and .. Approval shall be by an Independent Inspecting Authority using Registered Amendment November Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Road Lighting Columns and Brackets CCTV Masts and Cantilever Masts Welding Engineers Registered Welding Quality Engineers or equivalent .
Welding procedures shall be approved in accordance with BS EN ISO .
Preproduction test pieces shall represent the main assembly types .
.. Welder Qualification .
All welders shall be approved to BS EN for steel and BS EN ISO for aluminium alloys .
The tests shall include in addition an application test representative of the main structural joints on which the welder is to be approved to work .
The main structural joints shall include where relevant the flange plate joint the base compartment to shaft joint the door reinforcement any intermediate column joint the column to bracket joint and the column seam weld .
Welders shall be subject to reapproval in accordance with BS EN and BS EN ISO .
Weld testing shall be undertaken by an appropriate organisation accredited in accordance with subClauses .
and .. Approval shall be by an Independent Inspecting Authority using Registered Welding Engineers Registered Welding Quality Engineers or Welding Inspectors certified by the Certification Scheme for Weldment Inspection Personnel CSWIP or equivalent .
Test results shall be kept current and made available for review on request .
..
Inspection and NonDestructive Testing Inspection Personnel .
The manufacturer shall provide suitable personnel to carry out inspection of production welds as required in to Personnel conducting visual inspection shall have a nationally recognised certificate of competence appropriate to the type of welding being inspected .
Personnel conducting nondestructive testing NDT shall be certified according to a nationally recognised certification scheme appropriate to the equipment used and the weld groups inspected all in accordance with BS EN .
Evidence of training and qualification shall be retained and made available for examination when required .
The results of all weld inspections shall be recorded .
Visual Inspection .
All welds shall be subject to visual inspection in accordance with BS EN prior to any NDT and galvanizing .
Weld surfaces shall be free of slag residues and sharp edges .
All surfaces shall be free of traces of weld spatter arc strikes and contaminants .
The apparent throat dimensions of butt welds and the apparent leg length and apparent throat dimensions of fillet welds as measured by a welding gauge and taking into account any known lack of fit shall not be less than those specified except that local shortfalls up to .
mm may be accepted provided the average over any mm length is not less than the specified dimension .
The toe angle shall not be less than .
The surface of all welds shall be free from cracks lack of fusion including overlap and slag .
Isolated discontinuous porosity may be accepted provided it is not detrimental to the galvanizing process .
Undercut shall not result in a section loss of more than over any mm length of joint nor shall its depth exceed .
mm or of the thickness whichever is the less .
Magnetic Particle Inspection MPI and Liquid Penetrant Inspection .
MPI shall be applied in accordance with BS EN ISO to joints in steel lighting columns selected in accordance with where any of the material thickness exceeds mm .
Liquid penetrant inspection in accordance with BS EN shall be applied to transverse welds in aluminium columns selected in accordance with Notwithstanding the requirements of one of the above methods shall be applied as appropriate where on visual inspection the presence of cracking or lack of fusion may be suspected .
To aid inspection the profile of the weld may be dressed by burr grinding provided that the specified throat size and leg length is still maintained .
The surface of the weld shall be free of cracks lack of fusion and slag .
Ultrasonic Testing .
All butt joints selected in accordance with shall be ultrasonically tested in accordance with BS EN where the column shaft is mm thick or greater .
The weld shall be free of cracks .
The height of buried slag lack of fusion or lack of penetration shall not exceed mm .
Within mm of the outer surface their individual length shall not exceed mm .
The resulting net throat area loss over any mm length of weld shall not exceed .
Frequency of Testing .
Joints for MPI liquid penetrant inspection or ultrasonic testing shall be selected as follows of lighting columns of each type shall be inspected .
The sample shall include all variations in joint geometry material thickness and weld size covered by the basic type that are within the scope of and If nonconformances are found the scope of MPI liquid penetrant inspection and ultrasonic testing shall be doubled .
If further nonconformances are found the whole batch shall be tested .
Reporting .
Inspection records for production welds shall be retained by the manufacturer for seven years and those covering the production periods relating to the lighting columns supplied shall be made available for examination .
..
Destructive Testing .
Copies of certified reports of destructive tests on lighting columns supplied under earlier contracts with the Overseeing Organisation shall be made available for examination .
Amendment November Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Road Lighting Columns and Brackets CCTV Masts and Cantilever Masts The Contractor shall supply sample joints cut from complete lighting columns for destructive testing as selected on behalf of the Overseeing Organisation .
The sample joints shall be cut from the column extension piece bracket and welded anchorage where relevant .
The basis of selection shall be as follows a For orders of to lighting columns one complete lighting column for each type unless destructive testing has been carried out within the last year on a lighting column of that type .
The manufacture supply and verification of lighting columns and bracket arms shall comply with the quality management scheme described in Appendix A. b For orders of to lighting columns one complete lighting column for each type unless destructive testing has been carried out within the last month on a lighting column of that type where the lighting column to be tested was also selected on behalf of the Overseeing Organisation .
c For orders exceeding lighting columns two complete lighting columns for each type .
Acceptance criteria shall be as specified in .. except that in the throat and leg dimension shall apply to the true rather than the apparent dimension .
In the event that there is a nonconformance arising from a serious deviation in materials preparation assembly or welding procedure the batch concerned shall be rejected and further production of the columns affected stopped until such time as the fault has been corrected .
A minor nonconformance shall only be accepted on the basis that further sampling and testing shows that fault is not repetitive and in the view of the Overseeing Organisation will not in that instance impair structural integrity .
If the problem can be traced to a particular manufacturing period operator piece of equipment or batch of materials and if proper traceability to individual batches of components can be assured only those batches affected may be subject to rejection .
The destructive test reports shall be retained by the manufacturer and recorded in a register for a period of two years .
The destructive test specimens shall be retained for a period of months .
These shall be made available for examination on future contracts with the Overseeing Organisation .
.. Remedial Work .
Welds which do not comply with the Specification may be repaired to an approved procedure as described in Page subClause .. BS EN and BS EN In the first paragraph delete in .
In third paragraph delete .. and add and Pages and Clause BS EN and BS EN Delete subClauses .. .. and ..
Pages and Clause BS EN and BS EN Delete subClauses .. .. .. and .. . For CCTV Masts and Cantilever Masts BS EN applies subject to the following amendments Page Clause Delete the last five lines in subClause .
and replace with The steel shall be equivalent to or better than BS EN BS EN Grade S JR or BS EN Grade S JOH .
Delete subClause .
and replace with The steel used for foundation bolts shall be equivalent to or better than BS EN BS EN Grade S JR .
Page Clause Delete subClauses . . and .
and insert the following .. Steel CCTV masts and Cantilever masts .. General .
Arc welding of ferritic steels shall comply with BS EN and BS EN .
Arc welding of stainless steels shall comply with BS EN .
..
Procedures .
Written welding procedures shall be used with testing to BS EN ISO BS EN ISO and BS EN ISO for steel and shall apply to all production and repair procedures .
These shall be subject to reapproval after a period of seven years .
When applying BS EN ISO BS EN ISO and BS EN ISO the welding consumables and procedures used for steel shall be such that the mechanical properties of deposited weld metal will not be less than the respective minimum specified values of the parent metal being welded .
Weld testing shall be undertaken by an appropriate organisation accredited in accordance with subClauses .
and .. Approval shall be by an Independent Inspecting Authority using Registered Welding Engineers Registered Welding Quality Amendment November Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Road Lighting Columns and Brackets CCTV Masts and Cantilever Masts Engineers or equivalent .
Welding procedures shall be approved in accordance with BS EN ISO .
Preproduction test pieces shall represent the main assembly types .
.. Welder Qualification .
All welders shall be approved to BS EN .
The tests shall include in addition an application test representative of the main structural joints on which the welder is to be approved to work .
The main structural joints shall include where relevant the flange plate joint the base compartment to shaft joint the door reinforcement any intermediate mast joint the mast to bracket joint and the mast seam weld .
Welders shall be subject to reapproval in accordance with BS EN .
Weld testing shall be undertaken by an appropriate organisation accredited in accordance with subClauses .
and .. Approval shall be by an Independent Inspecting Authority using Registered Welding Engineers Registered Welding Quality Engineers or Welding Inspectors certified by the Certification Scheme for Weldment Inspection Personnel CSWIP or equivalent .
Test results shall be kept current and made available for review on request .
..
Inspection and NonDestructive Testing Inspection Personnel .
The manufacturer shall provide suitable personnel to carry out inspection of production welds as required in to Personnel conducting visual inspection shall have a nationally recognised certificate of competence appropriate to the type of welding being inspected .
Personnel conducting nondestructive testing NDT shall be certified according to a nationally recognised certification scheme appropriate to the equipment used and the weld groups inspected all in accordance with BS EN .
Evidence of training and qualification shall be retained and made available for examination when required .
The results of all weld inspections shall be recorded .
Visual Inspection .
All welds shall be subject to visual inspection in accordance with BS EN prior to any NDT and galvanizing .
Weld surfaces shall be free of slag residues and sharp edges .
All surfaces shall be free of traces of weld spatter arc strikes and contaminants .
The apparent throat dimensions of butt welds and the apparent leg length and apparent throat dimensions of fillet welds as measured by a welding gauge and taking into account any known lack of fit shall not be less than those specified except that local shortfalls up to .
mm may be accepted provided the average over any mm length is not less than the specified dimension .
The toe angle shall not be less than .
The surface of all welds shall be free from cracks lack of fusion including overlap and slag .
Isolated discontinuous porosity may be accepted provided it is not detrimental to the galvanizing process .
Undercut shall not result in a section loss of more than over any mm length of joint nor shall its depth exceed .
mm or of the thickness whichever is the less .
Magnetic Particle Inspection MPI and Liquid Penetrant Inspection .
MPI shall be applied in accordance with BS EN ISO to joints in steel CCTV masts and cantilever masts selected in accordance with where any of the material thickness exceeds mm .
Liquid Penetrant Inspection in accordance with BS shall be applied to transverse joints in masts selected in accordance with Notwithstanding the requirements of one of the above methods shall be applied as appropriate where on visual inspection the presence of cracking or lack of fusion may be suspected .
To aid inspection the profile of the weld may be dressed by burr grinding provided that the specified throat size and leg length is still maintained .
The surface of the weld shall be free of cracks lack of fusion and slag .
Ultrasonic Testing .
All butt joints selected in accordance with shall be ultrasonically tested in accordance with BS EN where the mast shaft is mm thick or greater .
The weld shall be free of cracks .
The height of buried slag lack of fusion or lack of penetration shall not exceed mm .
Within mm of the outer surface their individual length shall not exceed mm .
The resulting net throat area loss over any mm length of weld shall not exceed .
Frequency of Testing .
Joints for MPI liquid penetrant inspection or ultrasonic testing shall be selected as follows of CCTV masts of each type shall be inspected except for orders of to masts in which case shall be inspected .
The sample shall include all variations in joint geometry material thickness and weld size covered by the basic type that are within the scope of and If nonconformances are found the scope of MPI liquid penetrant inspection and ultrasonic testing shall be doubled .
If further non conformances are found the whole batch shall be tested .
Reporting .
Inspection records for production welds shall be retained by the manufacturer for seven years and those covering the production periods relating to the CCTV masts andor cantilever masts supplied shall be made available for examination .
..
Destructive Testing .
Copies of certified reports of destructive tests on CCTV masts andor cantilever masts supplied under earlier contracts with the Overseeing Organisation shall be made available for examination .
Amendment November Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Road Lighting Columns and Brackets CCTV Masts and Cantilever Masts The Contractor shall supply sample joints cut from complete CCTV masts andor cantilever masts for destructive testing as selected on behalf of the Overseeing Organisation .
The sample joints shall be cut from the mast extension piece bracket and welded anchorage where relevant .
The basis of selection shall be as follows a For orders of to CCTV masts andor cantilever masts no requirement .
b For orders of to CCTV masts andor cantilever masts one complete CCTV mast andor cantilever mast for each type unless destructive testing has been carried out within the last month on a CCTV mast andor cantilever mast of that type where the CCTV mast andor cantilever mast to be tested was also selected on behalf of the Overseeing Organisation .
c For orders exceeding CCTV masts andor cantilever masts two complete CCTV masts andor cantilever masts for each type .
Acceptance criteria shall be as specified in .. except that in the throat and leg dimension shall apply to the true rather than the apparent dimension .
In the event that there is a nonconformance arising from a serious deviation in materials preparation assembly or welding procedure the batch concerned shall be rejected and further production of the masts affected stopped until such time as the fault has been corrected .
A minor nonconformance shall only be accepted on the basis that further sampling and testing shows that fault is not repetitive and in the view of the Overseeing Organisation will not in that instance impair structural integrity .
If the problem can be traced to a particular manufacturing period operator piece of equipment or batch of materials and if proper traceability to individual batches of components can be assured only those batches affected may be subject to rejection .
The destructive test reports shall be retained by the manufacturer and recorded in a register for a period of two years .
The destructive test specimens shall be retained for a period of months .
These shall be made available for examination on future contracts with the Overseeing Organisation .
.. Remedial Work .
Welds which do not comply with the Specification may be repaired to an approved procedure as described in Page subClause ..
In first paragraph delete .and add ..
In third paragraph delete .. and add and Page Clause Delete subClauses .. .. and ..
Page Clause Delete subClauses .. .. .. and ..
Amendments and Additions to BS for Lighting Columns CCTV Masts and Cantilever Masts .
For Lighting Columns CCTV Masts and Cantilever Masts Page .
after paragraph Insert additional paragraphs as follows The door arrangement shall be such that it can be opened by releasing a single threaded locking fastener .
The fastener shall be of stainless steel to BS EN ISO and BS EN ISO or BS with the dimensions given in HCD Drawing Number K. When the door is secured the fastener head shall be completely recessed into the door in a circular recess as indicated in HCD Drawing Number K. Six door keys as shown on HCD Drawing Number K or for alternative vandal resistant locks approved by the Overseeing Organisation shall be supplied to the Overseeing Organisation .
The locking fastener shall be suitable for opening with the standard key detailed in HCD Drawing Number K. . For Lighting Columns Page .
after paragraph Insert additional paragraph as follows Where a cable entry slot width of mm is provided the minimum size of cableway from the cable entry slot to the base compartment shall be mm After Page Insert HCD Drawing Number K. Amendment November Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Road Lighting Columns and Brackets CCTV Masts and Cantilever Masts Attachments to Lighting Columns CCTV Masts and Cantilever Masts Attachments to lighting columns and CCTV masts shall be by means of circumferential clamps of stainless steel complying with AISI Grade or other suitable material which shall not damage the column or its protective coating .
Attachments to cantilever masts shall be in accordance with Chapter of BD DMRB Laminated Glass Fibre Reinforced Plastic GFRP Lighting Columns Manufacture of GFRP Laminates The columns shall be produced either by hand lay up or mechanical moulding technique .
The mechanical manufacture shall be carried out either by filament winding centrifugal casting compression moulding resin injection or any other appropriate method accepted by the Overseeing Organisation .
An exterior resin rich layer of at least .
mm thickness shall be provided to ensure adequate protection of the reinforcing fibres against adverse effects of the weather and possible chemical attack .
Columns containing bubbles cracks holes pits or other voids each greater than mm in area shall be rejected .
The dimension and tolerances shall be those given in BS for seamless metal columns .
The outer surface shall have a smooth uniform taper along its total length .
Materials for GFRP Laminates The fibre reinforced plastic shall be in the form of laminate made of thermosetting resin fibre reinforcement mainly glass fibre catalyst system and filler .
The resins used shall conform to the appropriate British Standards .
Polyester resins shall be based on isophthalic acid and conform to BS Type B .
Any fillers and pigments incorporated in the resin shall form part of the total resin system and shall be subject to acceptance of the Overseeing Organisation .
Fibre reinforcement shall conform to the appropriate British Standards .
Where glass fibre is used as the base for mat or chopped fibre it shall conform to BS EN BS EN and BS EN and shall be treated with an appropriate finish compatible with the resin system used .
All accelerators catalysts and hardeners shall be used in accordance with the resin manufacturers instructions .
Testing of GFRP Laminates The properties of the laminates shall be verified by testing as described in subClauses to of this Clause .
Any material failing any of the tests listed shall be rejected .
Such tests shall unless otherwise described in Appendix be carried out on samples representing the batch of columns to be supplied under the Contract .
Two types of samples shall be provided for the tests i Samples from a specially prepared flat laminate for type tests or where changes in raw materials or manufacturing techniques are proposed .
These shall comprise tests for colour fastness electric strength water absorption and impact strength .
ii Samples cut from complete columns to be used for quality control purposes to be carried out at a frequency of one in each fifty production columns .
Each column for tests will be selected on a random basis and will be examined by visual inspection and for loss on ignition .
A flat laminate sample mm mm square by mm .
mm .
mm thick shall be prepared by hand layup method using the same curing conditions resin and reinforcement systems as used for production columns .
The total glass fibre content shall not exceed by weight .
The colour fastness test shall be conducted in accordance with BS EN ISO BS Method B and the results assessed by Method A .
Material with a colour change assessed greater than moderate will not be accepted .
The electric strength test shall be carried out in accordance with BS EN IEC .
The electric strength shall be not less than kVmm .
The water absorption test shall be carried out in accordance with BS EN ISO .
The absorption of water shall be not greater than milligrammes .
The impact strength test shall be carried out in accordance with BS EN ISO BS Method B .
The impact resistance shall be at least kJm .
The loss on ignition tests shall be carried out in accordance with BS Method .
The loss on ignition on samples taken at random throughout the length of a column shall not exceed after Amendment May Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Road Lighting Columns and Brackets CCTV Masts and Cantilever Masts subtracting the amount allowed for non combustible fillers .
The percentage of glass fibre remaining following ignition shall be at least by weight .
Samples cut randomly throughout the length of a column shall be visually inspected to confirm that there are no delaminations or voids greater than specified in subClause of this Clause and that the laminate is fully densified and includes the required number of laminations .
Brackets for Laminated GFRP Lighting Columns General Brackets shall consist of a galvanized steel tube assembly with an external selfskinning rigid polyurethane foam moulding .
Materials The steel tube assembly shall comply with BS EN and BS and the requirements of this Series .
The rigid polyurethane foam shall be moulded in accordance with the manufacturers instructions to give a bulk density within the range of kgm when in the form of a test sheet in accordance with subClause of this Clause .
The surface shall be free from obvious defects such as voiding pitting or cracking .
It shall have a surface hardness of at least D when measured in accordance with BS EN ISO .
The polyurethane moulding shall be primed with a two part polyurethane primer and finished with a two part polyurethane top coating all in accordance with the manufacturers instructions .
Testing of Polyurethane Foam Properties of foam shall be verified by testing using specimens cut from moulded test sheets of mm nominal thickness using the same material as in the manufacture of the bracket arms .
The apparent bulk density of a specimen shall be determined and be within the range of kgm .
The method of testing shall be in accordance with the polyurethane foam manufacturers instructions .
The impact strength of a specimen shall be determined in accordance with BS EN ISO BS Method B and shall be at least .
kJm .
The flexural stress at a deflection of mm carried out on a specimen shall be in the range of to MPa .
The method of testing shall be in accordance with the polyurethane foam manufacturers instructions .
The tests specified in subClauses and of this Clause shall each be carried out on two specimens and unless otherwise stated in Appendix the results shall be representative of the batch of columns to be supplied .
Evidence of quality control including results of tests similar to those required in subClauses and of this Clause shall be made available when required by the Overseeing Organisation .
Tests specified in subClauses and of this Clause shall be carried out when changes in raw materials or manufacturing techniques are proposed .
For quality control purposes testing shall be carried out in accordance with subClause of this Clause on each production batch of brackets which are to be fitted to columns .
F Amendment November Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Road Lighting Columns and Brackets CCTV Masts and Cantilever Masts N NI General This Series shall apply to the design supply and installation of lighting columns and brackets and CCTV masts and cantilever masts for traffic signals andor speed cameras hereafter called cantilever masts within the following dimensional limitations i For steel aluminium and concrete lighting columns a post top columns not exceeding m nominal height b columns with brackets not exceeding m nominal height c bracket projections not exceeding .
x nominal height or m whichever is the lesser .
ii For glass fibre reinforced plastic lighting columns a columns not exceeding m nominal height b bracket projections not exceeding .
m. iii For steel CCTV masts a post top masts not exceeding m nominal height .
iv For steel cantilever masts a nominal height not exceeding .
m b cantilever projection not exceeding .
m. Where nominal hieght is taken as the distance between of the underside of the flange plate and the highest point of the mast see Figure of BD DMRB The Contractor shall propose lighting columns and brackets CCTV masts and cantilever masts which have been designed by the manufacturer .
The manufacture supply and verification of lighting columns and bracket arms shall comply with the quality management scheme described in Appendix A .
The Contractor shall design foundations for planted lighting columns and cantilever masts in accordance with BD Chapter DMRB .. or of BD Chapter DMRB .. using the soil type information as described in Appendices and .
NATIONAL ALTERATIONS OF THE OVERSEEING ORGANISATION OF NORTHERN IRELAND The Contractor shall where required design i anchorages and attachment systems for columns and masts with flange plates to foundation or bridge deck ii foundations for columns and masts with flange plates as described in Appendices and .
Lighting columns and brackets CCTV masts and cantilever masts shall be supplied and installed in compliance with the relevant requirements of BS EN BS EN BS EN BS EN BS EN BS EN and BS BS and BS together with the amendments and additions stated in Clauses and and all the other requirements of this Series .
Brackets shall include wall and wood pole mounted brackets and fixtures .
Temporary lighting on temporary diversions for traffic and crossovers shall comply with this Series .
Where lighting columns CCTV masts and cantilever masts are to be in the vicinity of overhead power lines the Contractor shall ensure that the appropriate Electricity Authorities are notified and give written agreement to the specific clearances to be provided and that warning notices as described in Appendices and are permanently fixed to these columns prior to erection .
Headroom over carriageway for cantilever masts shall be in accordance with the requirements of paragraph .
of Standard BD DMRB NI Handling Transport and Erection Lighting columns and brackets CCTV masts and cantilever masts shall be handled transported and stored in such a way as to avoid any structural damage or damage to the surface protection system .
Any damage incurred shall be made good in such a way that the structural performance and durability of the item shall be in no way reduced .
Lighting columns and brackets CCTV masts and cantilever masts shall be stored clear of the ground in such a way that contact with cement groundwater soil or ash or other deleterious material is prevented and Amendment May Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Road Lighting Columns and Brackets CCTV Masts and Cantilever Masts that water does not accumulate on any surfaces or inside sections .
Suitable packings shall be placed between the columnsmasts to allow a free passage of air and dispersion of water .
All rivets bolts nuts washers screws small plates and small articles generally shall be suitably packed and identified .
All such items shall be stored under cover .
Columns and masts shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
The door shall face the direction described in Appendices and .
Wall and wood pole mounted lighting brackets and fixtures shall be fixed as described in Appendix .
NF Amendment November Amendment May MANUAL OF CONTRACT DOCUMENTS FOR HIGHWAY WORKS VOLUME SPECIFICATION FOR HIGHWAY WORKS SERIES ELECTRICAL WORK FOR ROAD LIGHTING AND TRAFFIC SIGNS Contents Clause Title Page General Site Records Location of Lighting Units and Feeder Pillars Change of Lighting Arrangements Temporary Lighting Radio Interference Luminaires Lamps Photoelectric Control Units PECUs Shorting Plugs Dummy PECUs Time Switches Ballasts Ignitors for Discharge Lamps Starters for Fluorescent Lamps Capacitators Cutouts Fuse Holders Fuses and Miniature Circuit Breakers MCBs Base Compartment Fixing Arrangements Feeder Pillars Wiring Earthing Underground and Ducted Cable Cable Joints Armoured Cable Terminations Inspection and Testing to be Carried Out by the Contractor Preparation and Finish of Metal and Other Surfaces NATIONAL ALTERATIONS OF THE OVERSEEING ORGANISATIONS OF SCOTLAND WALES AND NORTHERN IRELAND Northern Ireland Clause Title Page NI General N denotes a Clause or Sample Appendix which has a substitute National Clause or Sample Appendix for one or more of the Overseeing Organisations of Scotland Wales or Northern Ireland .
Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Electrical Work for Road Lighting and Traffic Signs ELECTRICAL WORK FOR ROAD LIGHTING AND TRAFFIC SIGNS General Materials equipment and workmanship required under the Contract shall comply with BS Regulations for Electrical Installations IEE Wiring Regulations and the rules and regulations of the electricity supplier who provides the supply .
The installation and maintenance of electrical apparatus and cabling for road lighting and traffic signs shall comply with the quality management scheme detailed in Appendix A .
The Contractor shall take into account Engineering Recommendation G. Model Code of Practice covering Electrical Safety in the Planning Installation Commissioning and Maintenance of Public Lighting and Other Street Furniture .
Other relevant requirements are contained in the Electricity at Work Regulations .
The Contractor shall employ only competent personnel each of whom holds a Competent Persons Authorisation Certificate in accordance with the model form in Appendix B of the above document G. but modified as specified below which has been duly completed by the Contractor and authorised by a designated responsible person in the Authority or company as defined in Clause of G. all in accordance with Clause of G ..
The form of certificate as specified above shall be modified on page B of G. by insertion of the following after the space for Name and Address of Employer Name of Authority or Company In addition to the requirements of subClauses .
and .
of G. each Competent Person as defined in G. Clause shall be provided by the Contractor with not less than one copy of the above certificate duly completed and signed as Approved and such certificates shall be retained and be available at all times for inspection on the Works on request by the Overseeing Organisation .
A suitable Work Allocation Record shall be kept by the Contractor to enable works to be identified with the operatives and supervisors responsible for those works .
The following definitions shall apply i A Road Lighting Unit shall consist of the following as described in the Contract column bracket wall mounting Electrical Equipment as defined in iv below and wiring excluding electrical supply cable .
ii A Lit Sign Unit shall consist of a traffic sign requiring an electricity supply and Electrical Equipment and wiring as in i above .
iii The term Lighting Unit applies to both Road Lighting Units and Lit Sign Units .
iv Electrical Equipment for Lighting Units shall consist of the following as described in the Contract luminaires photoelectric control units PECUs shorting plugs lamps time switches ballasts ignitors starters capacitors cutouts fuses fuse holders and miniature circuit breakers MCBs .
v The network is the electrical distribution system installed by the Contractor from the electricity suppliers interface to the Lighting Units .
Each network shall operate on a single phase V to or three phase V to .
The Contractor shall provide facilities for the electricity supplier for service connections and commissioning of the network .
A dedicated feeder pillar shall be provided for the Overseeing Organisations network .
Supplies provided to electrical equipment and lighting units for third parties shall not be connected to the Overseeing Organisations network .
Where required and described in Appendix electrical isolation pillars shall be provided on the network at the maintenance boundaries between the Overseeing Organisation and third parties with the prior agreement of the Overseeing Organisation .
Site Records In accordance with the requirements of the Electricity at Work Regulations the Contractor shall on the completion of the electrical work provide a set of asinstalled drawings or transparencies showing as a minimum the position and identification mark including luminaire type modification status lamp setting lamp type and serial numbers of equipment requiring electrical connections ducts underground cables and joints and the type and depth of cables .
The Contractor shall also supply test certificates and Operation and Maintenance manuals .
Any additional requirements for records shall be as described in Appendix .
Amendment May Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Electrical Work for Road Lighting and Traffic Signs Locational measurements shall be taken of the underground equipment to the nearest mm from the nearest edge of the carriageway or fence line .
Offsets to cables and ducts shall be recorded at m intervals along their line .
Offsets shall be defined longitudinally by distance from a permanent highway feature a marker post or other suitable point .
The Contractor shall keep a daily record of the work in sufficient detail including the type and drum number of underground cables to enable site records to be completed .
A copy of the daily record shall be provided by the Contractor on the next working day for retention and use by the Overseeing Organisation .
The Contractor shall supply to the Overseeing Organisation one master and two prints of the asbuilt drawings of power supply arrangements for road lighting and traffic signal installations immediately upon completion of the installation work .
Location of Lighting Units and Feeder Pillars The position of Lighting Units and feeder pillars is described in Appendix .
The exact location will be agreed on site before commencement of any associated ground work .
The Contractor shall be responsible for recording the actual location .
In cases where the location of an item has been determined as indicated above and it is impossible because of underground obstruction to install the item then any excavation shall be backfilled and reinstated to its original condition .
Change of Lighting Arrangements No Lighting Unit shall be switched on or off dismantled resited replaced or removed without prior approval of the Overseeing Organisation .
Temporary Lighting The standard of temporary Lighting Units shall conform to the Clauses in this Series and Appendix .
The Contractor shall ensure that any temporary lighting he provides does not cause glare to traffic using any highway nor annoyance to occupants of surrounding property .
Radio Interference Electrical equipment shall be installed so that levels of radio interference given in BS EN are not exceeded .
Luminaires Where described in Appendix luminaires fitted with integral control gear shall have a fuse holder adjacent to the terminal block with a cartridge fuse protecting each set of control gear .
Luminaires for road lighting shall i comply with BS EN and be as described in Appendix ii be fitted in accordance with manufacturers instructions with no gap between the luminaire and the shoulder of any bracket arm iii for the luminaire optical system lamp housing have degree of protection rating IP to BS EN unless a higher rating is specified in Appendix iv for the luminaire control gear housing have a degree of protection rating IP to BS EN unless a higher rate is specified in Appendix v be fitted with a PECU socket located in the canopy unless otherwise specified in Appendix vi meet the structural design and aesthetic approval requirements of Clause .
Traffic sign luminaires shall comply with BS Appendix and the following i External lighting luminaires shall be correctly positioned to meet the luminance requirements of the sign .
ii Mean sign luminance shall be Category of BS unless otherwise stated in Appendix .
iii Impact strength shall be Category of BS unless otherwise stated in Appendix .
Lamps Lamps shall be compatible with the luminaires used .
Amendment May Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Electrical Work for Road Lighting and Traffic Signs The initial luminous flux of a lamp multiplied by the lamp flux maintenance factor for the projected lamp life shall be taken as its light output for road lighting design .
Lamps shall not be fitted until columns brackets and sign posts have been erected and the luminaires have been installed .
Lamps for Road Lighting Low pressure and high pressure sodium vapour lamps shall comply with BS EN .
Photoelectric Control Units PECUs Photoelectric control units PECUs shall comply with BS .
They shall have differential switch on switch off levels as described in Appendix .
They shall be designed where possible so that in the event of a fault occurring in the unit they cause the load to be switched on .
PECUs shall i be secured as appropriate to the a road lighting luminaire canopy b top of pole located close to feeder pillar c top of sign post d internally illuminated sign housing or e luminaire of externally illuminated sign ii include a delay device to prevent the lamp being switched in response to transient changes in light conditions iii be indelibly marked with the a manufacturers identification mark b model number and c switch on level iv be provided with a gasket or grommet to maintain the IP protection rating of the luminaire v be installed to the manufacturers instructions .
Where luminaires are a pair mounted on twin arm brackets unless otherwise specified in Appendix one luminaire shall be fitted with a PECU to control both luminaires and the other luminaire shall be fitted with a shorting plug .
The luminaire to be fitted with the shorting plug shall be as described in Appendix .
Where described in Appendix circuits shall be group switched as specified therein .
Shorting Plugs Dummy PECUs Shorting plugs shall i be interchangeable with PECUs ii have the line and load terminals permanently connected internally and iii be clearly distinguishable from PECUs .
Time Switches Time switches shall i be electrically or electronically driven ii have an electrically wound spring or battery reserve of not less than hours unless otherwise described in Appendix iii be equipped with a solar dial suitable for the geographic location or equivalent means of setting and seasonal adjustment iv have switched onoff periods per hours v be capable of switching a A inductive load current at the specified operating voltage of the network .
Ballasts Unless otherwise specified in Appendix ballasts shall comply with BS EN BS EN BS EN BS EN and BS EN or BS EN as appropriate and be tap selected to the specified operating voltage of the network .
The terminals shall be indelibly marked to indicate all wiring connections and operating voltages .
Ignitors for Discharge Lamps Unless otherwise specified in Appendix ignitors shall not be incorporated in the lamps .
Ignitor lamp and ballast shall be mutually compatible .
Starters for Fluorescent Lamps Starters shall comply with BS EN and shall be incorporated in the electrical equipment where applicable .
Amendment May Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Electrical Work for Road Lighting and Traffic Signs Capacitors Capacitors shall comply with BS EN and BS EN and be supplied complete with fixing clips discharge resistors and either sealedin cable tails or shrouded terminals .
Capacitors shall correct the lamp circuit power factor to not less than .
lagging .
Cutouts Fuse Holders Fuses and Miniature Circuit Breakers MCBs Cutouts fuse holders and MCBs shall have moulded dripproof housings to IP or above .
Cutouts shall be double pole and comply with BS .
Terminals shall be sufficient for the conductors as described in Appendix .
They shall be clearly labelled to differentiate circuits and phases .
When fuse holders are intended to be used as isolating devices special tools or protective measures shall not be necessary to extract them .
Fuse links shall comply with the requirements of either BS EN BS EN BS BS or BS .
They shall be of high breaking capacity type and be of a value specified in Appendix to protect the circuit .
Miniature circuit breakers shall be in accordance with BS EN and BS EN for use on the specified operating voltage of the network at single or three phase as appropriate .
Their short circuit current rating and type shall be as described in Appendix .
Thermal or magnetic excess current tripping devices shall be provided with a mechanism to ensure that the contact can not be held closed against a fault .
Where MCBs are intended to be used as isolating devices a lock off facility shall be provided .
Base Compartment Fixing Arrangements Electrical equipment described in Clauses to installed within the base compartment of columns or posts shall be positioned as described in Appendix and Appendix and fixed in accordance with manufacturers instructions with corrosion resistant fixing screws .
Feeder Pillars Feeder pillars shall be constructed in the materials described in Appendix .
They shall comply with IP of BS EN .
They shall include a full size back board of varnished marine plywood at least mm thick or other suitable nonhygroscopic material .
Alternatively a purposedesigned equipment mounting system may be used .
The entry for cables shall be via the root .
The distribution MCBs or fuse boards shall have sufficient spare capacity to accommodate at least one extra circuit .
One three phase spare way on a three phase distribution unit and one single phase spare way on a single phase distribution unit .
There shall be at least usable spare space on the back board .
The feeder pillar shall be fitted with a suitably rated to phase and neutral switch fuse to BS EN as appropriate for the supply cable .
The pillar doors shall be fitted with tamper proof locks all locks being identical in pattern and two sets of keys shall be provided .
All hinges and locks shall be of stainless steel unless otherwise stated in Appendix .
Distribution boards shall be provided with an external earth phase barriered and colour coded .
They shall be fitted with the same number of live and neutral bus bar terminals as there are outgoing circuits plus at least one spare way .
Circuit details and labelling shall be provided in each feeder pillar as described in Appendix .
The main earthing terminal in each feeder pillar shall be connected to earth as described in Appendix .
Unless otherwise stated in Appendix feeder pillars shall be mounted on a mm thick foundation of ST concrete in compliance with Clause .
After completion of the cabling the feeder pillar base shall be filled to mm below the door with rounded coarse aggregate conforming with Table of BS EN aggregate with a grading category of GC .
A durable warning sign indicating Danger Volts or Danger Volts as appropriate shall be fixed to the front of the pillar where applicable .
Wiring All wiring and installation of components within the column post or Lit Sign Unit shall be as described in Appendix and Appendix .
Amendment May Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Electrical Work for Road Lighting and Traffic Signs Wiring between the terminal block in the luminaire and the components in the base of the column or sign unit shall be PVC or XLPE insulated and sheathed single multicore or composite cable to BS of volt grade .
Phase and neutral copper conductors shall be not less than .
mm in crosssectional area except that where the vertical unsupported length does not exceed metres their crosssectional area may be reduced to .
mm .
Cable types and sizes shall be selected to ensure that the operation of the lighting systems shall not be adversely affected .
Where electronic ignitors are used with remote control gear single core cable shall be used .
The final connection between equipment mounted in the base compartment and the cut out shall be made using PVC or XLPE insulated and sheathed single core cable of a minimum crosssectional area of .
mm .
All cables shall be correctly colour coded throughout their length and labelled appropriately at the feeder pillar and the cutout .
Unsupported lengths of cable shall be kept to a minimum and shall not be allowed to come into contact with components by their freedom of movement .
Where there is more than one cable they shall be secured together at one metre intervals throughout the unsupported length .
Vertical cables within posts or columns shall be adequately supported along their length at the top of the cable run .
On double bracket columns the wiring shall connect PECU sockets in series unless otherwise specified in Appendix .
Wiring shall wherever possible be housed inside columns wall brackets and posts or stiffening members .
Where it is external it shall be as described in Appendix .
Connections between conduit and sign housings switchboxes and other components shall be waterproof and be smooth internally .
All unused cores in cables shall be cut to a minimum length long enough to connect to the furthest workingoff point within the unit and shall be cut to equal length .
The ends of the cores shall be tied together and sealed with selfamalgamating waterproof jointing tape .
The unused cores shall be coiled and strapped in a suitable unobtrusive position .
Earthing Circuit protective and equipotential conductors shall be installed as shown on the Drawings and shall be greenyellow PVC or XLPE insulated or sleeved .
Where bolted connections are required these conductors shall be terminated in accordance with manufacturers instructions in correctly sized purpose made lugs .
Such connections shall be made with non ferrous nuts bolts and washers .
A circuit protective conductor shall connect the earth terminal on each luminaire to the main earth terminal associated with the service cutout unit .
A separate circuit protective conductor of not less than .
mm crosssectional area shall connect all metal enclosures of all electrical components to the main earth terminal .
All extraneous conductive parts as described in BS and including doors to feeder pillars lighting columns and lit sign units shall be bonded to the main earth terminal using an equipotential bonding conductor of mm crosssectional area when the lighting unit is directly serviced by a TNCS supply .
Earth electrodes shall be installed where necessary .
All street lighting and other electrically supplied street furniture shall be earthed and bonded in compliance with BS .
Underground and Ducted Cable Cables shall have XLPE insulation and sheathing material coloured in accordance with National Joint Utilities Group publication Guidelines on the positioning and colour coding of utilities apparatus .
The identification of the conductors by colour shall be as per Table of BS and every core shall be identifiable by colour throughout its length .
The sheathing material shall be appropriate to the ground conditions in which it will be laid .
In ground that is liable at any time to become waterlogged then the sheathing material shall have an ASTM F tested maximum permeability of .
g.d R.H mm .
The cables shall be V grade with steel wire or aluminium strip armouring to BS or BS and all conductors shall be of equal cross sectional area .
The Contractor shall provide to the Overseeing Organisation evidence that each cable length delivered to Site has been tested at the place of manufacture and complies with the testing requirements of BS or BS according to the cable used .
Service ducts shall be self coloured in accordance with National Joint Utilities Group publication Guidelines on the positioning and colour coding of utilities apparatus and shall comply with Series and Appendix .
Cable covers for protection of underground cables shall comply with BS and shall be installed as described in Appendix .
When cable covers are installed marker tapes are not required .
Amendment May Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Electrical Work for Road Lighting and Traffic Signs Cable trenches shall be excavated to the lines described in Appendix and in accordance with Clause .
The depth of excavation shall be such that cables laid under verges footways or open ground shall have a minimum cover of mm and under carriageways of mm or mm below formation whichever is the greater depth .
Cables shall be laid without sharp bends and kinks and in accordance with any particular requirements in Appendix .
If required additional protection and support shall be provided as described in Appendix .
Where cables are laid across or within mm of filter drains they shall be contained within a duct .
The duct shall be surrounded with mm of ST concrete in compliance with Clause .
Cables following the same route shall unless otherwise described in Appendix occupy the same trench with a clearance of mm between the outer sheath of the cables .
Power supply cables other than those associated solely with the communications system shall not be installed within mm of signal or communication cables within mm of telecommunication cables or within mm of HV cables unless otherwise described in Appendix .
Cables shall only be laid when the ambient temperature is above C and the cable has been stored at a temperature greater than C for the previous hours .
Cables shall not be bent to an internal radius of less than times the external diameter of the cable or less than the radius recommended by the manufacturer whichever is greater .
Sufficient length of cable shall be allowed for its termination .
When termination does not proceed immediately following the installation of the cable its end shall be sealed against the ingress of moisture .
If such cable ends are buried their positions shall be marked with a permanent marker block consisting of a mm square x mm deep precast concrete block having a mark as described in Appendix indented into its top surface and recorded on the site records .
When duct or trough alignments differ from those of the trench the transition from one to the other shall not exceed horizontally or vertically .
Cables laid in trench shall unless otherwise specified in Appendix be both bedded on and covered by a mm thickness of lightly compacted graded sand or equivalent material passing a mm BS sieve .
Class material complying with Table and compacted to the requirements therein shall then be deposited to a thickness of mm prior to further backfilling in compliance with subClause of this Clause .
A yellow selfcoloured PVC or polythene plastic tape for cable marking not less than .
mm thick and mm wide with the wording Street Lighting Cables Below printed in black along the full length so as to occupy not less than of its available length and occurring at least at m intervals shall be laid approximately mm above any power supply cable .
Where several cables are laid in one trench only one line of marker tape need be installed .
Where cables are required to be laid in ducts the Contractor shall swab through the duct prior to drawing in the cables and a further draw rope .
On completion of cabling ducts shall be left with a draw rope in place and resealed with split plugs or suitable alternative material to adequately seal the ducts against the ingress of foreign matter .
Where cables are laid in troughs they shall be covered with sand or equivalent material passing a mm BS sieve up to the level of the cover .
Backfilling to cable trenches shall comply with Clause and to prevent damage by the ingress of foreign matter shall whenever practical be undertaken immediately after the specified operations preceding it have been completed .
The Contractor shall backfill above the cable marking tape duct or trough with Class or material complying with Table and compacted to the requirements therein except that he shall i spread and compact the material evenly without dislodging disturbing or damaging cables ducts or troughs and ii not use power rammers within mm of cables ducts or troughs .
Where described in Appendix buried cables shall be taken up and removed by the Contractor .
Conductors shall be disconnected from the equipment in which they are terminated the terminal screws and glands retightened and the cable withdrawn clear of the equipment .
Unused cores in cables shall be dealt with as described in subClause ..
Unless ducts terminate at cabinets or mounting posts or columns their ends shall be marked as described in Appendix with marker blocks complying with subClause of this Clause and location posts so that their location can be clearly identified without exploratory excavation .
Amendment May Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Electrical Work for Road Lighting and Traffic Signs Cable Joints Joints shall be made using jointing kits complying with BS which shall be installed in compliance with BS .
Prior to any cable laying the Contractor shall provide evidence to the Overseeing Organisation of the jointers competence in the use of the adopted cable joint kit .
A record shall be kept to enable cable joints to be identified with the jointer responsible for the work .
Cable joints shall be made where described in Appendix .
Additional joints shall not be provided on cables in duct or trough .
Approval is required from the Overseeing Organisation for additional joints using other fixing methods .
Jointing shall only be carried out when all materials to be used in the jointing are free from visible signs of moisture and joints shall be left protected from the weather during the curing period .
Joints shall be adequately supported at all times .
Backfilling shall not take place until the joint is fully completed in accordance with the manufacturers instructions including curing times and is in a fit condition to withstand any stresses which may be imposed upon it .
Where described in Appendix a cable joint marker block as described in subClause .
shall be placed over the cable joint and reference measurements taken from nearby permanent features .
All cable jointing shall be made under the protection of a specialist jointing tent .
Armoured Cable Terminations Cables shall be individually terminated and existing cables reterminated and secured at switches cutouts and other electrical apparatus by means of an armour securing clamp or an aluminium compression type gland complying with BS BS EN and a gland plate all as described in Appendix .
The armour securing clamp or compression gland and plate assembly shall incorporate at least one non ferrous earthing terminal .
All glands shall be shrouded overall with PVC sleeves and the conductor shall be terminated with cable lugs .
An antioxidant mastic or paste protective coating shall be applied to all aluminium conductor terminals where they are exposed to the atmosphere .
Phase connections shall be clearly indicated by a suitable colour marking system .
Inspection and Testing to be Carried Out by the Contractor Every Lighting Unit and network on completion and before being energised shall be inspected and tested to verify that the requirements of BS have been met .
The method of testing shall be such that no danger to persons or property or damage to equipment can occur even if the circuit tested is defective .
The following tests shall be carried out in the sequence indicated below and recorded on a Schedule in an appropriate format which shall be submitted to the Overseeing Organisation immediately after completion of all the tests including those on Lighting Units within each network i For Lighting Units b d f g apply .
ii For networks a b c e f g h j apply .
Standard methods of testing are given in BS .
a Cable sheath insulation test .
b Continuity of protective conductors including main and supplementary equipotential bonding .
c Earth electrode resistance .
d Insulation resistance at a test voltage of V to be not less than .
M ohm .
e Insulation resistance at a test voltage of V to be not less than M ohm .
f Insulation of the sitebuilt assemblies .
g Polarity including the continuity of circuit conductors .
h Earth fault loop impedance at every cutout .
j Operation of residual current devices .
The cable sheath insulation test shall be carried out using an insulation tester .
The insulation resistance test of V direct current shall be applied and maintained for not less than one minute between the continuous cable armouring or earth conductor and the general mass of earth .
The measured insulation resistance shall not fall below .
M ohm for the full duration of the test .
The cable sheath insulation test shall be carried out after the cable has been laid and the trench backfilled but before jointing has taken place .
Voltage readings shall be taken at each feeder pillar and at the terminals of the last currentusing equipment on each circuit with all equipment energised .
The Contractor shall give not less than days notice to the Overseeing Organisation of his intention to carry out any of the tests specified and the Overseeing Amendment May Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Electrical Work for Road Lighting and Traffic Signs Organisation shall be given the opportunity to witness such tests .
The Contractor shall furnish the Overseeing Organisation with two copies of a certificate verifying compliance with BS upon satisfactory completion of the inspection and tests .
The Contractor shall ensure that all test instruments have been calibrated and adjusted in accordance with BS EN ISO and come complete with calibration certificates to verify that BS EN ISO has been complied with .
Preparation and Finish of Metal and Other Surfaces Electrical components and ancillary equipment shall be prepared and finished in compliance with sub Clauses .
and .
F Amendment May Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Electrical Work for Road Lighting and Traffic Signs NF NI General Materials equipment and workmanship required under the Contract shall comply with BS Regulations for Electrical Installations the IEE Wiring Regulations and the rules and regulations of the electricity supplier who provides the supply .
The installation and maintenance of electrical apparatus and cabling for road lighting and traffic signs shall comply with the quality management scheme detailed in Appendix A .
The Contractor shall take into account Engineering Recommendation G. Model Code of Practice covering Electrical Safety in the Planning Installation Commissioning and Maintenance of Public Lighting and Other Street Furniture .
Other relevant requirements are contained in the Electricity at Work Regulations Northern Ireland .
The Contractor shall employ only competent personnel each of whom holds a Competent Persons Authorisation Certificate in accordance with the model form in Appendix B of the above document G. but modified as specified below which has been duly completed by the Contractor and authorised by a designated responsible person in the Authority or company as defined in Clause of G. all in accordance with Clause of G ..
The form of certificate as specified above shall be modified on page B of G. by insertion of the following after the space for Name and Address of Employer Name of Authority or Company In addition to the requirements of subClauses .
and .
of G. each Competent Person as defined in G. Clause shall be provided by the Contractor with not less than one copy of the above certificate duly completed and signed as Approved and such certificates shall be retained and be available at all times for inspection on the Works on request by the Overseeing Organisation .
A suitable Work Allocation Record shall be kept by the Contractor to enable works to be identified with the operatives and supervisors responsible for those works .
The following definitions shall apply i A Road Lighting Unit shall consist of the following as described in the Contract column bracket wall mounting Electrical Equipment as defined in iv below and wiring excluding electrical supply cable .
NATIONAL ALTERATIONS OF THE OVERSEEING ORGANISATION OF NORTHERN IRELAND ii A Lit Sign Unit shall consist of a traffic sign requiring an electricity supply and Electrical Equipment and wiring as in i above .
iii The term Lighting Unit applies to both Road Lighting Units and Lit Sign Units .
iv Electrical Equipment for Lighting Units shall consist of the following as described in the Contract luminaires photoelectric control units PECUs shorting plugs lamps time switches ballasts ignitors starters capacitors cutouts fuses fuse holders and miniature circuit breakers MCBs .
v The network is the electrical distribution system installed by the Contractor from the electricity suppliers interface to the Lighting Units .
Each network shall operate on a single phase V to or three phase V to .
The Contractor shall provide facilities for the electricity supplier for service connections and commissioning of the network .
Amendment May MANUAL OF CONTRACT DOCUMENTS FOR HIGHWAY WORKS VOLUME SPECIFICATION FOR HIGHWAY WORKS Amendment February SERIES HIGHWAY COMMUNICATIONS Contents Clause Title Page Introduction General Requirements Materials Equipment and Workmanship Site Records Provision of Cabinets Cables and Ancillary Items Cables Cable Installation Installation of Cabinets and Signal Posts Gantries for Motorway Signals Installation of Telephones Marker Tape Installation of Ancillary Items Jointing and Termination of Multipair Communications Cables Cable Connectors Termination of Optical Fibre Communication Cables Termination and Jointing of Power Supply Cables for Communications Earthing Bonding and Lightning Protection Cable Testing Labelling and Numbering Not Used Removal and Resiting of Existing Equipment Enforcement and Other Systems Detector Systems Trial Pits Safeguarding the Existing Highway Communications Network The Inspection and Testing of Electrical Installations Clause Title Page Cable Installation at Transmission Stations Modifications to Equipment and Circuitry associated with Existing Cabinets Temporary Emergency Telephones Cable Ducts General Installation of Ducts General Chambers for Highway Communications Cables Proving and Testing of Ducts Closed Circuit Television Provision of the Telecommunications Services Electricity Connections NATIONAL ALTERATIONS OF THE OVERSEEING ORGANISATIONS OF SCOTLAND WALES AND NORTHERN IRELAND Contract specific Additional Requirements A and Substitute Requirements S may be included for contracts where the Overseeing Organisation is not Highways England or its successor .
Where required these will be issued by Scotland Transport Scotland th Floor Buchanan House Port Dundas Road Glasgow G HF .
Wales The Welsh Government Transport Department Cathays Park Cardiff CF NQ .
Northern Ireland Director of Engineering The Department for Infrastructure Clarence Court Adelaide Street Belfast BT GB .
The Overseeing Organisation may also issue an initial list of Alternative RequirementsDepartures .
Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Highway Communications HIGHWAY COMMUNICATIONS Introduction Where this document contains specification requirements it must be read in conjunction with the general requirements in Series and and with all other Series relevant to the specification for the particular works to be undertaken .
Where this document contains design requirements it must be read in conjunction with the general requirements in GD DMRB .. GD DMRB .. and GD DMRB .. and with all other DMRB documents relevant to the design for the particular works to be undertaken .
Where this document contains technology requirements that fall within the scope of the TSS Plans Registry it must be read in conjunction with the general requirements in TR TR and TR and with all other TSSR Documents relevant to the particular works to be undertaken .
Where there is a requirement in this document for compliance with any part of a British Standard technical specification or quality mark that requirement may be met by compliance with GD .
Where there is a requirement in this document for compliance with any part of a British Standard technical specification or quality mark that requirement may be met by compliance with Series of the specification .
Where there is a requirement in this document for compliance with any part of a British Standard technical specification or quality mark that requirement may be met by compliance with TR .
A safety risk assessment shall be carried out in accordance with GD .
Where the design falls within the scope of the Equality Act an equality impact assessment shall be carried out by the designer .
Where a product falls within the scope of a harmonised standard the contractor shall provide the declaration of performance and manufacturers installation instructions for the product as part of the safety file .
Series applies to the Strategic Road Network i.e .
both to all purpose trunk roads and motorways .
Unless otherwise stated in contract specific Appendix a Telecommunications Services Provider is responsible for the highway communications transmission network from a Service Delivery Point SDP where roadside technology interface with that network to the SDP in the Overseeing Organisations central facilities such as the Regional Control Centres .
Where the Contractor is responsible for the highway communications transmission network the requirements placed on the Contractor shall be as set out within amended or substitute Clauses to this Series with detail of the works contained in contract specific Appendices and .
The Contractor is responsible for all cabling termination and linking downstream or otherwise termed beyond the SDP where such cabling is required by the installation but not directly linked to the SDP .
The Contractor shall install all communications infrastructure comprising but not limited to ducts chambers hardstandings transmission station bases cabinet bases including any castin frames that may be provided by the Telecommunications Services Provider access infrastructure and protection infrastructure as stated in contract specific Appendix .
With exception of cables and equipment provided by the Telecommunications Services Provider the Contractor shall supply and install all cables cable terminations and equipment as stated in contract specific Appendix .
This shall include all power cabling and local communications cables that are installed beyond the SDP and any other local cables required by the installed equipment and systems .
The telecommunications services and all related equipment necessary to provide the telecommunications services shall be as scheduled in contract specific Appendix .
These shall be installed by the Telecommunications Services Provider into infrastructure constructed by the Contractor unless the contract specific Appendix defines otherwise .
Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Highway Communications General Requirements The Contractor is responsible for the supply of all equipment except that scheduled in contract specific Appendix as to be supplied by the Overseeing Organisation .
The procurement responsibilities in respect of the telecommunications services to be provided by the Telecommunications Services Provider shall be as set out within the contract .
Details of the telecommunications services to be provided by the Telecommunications Services Provider and any specific instructions relating to the provision of the telecommunications services shall be as stated in contract specific Appendix .
The Contractor shall comply with the requirements of the Telecommunications Services Provider as stated in contract specific Appendix .
The Contractor shall confirm and amend as appropriate with the Telecommunications Services Provider details of the telecommunications services contained in the contract specific Appendix .
The Contractor shall establish and maintain a programme of interfacing liaison planning and coordination with the Telecommunications Services Provider taking account of the requirements within contract specific Appendix throughout the period of performing the works as necessary to permit the Telecommunication Services Provider to provide the telecommunications services .
In response to requirements set out in contract specific Appendix the Contractor shall contribute to and provide support to the Telecommunications Services Provider in the establishment joint periodic review and update of an interface agreement comprising a memorandum of understanding between the Contractor and the Telecommunications Services Provider .
This interface agreement covering the period of the works shall as a minimum capture the joint requirements in respect of i the scope and geographic coverage of the interface agreement ii a description of the contractual and operational interfaces including current and future plans iii contacts and rolesresponsibilities including fault reporting handling and escalation iv requirements in respect of meetings and written and electronic communications v requirements in respect of authorisations and the provision of notices vi specific access boundaries and access protocols vii definition of responsibilities for maintenance including any shared maintenance responsibilities viii the booking and provision of temporary traffic management ix a schedule and details of special requirements including references to sitespecific special requirements such as site health and safety requirements and permits to work x any additional requirements within contract specific Appendix .
The Contractor shall organise all operations and works so that the highways communications installation the provision of services by the Telecommunications Services Provider is completed tested and the test results accepted by the Overseeing Organisation or in accordance with contract specific Appendix by the date or dates specified in contract specific Appendix .
The Contractor shall allow time in the programme for any remedial works repairs and retesting which may be required to be completed satisfactorily before the date or dates specified in contract specific Appendix .
The Contractor shall include within the programme key dates as appropriate to the work relating to the Telecommunications Services Providers activities including any sectional completion .
This programme shall include dates for i installation and removal of telecommunications bypasses ii deactivation and reactivation of existing telecommunications services iii removal of existing telecommunications equipment and infrastructure Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Highway Communications iv setting out of telecommunications infrastructure at site prior to the start of construction activities v completion of telecommunications infrastructure including periods for inspection and acceptance vi the availability of cabinets for the installation of cabling or equipment vii installation of the Contractors cables viii installation of the Telecommunications Services Providers cabinets cables and equipment based on information provided by the Telecommunications Services Provider ix activation of new telecommunications services x provision of temporary traffic management by the Contractor for the Telecommunications Services Provider xi dates for any additional activity types including notice and mobilisation periods and constraints regarding the Telecommunications Services Providers activities contained within contract specific Appendix .
The location of existing buried services and infrastructure shall be detected confirmed marked on the ground and protected in accordance with the relevant special requirements contained in the contract documents and any additional requirements detailed in contract specific Appendix and contract specific Appendix in the case of buried services and infrastructure owned operated or maintained by the Telecommunications Services Provider .
In respect of buried services and infrastructure owned operated or maintained by the Telecommunications Services Provider the Contractor shall arrange for the location and marking of buried services and infrastructure and shall subsequently comply with the requirements for excavation in the proximity of such buried services and infrastructure in accordance with contract specific Appendix .
The location of buried cables shall be detected confirmed and protected in accordance with the relevant special requirements of name of statutory undertaker or similar notice or instruction issued by a statutory undertaker and any additional requirements determined by the Telecommunications Services Provider in accordance with contract specific Appendix .
Prior to the start of telecommunications infrastructure construction activities the Contractor shall comply with any requirements of the Telecommunications Services Provider contained in contract specific Appendix in respect of the setting out of communications infrastructure that will be handed over upon the completion of the works for the Telecommunications Services Provider to maintain .
Mitigation methods to prevent metal theft shall be contained in contract specific Appendix as agreed with the Overseeing Organisation .
Materials Equipment and Workmanship All Electrical works shall comply with BS Requirements for Electrical Installations IET wiring Regulations and the rules and regulations of the electricity Distribution Network Operator DNO .
Site Records The Contractor shall keep a record on drawings or as specified in contract specific Appendix of all work carried out as it proceeds .
Copies shall be kept available for the use of the Overseeing Organisation and during the Contract at intervals shown in the programme .
The compilation of records drawings and other information specified in contract specific Appendix including timing of submissions shall be coordinated with and reflect the requirements of the Telecommunications Services Provider as specified in contract specific Appendix .
Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Highway Communications Upon completion of the works the Contractor shall produce record drawings in accordance with MCH and contract specific Appendix which shall be issued to the Overseeing Organisation and the Telecommunications Services Provider for record purposes .
The following information shall be recorded on the drawings i Duct locations including depth number and size of ducts and duct material .
ii Cable chamber locations including type depth incoming and outgoing ducts subducts type of chamber cover and details of cable joints within .
iii Cabinet positions and type .
iv Cabinet cabinet function and cable chamber references .
v Other than those cables installed by the Telecommunications Services Provider the cable routes including cable lengths .
Additionally within a ducted network the number and type of cable allocated to each duct and the length of each cable unless the Telecommunication Services Provider is to provide the cable route .
vi Other than those cables installed by the Telecommunications Services Provider the cable size type and drum number .
vii Power supply installations .
viii SDP interfaces with Telecommunications Services Provider .
ix Signals .
x Telephones .
xi Sheath repair and cable joint positions .
xii Any additional requirements stated in contract specific Appendix and contract specific Appendix .
The drawings shall be submitted for the approval of the Overseeing Organisation at weekly intervals during the contract .
Position measurements both horizontal and vertical shall be taken of the underground equipment to the nearest mm .
The interval and method of recording including any datum shall be agreed with the Overseeing Organisation and shall be in accordance with the requirements of contract specific Appendix .
The Contractor shall keep records of the work in sufficient detail including type and drum number of installed cables to enable site records to be completed .
A copy of the records shall be provided by the Contractor for retention and use by the Overseeing Organisation .
The Contractor shall keep record sheets for ducts subducts and chambers which shall indicate details of all cables installed by the Contractor ironwork and plugs or seals installed and tests undertaken .
For all cables installed by the Contractor each drum of cable delivered to the site will have quality inspection certificates attached to each side flange in accordance with the relevant cable specification and shall be CE marked .
The Contractor shall ensure that the certificate relates to the cable to which it is attached .
The certificate shall be given to the Overseeing Organisation prior to the installation of cable .
The Contractor shall produce handover records in accordance with MCH .
Record information shall include details of any test equipment used to produce test results .
For each set of results details of the test equipment manufacturer model serial number and confirmation that the test equipment is within its calibration period as recommended by the manufacturer at the time of performing the test .
Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Highway Communications Provision of Cabinets Cables and Ancillary Items Cabinets cables and ancillary items including cabinet bases cabinet fittings equipment mounting posts and similar items may be supplied by the Overseeing Organisation or the Telecommunications Services Provider to the Contractor .
These along with the organisation responsible for delivery installation and maintenance will be listed in contract specific Appendix .
The Contractor shall supply a programme of required delivery dates and other information in accordance with the Overseeing Organisations requirements given in contract specific Appendix .
The notice period required for this programme of required equipment and delivery dates is given in contract specific Appendix .
This programme shall be reviewed and revised by the Contractor to suit the progress of the works and any revised programme and associated schedule of equipment submitted to the Overseeing Organisation in accordance with their requirements given in contract specific Appendix .
The Contractor shall provide a dry and heated store to ensure that the equipment is stored in the manner recommended by the manufacturer as described in contract specific Appendix .
The Contractor shall be responsible for examining the equipment and cable from the Overseeing Organisation and shall report any defects within five working days to the Overseeing Organisation .
On completion of the works all unused Overseeing Organisation equipment cables and cable drums shall be set aside .
The ownership status of these items from this point and any instructions for the Contractor to deliver these items to the Overseeing Organisation or make them available for collection by the Overseeing Organisation shall be as set out in contract specific Appendix .
Cables Communications cables installed by the Contractor shall meet the requirements of TRH or as detailed in contract specific Appendix .
Power cables for communications systems shall meet the requirements of TRH or as detailed in contract specific Appendix .
On receipt and at various stages before laying armoured cables the Contractor shall ensure that no damage has been sustained by the cable which will compromise the integrity of the sheath .
The Contractor shall also determine that the quantity is sufficient based on the optimum cut lengths and based on the drum quantities and also ensuring minimum wastage .
The location in the ground of cable lengths by reference to their drum numbers shall be kept with the daily records .
The cable end shall be cut terminated and the ends sealed to prevent the ingress of water to IPX .
Cable Installation The approximate location of roadside technology cabinets SDPs Contractor installed cables ducts and trenches are described in contract specific Appendix and contract specific Appendix .
The Contractor and as appropriate the Overseeing Organisation or Telecommunications Services Provider shall agree the exact location of these items before commencement of any associated works including groundworks .
Cables shall be stored and laid in accordance with manufacturers written instructions .
Cable occupancy for multiple cables installed in the same duct shall allow for installation and future cable replacement .
The cross sectional area of all cables shall not exceed of the inner cross sectional area of the duct or as stated in contract specific Appendix .
Sufficient length of cable shall be allowed for its correct termination .
When termination does not proceed immediately following the installation of the cable the cable ends shall be sealed against the ingress of water to IPX .
Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Highway Communications The schedule of existing and new ducts is contained in contract specific Appendix .
The Contractor shall verify that all ducts are prepared and proven suitable for cable installation in accordance with Clause prior to the drawing in of cable including where the Telecommunications Services Providers cables are to be installed by the Telecommunications Services Provider .
Requirements for the preparation and proving of new or existing ducts and subducts for the installation of cables by the Telecommunications Services Provider are specified in contract specific Appendix .
The requirement for the Contractor to install certain cables prior to the installation of cables by the Telecommunications Services Provider is specified in contract specific Appendix .
On completion of the cable installation a draw cord in accordance with subClause .
shall remain secured in each duct .
Where specified in contract specific Appendix or as determined by survey including surveying using CCTV during construction works existing ducts may be considered by the Contractor or Telecommunications Services Provider as unsuitable to install new cables .
An unsuitable duct in this context shall be determined through the failure of a mandrel test in accordance with Manual of Contract Documents for Highway Works Volume Highway Construction Details or the presence of visible sharp edges or discontinuities along the length of the duct .
In such circumstances the existing duct may be sleeved or subducted with a single Highdensity polyethylene HDPE continuous subduct acting as a sleeve for the installation of multiple cables or multiple HDPE continuous subducts in accordance with subClause .
with one subduct for each cable .
The diameter of each cable including pulling arrangement shall not exceed of the cross sectional area of the inner diameter of the subduct .
Subducts shall be retained within the chamber at each end of the continuous run of subducts using a clamping plate or duct plug or other proprietary duct sealing system that can easily be removed excluding expanding foam that retains the subducts to the outer duct at each chamber .
No cable shall be left exposed at the end of any work period .
Any cable stolen andor vandalised shall be replaced in its entirety at the Contractors expense .
Shall any damage occur to a cable during installation however slight the Contractor shall identify and record the damage and report it to the Overseeing Organisation .
The damage shall be repaired with cable accessories meeting BS EN in accordance with the manufacturers instructions and at the Contractors expense .
Every cable shall be temporarily or permanently labelled immediately following its installation .
Temporarily labels shall be subsequently replaced with a permanent label prior to the completion of the works .
Cables shall be handled and installed in accordance with the manufacturers instructions .
The installation of cables shall not damage the cable being installed existing cables in the duct or the duct itself .
Where permitted by the manufacturer a biodegradable lubricant may be used .
Unless specifically identified in contract specific Appendix and agreed by the owner of the service duct sharing of individual service ducts for power and data services shall not be permitted .
Where cables pass through intermediate chambers the Contractor shall immediately after installation label each cable with the destination of the cable joint chamber or equipment reference as appropriate mm from the entry and exit points of the chamber .
The Contractor shall take account of the requirements of the Telecommunications Services Provider as specified in contract specific Appendix when determining the order of the installation of cables within ducts and subducts .
The sections of optical fibre cables that are visible inside chambers shall additionally be marked at intervals of mm along their length inside each chamber .
The marking shall be mm wide yellow PVC adhesive tape or alternative fit for the purpose .
Cables shall not be bent to an internal radius less than the manufacturers recommendations taking account of the tensile load present in the cable during installation .
Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Highway Communications Cables shall be secured to the chamber walls using fixings recommended by the manufacturer and kept within the permitted bend radius .
Cable management shall be laid such that it maximises the available space allowing for future cabling of the remaining ducts .
The Contractor shall provide cable management fixings to chambers in accordance with the Telecommunications Services Provider as stated in contract specific Appendix .
On completion of cabling within chambers including cabling installed by the Telecommunications Services Provider the ducts shall be resealed with purpose made mechanical duct plugs or other proprietary duct sealing system that can easily be removed excluding expanding foam installed in compliance with subClause ..
The locations and responsibility for the provision and installation of duct plugs or duct sealing systems other than by the Contractor shall be as stated in contract specific Appendix .
The cables shall be looped around within the chambers and secured to the cable support steelwork .
Unless stated otherwise in contract specific Appendix all types of cable installed on gantries shall be provided with continuous protection against mechanical damage or vandalism from ground level to a point a minimum of .
m above the adjacent ground level within a covered cable tray or by other means .
Other means shall be as specified in contract specific Appendix .
In addition cables installed on gantries in those areas that are accessible from walkways or ladders shall be protected from mechanical damage or vandalism by the provision of covered cable tray or other means unless stated otherwise in contract specific Appendix .
Where specified in contract specific Appendix cables shall also be protected against environmental damage e.g .
through prolonged exposure to ultraviolet radiation .
Where cables are to be installed across gantries by the Telecommunications Services Provider then the Contractor shall be responsible for the final design and installation of the cable management and cable containment solution to satisfy any requirements in respect of design proving and testing as specified in contract specific Appendix .
The depth of excavation shall be such that directly buried cables laid under verges footways or open ground shall have a minimum cover of mm and under carriageways of mm or mm below formation whichever is the greater depth .
Trench detail does not apply to cables laid under carriageways or below formation .
For trenches requiring topsoiling grass seeding andor turfing shall be as described in Clauses and shall be placed in the top mm of the cable trench unless otherwise specified in contract specific Appendix .
With the agreement of the Overseeing Organisation where minimum cover can not be achieved cables can be laid in accordance with contract specific Appendix .
Cables laid in trenches shall be both bedded on and covered by a mm thickness of sand complying with subClause .
ii Class C material complying with Table and compacted to those requirements .
An additional mm of sand shall be deposited to reach a total cover thickness of mm prior to final backfilling .
Cables shall be laid in sand bedding and surround material in accordance with Clause to a depth of mm .
Class C material in accordance with Clause and Table shall be laid on top of the sand to a depth of mm .
Class material in accordance with Clause and Table shall be laid on top of the Class C material to a depth of mm .
Where shared ownership of cables applies in the one trench the requirements of contract specific Appendix shall take precedence .
Backfilling shall be in accordance with Clause with material Class complying with Table and compacted to the requirements therein .
The material shall be spread and compacted evenly without dislodging disturbing or damaging cables ducts or troughs .
Vibrating compaction equipment shall not be used within mm of cables ducts or troughs .
For trenches requiring topsoiling grass seeding andor turfing shall be as described in Clauses and shall be placed in the top mm of the cable trench unless otherwise specified in contract specific Appendix .
Cable marker tape complying with Clause shall be laid in the cable trench .
Where several cables are laid in one trench one line of marker tape shall be installed for each mm of trench width .
Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Highway Communications Before installing any cables the ducts shall be free from foreign matter and detritus .
When cables are required to be laid in ducts the Contractor shall swab through the duct prior to drawing in the cables and a further draw cord .
The ducts shall be sealed with a draw cord in place following cabling and resealed with split plugs or other proprietary duct sealing system that can easily be removed excluding expanding foam to adequately seal the ducts against the ingress of foreign matter .
Where cables are installed in existing troughs they shall either as defined in contract specific Appendix be installed in subducts suitably retaining in position or be covered with sand up to the level underside or seating of the cover whichever is the lower .
The sand shall pass as mm size test sieve as specified in BS EN .
The Telecommunications Services Providers use of armoured communications cables shall be limited by design rules where specified in contract specific Appendix .
Unless otherwise stated in contract specific Appendix longitudinal armoured cables that are to be installed by the Telecommunications Services Provider shall be installed within sacrificial ducting installed by the Contractor .
Longitudinal cables shall generally be run parallel to the fence line or edge of the hardshoulder .
Transverse cables shall run at right angles to the carriageway .
Subject to the approval of the Overseeing Organisation transverse cables installed diagonally with respect to the carriageway may be accepted .
All armoured communications cables exceeding metres in length shall be provided with buried loops to allow for retermination following a cabinet knockdown .
These loops shall be installed at each end of the cable immediately adjacent to the entry and exit ducts at cabinet locations and the location included on the record drawings .
When duct or trough alignments differ from those of the trench the transition from one to the other shall not exceed horizontally or vertically .
When more than one cable is laid in a trench they shall be accommodated in one horizontal layer in order to locate them in the future .
This applies to both communications and power cables as long as the power cables are associated solely with communications equipment .
The minimum separation between cables shall be such that safety and heat transfer as defined in BS or interference as defined in BS EN from adjacent cables will not affect the cable or the safety and functionality of the equipment the cable is connecting both communications and power and as stated in Appendix .
The separation between a cable and the wall of the trench shall be such that the cable shall not be damaged during infill or future ground movement .
Following completion of work unused cable ends shall be sealed according to the manufacturers written instructions to comply with IPX .
Installed cables including any cable joints shall have a design life of not less than years unless otherwise stated in contract specific Appendix .
Installation of Cabinets and Signal Posts Where described in contract specific Appendix the Contractor shall construct hardstanding areas and foundations incorporating plinths for cabinets and signal posts .
Plinths shall make allowance for ducts to enter cabinets from beneath .
Hardstanding areas shall be constructed these shall extend at least mm plus the depth of any raised plinth away from each opening within a face of a cabinet or mm in respect of signal posts fence line cabinets and gantry cable interfaces to the ducted network requiring access for maintenance .
Individual hardstanding areas within groups of cabinets and posts shall be interconnected by paths of minimum mm width .
Hardstanding areas shall be continuous between opposing cabinet or post doors where the spacing between the door faces is up to .
m. Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Highway Communications Hardstanding areas shall be constructed such that any water drains away from cabinet plinths .
Cabinet plinths shall be constructed and cabinets installed such that cabinet doors shall be capable of opening and closing without being fouled by the paved area or each other .
The cabinets and signal posts shall be mounted on plinths using the fixings provided .
Plinths shall be constructed such that the orientation of the cabinets shall allow the hinged doors to open towards the carriageway unless otherwise required by space or fouling constraints .
The Contractor shall construct hardstanding areas and foundations incorporating plinths for cabinets for use by the Telecommunications Services Provider as described in contract specific Appendix .
The responsibilities for the provision of castin frames erection of cabinets labelling installation of cables and sealing of cabinet bases and ducts shall be as described in contract specific Appendix .
The orientation spacing and clearance around cabinets and cabinet doors shall comply with the Telecommunication Services Provider in contract specific Appendix .
After the completion of all cable terminations and testing the cabinet bases and ducts shall be sealed so that the ingress protection IP rating of the cabinet rodent protection and ability to add and replace cables without damage is maintained following the manufacturers guidelines .
The Contractor shall keep the interior of cabinets free from moisture and debris .
The Contractor shall ensure prior to the installation of equipment that for cabinets requiring power for environmental conditioning that power is applied to the cabinets and is subsequently maintained and that the cabinets are clean and dry .
Subsequently the Contractor shall ensure that the doors of each cabinet are closed and properly secured after the installation of equipment in the cabinet and after the completion of any other work .
Entryexit ducts to cabinets on a ducted network shall be sealed using duct plugs in compliance with subClause .
or other proprietary duct sealing system that can easily be removed to prevent the ingress of water and soil gravel etc .
The use of expanding foam is prohibited .
The locations and responsibility for the provision and installation of sealing systems other than by the Contractor shall be as stated in contract specific Appendix .
Where cabinets are situated in groups they shall be located in a consistent sequence as described in contract specific Appendix .
The Contractor shall install additional security measures to deter unauthorised access to cabinets including cabinets operated and maintained by the Telecommunications Services Provider as detailed in contract specific Appendix .
The Contractor shall install secure cabinets for enforcement systems as detailed in contract specific Appendix .
When installing a sign in an area where a concrete safety barrier is present it is permissible to install signal posts on top of the concrete safety barrier providing the mounting height as required by the Traffic Signs Regulations and General Directions TSRGD is maintained and the access door is accessible as defined in contract specific Appendix .
Where power or communications interface cabinets are installed within the Overseeing Organisations boundary fence line to permit access by a third party to the interface the cabinet and the associated communications infrastructure shall be wholly contained within the Overseeing Organisations land .
Gantries for Motorway Signals Details of cables and electrical equipment for traffic signs including variable message signs and matrix signals on gantries are given in contract specific Appendix .
Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Highway Communications Installation of Telephones The Contractor shall construct a hard standing area and install the telephone base as described in contract specific Appendix .
Access for disabled users shall be provided .
An area of hard standing shall be provided adjacent to the telephone .
It shall be suitable to allow a person in a wheelchair to access the telephone .
A further hard standing where required in accordance with Clause of sufficient working area shall be installed behind the telephone to provide a flat level surface for maintenance purposes .
Where not protected by a safety barrier the telephone holding down arrangements shall pass the requirements of EN when tested in accordance with speed class and nonenergy absorbing structures occupant safety level .
Spare cabling as stated in contract specific Appendix shall be provided at ERT locations to allow for ERT knockdowns .
A cable remake loop should be retained in the cable pit moulding or nearby underground chamber .
Unless otherwise stated where new cable is being installed a minimum m length remake loop of unhindered cable shall be retained in the cable pit moulding .
Each telephone column instrument module and header module shall be orientated such that i locations where the telephone site is not protected by safety barrier the instrument module door is on the downstream of traffic side of the unit meaning that the road user is facing oncoming traffic while using the telephone ii locations where a safety barrier is present that the instrument module door faces the kerb to allow the road user to access the telephone .
Where telephones are installed on existing highways they shall be covered with purpose made Not in Use covers until they have been commissioned and are available for use by the public .
Where solar panel powered telephones are used the bag used shall ensure that it does not prevent the charging of the telephone .
Telephones shall be aligned within of the vertical .
The Telecommunications Services Provider SDP shall be within the telephone column or instrument module or as agreed by the Overseeing Organisation as defined in the contract specific Appendix .
An underplinth duct shall be used for all wired plinth installations .
In ducted systems a suitable proprietary sealed joint shall be used to connect the underplinth duct to the ducted network .
The underplinth duct shall also be sealed against water ingress by suitable means at its junction with the cable pit moulding .
Duct to extend minimum of mm beyond edge of plinth for sites without existing ducts .
Marker Tape All cables and ducts installed underground shall have their position indicated by the use of marker tape in accordance with BS EN that is detectable from above ground .
Marker tape shall be buried in the trench above the cableduct .
The wording on the marker tape shall read CAUTION COMMUNICATIONS POWER CABLES BELOW .
The marker tape shall be compliant to EN .
Marker tape shall be yellow in colour with wording in black .
Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Highway Communications Installation of Ancillary Items Unless otherwise specified in contract specific Appendix all boxes shall be mounted onto the baseboards or frames of cabinets the knockouts for cable access removed as necessary and holes bushed or fitted with cable glands .
Termination frames shall be fitted within the boxes where appropriate .
Distributors shall be mounted onto the baseboards of posts .
Distributors and electrical switches shall be mounted at the gantry or as described in contract specific Appendix .
Power switchgear and protective devices shall be installed in power supply cabinets and other locations as described in contract specific Appendix .
The Contractor shall provide and install connectors for the termination of cables as detailed in contract specific Appendix .
All terminations and link cabling from the Telecommunication Services Providers SDP to the equipment installed within the cabinet shall be the responsibility of the Contractor .
Where the Telecommunications Services Providers active equipment is installed in a cabinet a minimum of two separately protected circuit ways from the main distribution point within the cabinet shall be provided for the sole use by the Telecommunications Services Provider .
Sufficient spare cable terminations and entry points to allow the fitting of mm cable glands or the provision of outlet sockets to IEC Part sheet F shall be provided to permit the Telecommunications Services Provider to make connections to the power supply .
Unless stated otherwise in contract specific Appendix protection devices on each of the circuit ways shall be A type B miniature circuit breakers that meet the relevant essential requirements for overcurrent protection under the Low Voltage Directive .
Jointing and Termination of Multipair Communications Cables Unless described otherwise in contract specific Appendix jointing and termination of multipair communications cables up to the SDP shall be undertaken by the Telecommunications Services Provider .
The Contractor shall be responsible for jointing and termination of multipair communications cables beyond the SDP including detector systems and cables to gantry mounted equipment .
The Contractor shall provide space and fixing points to accommodate the Telecommunications Services Providers terminations including terminations up to the SDP .
Cable joints provided by the Contractor except within inroad detector systems will only be permitted at the locations described in contract specific Appendix .
Where cable joints house a SDP then these joints shall be located and readily accessible as determined by the Contractors consultation with both the Telecommunications Services Provider and the Overseeing Organisations Technology Maintenance Services Provider .
The responsibility for providing the cable joint that houses an SDP shall be the Telecommunications Services Provider unless otherwise specified in contract specific Appendix .
Cable joints in road detector systems shall comply with Clause .
All jointing and termination shall be carried out in accordance with manufacturers instructions .
All cable conductors shall be protected from strain prior to their termination .
Cables shall be dressed neatly in accordance to the manufacturers instructions .
The Contractor shall ensure that the lay of the cable is maintained up to the termination position without exerting undue stress on the conductors and terminals .
All conductor pairs shall be identified by means of a numbered plastic sleeve collar or other method as agreed with the Overseeing Organisation .
Termination of cable using insulation displacement connectors shall be undertaken in accordance with the manufacturers instructions using any specialist tools necessary .
The Contractor shall provide the requisite tools .
Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Highway Communications Within cabinets links shall be terminated in terminal blocks complying with subClause ..
The conductors shall be secured in terminals in accordance with the manufacturers written instructions .
Links shall be tied and supported and of sufficient length to facilitate routine maintenance and allow for subsequent re terminations .
The correct pairing shall be maintained at all times .
The Contractor shall clearly identify links by using collets at either end .
Where the Contractor is required as scheduled in contract specific Appendix to terminate cables into cabinets containing operational circuitry the Contractor shall give two weeks notice or as specified in contract specific Appendix whichever is the longer to allow the opportunity for a representative of the Overseeing Organisations Technology Maintenance Services Provider to attend each site to oversee all work within the cabinet for which the Contractor is responsible .
i The Contractor shall also comply with the Telecommunications Services Providers requirements for notification and attendance by the Telecommunications Services Provider where necessary in accordance with the requirements specified in contract specific Appendix .
This work shall not compromise operational systems .
For cable joints installed by the Contractor Cable Joint Enclosures CJE shall be installed in chambers and Above Ground Joints AGJ or other cable joint type in cabinets as described in contract specific Appendix .
If cable joints are to be located in the same chamber as a Telecommunications Services Providers cable joints then the accommodation requirements shall be as per contract specific Appendix .
At rural post mounted signal sites or other locations where the accommodation of a suitable SDP connection is not possible or readily accessible within the equipment housing the Contractor shall provide sufficient space within a segregated compartment for the Telecommunications Services Provider to install a CJE to house an SDP and to facilitate the isolation and testing of RS and other communication circuits .
Cable continuity kits to ensure the integrity of protective and screening conductors shall be installed on every cable except in the case of screening conductors where specified otherwise in contract specific Appendix .
Links shall be installed and connected within cabinets and connection boxes with jumper leads installed between connection boxes wherever two are installed within one cabinet using as appropriate the insulated conductors of multipair cable with its outer sheath armour and inner sheath removed .
The leads shall be of sufficient length to facilitate routine maintenance and allow for several subsequent reterminations and shall not obstruct any accessory in the connection box .
The Contractor shall maintain multipair colour coding so that colour code duplication does not occur .
The correct pairing shall be maintained at all times .
Cable Connectors Where shown on the contract specific drawings cables shall be terminated using insulation displacement connectors that are designed to accommodate the conductor and outer insulation sizes of the cables being terminated and the number of conductors terminated into a single terminal .
Unless otherwise shown on the contract specific drawings the Contractor shall use terminal blocks that meet the relevant essential requirements for copper conductors under the Low Voltage Directive with an impulse withstand voltage rating of at least kV .
Terminals shall employ either screwtype or screwlesstype clamping arrangements to retain individual conductors without any direct screw to conductor contact .
Terminal blocks shall be compatible with the stranding and size of conductors being terminated and shall incorporate or be fitted with indelible identification labels to uniquely identify each terminal way .
The requirements for ethernet and optical patch cords shall be as detailed in contract specific Appendix .
Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Highway Communications Termination of Optical Fibre Communication Cables Unless otherwise stated in contract specific Appendix the Telecommunications Services Provider shall be responsible for the termination of optical fibre cables up to the SDP and the Contractor shall be responsible for the termination of optical fibre cables beyond the SDP .
SubClauses .
to give the requirements where the Contractor is required to execute optical fibre cable jointing .
The Contractor shall be responsible for the safe disposal of any optical fibre cable waste created by the Contractor .
Cables shall be terminated in such a way to prevent damage due to the occurrence of moisture to IPX .
The fibres shall be fusion spliced and protected from mechanical strain .
Copper conductors in composite optical fibre cables shall be secured in terminals in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
Termination and Jointing of Power Supply Cables for Communications The method and responsibility of the termination of power supply cables for communications shall be described in contract specific Appendix .
Cable joints in power cables shall be made where described in contract specific Appendix .
Additional joints shall not be permitted to overcome inaccuracies in measurement or cable damage .
Cable joints shall not be situated in a duct or trough .
Heatshrink or coldshrink type joints shall not be used .
Cables greater in size than mm shall not be terminated within cabinets unless the cabinet is specifically designed to terminate a large sized cable as identified in contract specific Appendix .
As specified in contract specific Appendix or on the cable schematic contract specific drawings the cable shall be jointed to a length of mm or mm cable manufactured to specification TRH part .
The mm or mm cable shall be terminated within the cabinet .
An underground cable reduction joint shall be installed at the change in cable size .
Within a ducted cable network the cable joint shall be made in the adjacent chamber or for a direct buried network near to the cabinet cable entry duct .
The type of chamber shall be as shown on the contract specific drawings .
Details of the reduction joint shall be displayed within the cabinet where the jointed cable is terminated .
Power supply cable joints including reduction joints for cables of cross section greater than mm are not permitted within chambers containing longitudinal below ground cable joints .
Power supply cable joints for cables of cross section greater than mm shall be housed in separate chambers as shown on the contract specific drawings .
Details of the locations of chambers that will contain power supply cable joints are provided in contract specific Appendix .
Power cables shall be supported and routed in a manner that does not impede access to the telecommunications infrastructure nor create a hazard when using the access steps where present .
Joints shall be made using a suitable jointing system in which all components are mutually compatible and adequate for the type of cables to be jointed .
Joints shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturers written instructions .
Jointing shall only be carried out when all the materials used in the joint are free from visible signs of moisture .
Joints shall be protected from water frost direct sunlight and extremes of temperature during the curing period for the joint materials in accordance with the manufacturers instructions .
Joints shall be adequately supported at all times .
Backfilling shall comply with this specification and shall not take place until the joint is completely cured and able to withstand any stresses which may be imposed on it .
Where a new power supply is being provided to existing equipment or an existing power supply is modified which will result in a disruption to or the loss of existing facilities signals CCTV etc .
written authority shall be obtained by the Contractor from the Overseeing Organisation and Telecommunications Services Provider as appropriate who will advise their individual stakeholders of the anticipated duration so that the effects of the Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Highway Communications power supply disruption can be assessed .
The Contractor shall provide at least two weeks notice in writing of all planned disruptions to the Overseeing Organisation and take into account any other notice periods that are in place as stated in contract specific Appendix .
The Contractor shall undertake all necessary preparatory work to ensure that the period of disruption is minimised .
Where described in contract specific Appendix at each existing gantry the Contractor shall carry out tests to confirm that the lighting supply and the communications power supply are fed from the same phase .
Where tests show the two supplies are not in phase the Contractor shall isolate the lighting power supply at the power isolation cabinet from the mains supply and carry out the remedial works necessary to bring both supplies into the same phase as agreed with the Overseeing Organisation .
Cable joint markers complying with the requirements of duct end markers subClause .
but with the letters CJ replacing the letter D shall be provided and installed to indicate the position of below ground joints .
Alternatively the letters CJ can be added to the chamber label described in subClause ..
Temporary markers shall be provided if necessary to ensure the accurate positioning of permanent markers alternatively an active marker may be provided .
Earthing Bonding and Lightning Protection Lightning protection and power supply earthing and the labelling of such earthing arrangements shall be provided for all metalwork including gantries and cantilever structures in accordance with BS EN BS and BS .
Specific lightning protection and earthing requirements are defined in contract specific Appendix .
The area of gland plates or boxes which will come in contact with a cable gland shall be cleaned of all paint and corrosion before a cable gland is fitted .
Once the gland is fitted exposed metalwork of gland plates or boxes shall be suitably treated to protect against corrosion .
All connections to bolted fixtures shall be made through crimped type lugs .
Adjacent cabinets less than two metres distant shall be effectively equipotentially bonded together in accordance with BS .
Lightning protection for gantries and other structures such as camera masts shall be provided as described in contract specific Appendix .
Gantry lightning protection system components shall comply with BS EN .
Unless otherwise stated in contract specific Appendix the Telecommunications Services Provider shall provide lightning protection components to protect the telecommunications services delivered to the SDP .
The Contractor shall provide space and fixing points to accommodate the Telecommunications Services Providers lightning protection components .
The Contractor shall provide suitable earthing point or earthing arrangements in accordance with contract specific Appendix for use by the Telecommunications Services Provider to provide earthing for the Telecommunications Services Providers lightning protection components .
Cable Testing The Contractor shall undertake tests on cables as detailed in contract specific Appendix .
The Telecommunications Services Provider shall undertake tests on all cables installed by the Telecommunications Services Provider .
All cables shall be tested by the Contractor post installation in accordance with specification MCG for armoured or nonarmoured copper cables or to the manufacturers specifications for continuity and insulation as appropriate .
The cable sections and scope of tests shall be as described in contract specific Appendix .
Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Highway Communications Three copies of all cable test results shall be supplied to the Overseeing Organisation on the completion of each test .
All test instruments requiring calibration shall have a current calibration certificate copies of which shall be available at the time of testing .
The Contractor shall give at least two weeks advance notice in writing to the Overseeing Organisation of any cable testing .
In the event of the Contractor opening up a trench or drawing further cables through a duct after cables have been installed and tested then all cables in the trench or duct shall be retested .
Any damage identified by this test shall be rectified by the Contractor and the cables then retested .
After testing the Contractor shall locate and expose any damaged outer sheath and shall report all such damage to the Overseeing Organisation .
The Overseeing Organisation shall be informed prior to the commencement of any operation to expose damaged cable and shall be allowed to be in attendance during the operation .
The Contractor will be informed by the Overseeing Organisation whether a sheath repair shall be permitted .
For cables installed on behalf of the Telecommunications Services Provider the criteria to determine whether a cable sheath repair is permitted or other action required shall be as defined in contract specific Appendix .
Should sheath repairs be permitted the Contractor shall provide and install cable joint markers complying with subClause .. No tests shall be carried out until the cable trench has been backfilled and the ground above the cable reinstated and the cable ends have been installed unterminated in the respective termination cabinets .
Labelling and Numbering Gantries Cable Joint Enclosures CJE Above Ground Joints AGJ cable chambers cabinets signal posts and telephones shall be numbered and cables shall be labelled in accordance with the details described in contract specific Appendix .
Labels shall be as specified in contract specific Appendix .
Labels shall be fitted so as not to compromise the IP rating of the cabinet or enclosure .
The label material and fixing method shall be capable of lasting the design life of the equipment it is fitted to .
The Contractor shall reference individual telecommunications services in correspondence and site records using the telecommunications service and SDP labelling information as provided and installed by the Telecommunications Services Provider and as stated in contract specific Appendix .
Cables shall not be left unlabelled at any time temporary labelling may be applied to facilitate testing and termination prior to the implementation of permanent labelling .
All cabinets and enclosures containing power distribution and control equipment shall be labelled to indicate the source of supply destination and user where this is a third party e.g .
Telecommunications Services Provider circuit arrangements and test details in accordance with regulations .
Refer to contract specific Appendix for examples of such labels .
Where the Contractor carries out modification work to existing cabinets new labels shall be fitted in accordance with contract specific Appendix .
The Contractor shall submit to the Overseeing Organisation for acceptance proposals for cabinet labels .
The Contractor shall allow seven working days for acceptance of the proposals .
Cabinets enclosures and distribution equipment containing power shall be fitted with warning labels as per the requirements in BS .
The Contractor shall refer to TSRGD for proportions and forms of numbers and letters for all external labels .
External cabinet identification labels shall contain details of marker post number carriageway designation letter and internal equipment or cabinet function identification .
Cabinet identification references shall be consistent across a scheme and with references used within record information and drawings .
Text shall be upper case Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Highway Communications and readable when standing adjacent to the cabinet .
Cabinet labels shall be installed on the side of the cabinets facing the carriageway .
At Electrical Interface EI locations the label shall be fitted on each cabinet door due to orientation of the cabinet in the fence line .
External labels for post signal posts and target boards shall have numbers and upper case letters .
The label shall be fitted as near to the bottom of the post as possible and viewed from the carriageway .
The label can be fitted to the door if the signal obscures the bottom of the post e.g .
when an Advanced Motorway Indicator AMI is fitted .
External labels for gantries shall be fitted to each gantry leg facing traffic m above road level .
For telephone installations although the door may face the carriageway or downstream of the traffic direction depending on installation the header module shall always be oriented so that external labels face upstream and downstream .
All cables shall be clearly and unambiguously marked to show details of cable destinations .
At CJEs the cable shall be marked immediately adjacent to the CJE .
At AGJs the cable shall be marked immediately prior to the glanding of the cable before its entry into the terminal housing .
Where the Overseeing Organisations cables are terminated into cabinets or locations for which the Telecommunications Services Provider is solely responsible for maintaining then the Contractor shall identify the Overseeing Organisations cables in accordance with the requirements in contract specific Appendix .
Not Used Removal and Resiting of Existing Equipment Existing communications equipment and infrastructure shall be removed or resited where required in the works as detailed in contract specific Appendix .
No equipment shall be removed or cables disconnected or cut until agreed by either the Overseeing Organisation or Telecommunications Services Provider as appropriate .
The Contractor shall coordinate and schedule the deactivation of telecommunications services resiting of equipment reactivation of telecommunications services and removal of telecommunications services and associated equipment and infrastructure as identified in contract specific Appendix in accordance with a programme agreed with the Telecommunications Services Provider as and in compliance with the requirements of contract specific Appendix .
Existing highway communications equipment as detailed in contract specific Appendix shall be removed in a manner that would enable its reuse and stored by the Contractor as directed by the Overseeing Organisation .
Existing equipment operated by the Telecommunications Services Provider shall be removed by the Telecommunications Services Provider .
Cables and other infrastructure maintained by the Telecommunications Services Provider shall as scheduled in contract specific Appendix be removed or broken out and disposed of by the Contractor in compliance with Clause .
Where the Telecommunications Services Provider is required to attend site and remove equipment no longer required or that requires resiting the notice period set out in contract specific Appendix shall be given by the Contractor to the Telecommunications Services Provider .
Conductors shall be disconnected from the equipment in which they are terminated the terminal screws and glands retightened and the cable withdrawn clear of the equipment .
Items of equipment to be resited shall be unbolted from their plinths or supports together with their holding down bolts stored and resited as described in contract specific Appendix .
Plinths and concrete foundations shall be broken out and disposed of in compliance with Clause .
Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Highway Communications Cables including those to be removed shall be located and marked at ground level by the Telecommunications Services Provider where these are maintained by the Telecommunications Services Provider or the Contractor in respect of other cables throughout their routes .
The marking shall clearly distinguish the cables to be removed from other cables .
The Contractor or Telecommunications Services Provider as appropriate shall also excavate trial holes to expose these cables at the predetermined locations detailed in contract specific Appendix together with the method of cable removal .
Where described in contract specific Appendix the Contractor or Telecommunications Services Provider as appropriate shall excavate that part of the cable route carefully by hand .
Where the cable to be removed is sharing a trench with other existing cables on completion of removal all stones and contaminated material shall be removed from the cable trench clean sand and warning tape shall be provided and installed and the cable trench shall then be reinstated in compliance with Clause the Contractor or Telecommunications Services Provider as appropriate shall then remove and dispose of all unsuitable and surplus material in compliance with Clause .
Cable in ducts shall be carefully withdrawn .
The Contractor or Telecommunications Services Provider as appropriate shall also fulfil the requirements for removal of duct seal resealing and reroping .
Cables in troughs shall be carefully segregated and lifted out .
The Contractor or Telecommunications Services Provider as appropriate shall also remove all trough lids all debris from troughs and all sand from troughs .
On completion the Contractor or Telecommunications Services Provider as appropriate shall provide and install clean sand reinstate all trough lids and provide and install new trough lids to replace any breakages caused during the preceding operation .
The sites of cabinets plinths and cable trenches shall be reinstated to the level of the surrounding ground unless otherwise described in contract specific Appendix .
The disposal of any waste shall be in accordance to the Contractors waste management plan .
Enforcement and Other Systems Secure equipment cabinets required for enforcement systems shall be installed in accordance with Clause .
The Contractor shall construct foundations for enforcement system camera masts as described in contract specific Appendix .
Mountings cable tray and other ancillary items for enforcement system equipment shall be installed as described in contract specific Appendix .
Detector Systems The installation of detector systems shall comply with the requirements of contract specific Appendix .
Where detector loops are specified detector loop installation and testing shall comply with Clause .
Other detection systems shall comply with the installation requirements detailed in contract specific Appendix .
Any cabinet equipped for detector system use shall be installed in accordance with Clause .
Loop feeder cables shall be terminated as described in contract specific Appendix .
The loop feeders shall be terminated in terminals complying with Clause secured to the equipment frame .
Each feeder shall have mm of cable coiled in the bottom of the cabinet to allow subsequent reterminations .
Each feeder shall be individually identified by means of a label .
Trial Pits Trial pits shall be excavated as described in contract specific Appendix .
Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Highway Communications Safeguarding the Existing Highway Communications Network The highway communications network forms part of the national network operated by the Telecommunications Services Provider and consequently any damage to equipment or infrastructure within the works area including power supplies to the Telecommunications Services Providers equipment cabinets can have severe consequences to the system as a whole .
The Contractor shall coordinate with the Telecommunications Services Provider a programme of works that supports the installation by the Telecommunications Services Provider of measures to maintain service continuity throughout the affected area there may be more than one affected areas within the works boundary and to implement temporary communications arrangements that allow the Contract to complete each phase of the works whilst minimising the disruption to the national communications network and local communications services .
The requirements for implementing measures to maintain service continuity and for giving notice to the Telecommunications Services Provider to implement these measures and other temporary communications services are specified in contract specific Appendix .
Any provisional agreements in respect of network bypass cables shall be scheduled in contract specific Appendix .
Telecommunications services to be suspended deactivated pending activation at a later date re located or removed by the Telecommunications Services Provider shall be as scheduled against location and equipment type in contract specific Appendix .
Telecommunications services to be maintained using temporary arrangements are to be implemented by the Telecommunications Services Provider .
In each case the Contractor shall give notice for service suspension relocation service removal and the implementation of temporary communications arrangements in accordance with contract specific Appendix .
The Contractor shall give at least three weeks written notice of the proposed change to the network which shall have been identified in advance in the Contractors programme .
Any such proposal shall be subject to the agreement of the Overseeing Organisation and the Telecommunications Services Provider .
The Contractor shall allow representatives of the Overseeing Organisation and the Telecommunications Services Provider access to all equipment within the works which has been identified as operational .
The Contractor shall comply with the Telecommunications Services Providers requirements for access to install maintain and remove operational equipment and telecommunications bypasses as specified in contract specific Appendix .
The Contractor shall recognise the importance of the need for the Telecommunications Services Provider to gain access for the maintenance and repair of temporary communications arrangements particularly those that support the national communications network .
The Contractor shall accommodate and prioritise requests made by the Telecommunications Services Provider to enable the repair of temporary communications arrangements to restore the Telecommunications Services Providers services .
Areas within the works boundary where the nature of the works performed has a potential impact upon the integrity of the national communications network and local telecommunications services shall be jointly identified and agreed between the Contractor the Overseeing Organisation and the Telecommunications Services Provider .
Measures to maintain service continuity throughout the affected areas including any routes for the implementation of network bypass cables and to implement temporary communications arrangements shall be agreed between the Contractor the Overseeing Organisation and the Telecommunications Services Provider .
The Contractor shall be responsible for the provision of cable protection for network bypass cables and other temporary communications cables .
The requirements for protection shall be as detailed in contract specific Appendix .
The locations for the installation of cable protection and the measures to be applied over the entire length of network bypass cables shall be agreed with the Telecommunications Services Provider taking account of the following .
i The risk of damage due to construction work activities including plant crossings .
ii The risk of damage due to vandalism or theft e.g .
close exposure to public footpaths or known areas of vandal damagetheft .
Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Highway Communications iii The close proximity to running traffic lanes and where the cables can only be located at a low level where they directly face running traffic e.g .
close proximity to running traffic with cables installed near to ground level risk of damage by stones or other debris .
iv The installation of protection infrastructure at carriageway crossings on overbridges or gantries where this enables cable installation without the need to implement significant lane closures .
All of the above requirements shall apply to the full extent of network bypass cables and other temporary cabling including where they extend beyond the works boundary .
Where in accordance with criteria set out within contract specific Appendix construction works are to be performed in close proximity to the Telecommunications Services Providers buried services and infrastructure then the Contractor shall provide notice to the Telecommunications Services Provider to attend site during periods of relevant construction work .
The Contractor shall provide construction method statements and a programme of these works to the Telecommunications Services Provider .
No construction works in close proximity to the Telecommunications Services Providers buried services and infrastructure shall be performed by the Contractor without either i the attendance at site by the Telecommunications Services Provider or ii the written consent of the Telecommunications Services Provider .
The Inspection and Testing of Electrical Installations The Contractor shall carry out the inspection and testing of electrical installations in accordance with BS .
The Contractor shall provide inspection and completion certificates to the Overseeing Organisation in accordance with BS and to notice periods determined in contract specific Appendix .
Where the inspection tests show that an existing electrical installation or earthing arrangement is not determined as safe in accordance with the requirements of BS the Contractor shall immediately notify the Overseeing Organisation giving full details of noncompliance .
The Contractor shall not undertake any work on such an installation until written instructions have been issued by the Overseeing Organisation .
Electrical inspection records test results and electrical installation certificates shall form part of the records produced in compliance with Clause .
In the case where the Telecommunications Services provider shares power with the Overseeing Organisation the Telecommunications Services Provider shall unless specified otherwise within contract specific Appendix be responsible for the inspection and testing of the electrical installation from the point that the supply becomes for the sole use of the Telecommunications Services Provider .
Cable Installation at Transmission Stations Cables shall be installed into and terminated within transmission station buildings and transmission cabinets by the Telecommunications Services Provider .
Unless detailed otherwise in contract specific Appendix work shall not be undertaken in transmission station buildings or transmission cabinets by the Contractor without the approval of the Telecommunications Services Provider .
The work shall be identified in the Contractors programme and agreed with the Telecommunications Services Provider .
The Contractor shall comply with the requirements for access to transmission stations and transmission cabinets to perform work as specified in contract specific Appendix .
The Contractor shall ensure that no unplanned disruption occurs to any operational systems .
Modifications to Equipment and Circuitry associated with Existing Cabinets The Contractor shall carry out modifications to equipment and circuitry associated with existing cabinets as described in contract specific Appendix .
Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Highway Communications The Contractor shall prior to laying any cable to the cabinets locate including as appropriate scheduling the Telecommunications Services Provider to attend site and to mark buried services and infrastructure the position of all cabling exposing all cables that are not in ducts by careful hand excavation and identify the type size and designation of each cable .
Where appropriate the Contractor shall undertake the following i remove retain for reuse and reinstall the cabinet duct seals and base pea gravel ii remove and relay any hardstanding iii excavate to expose cable remake loop and excavate cable routes iv reroute cable to gain sufficient lengths for the proposed modification v reinstate cable trenches vi break open and reseal resin filled base vii disconnect and reconnect undo existing gland and regland including the provision of new ducts seals gland assemblies and cable termination ancillaries where required viii withdraw and reinstall cables at cabinet base .
Any work required to operational circuitry shall be undertaken by a representative of the Overseeing Organisation or Telecommunications Services Provider as appropriate .
The Contractor shall give at least two weeks written notice and take into account any other notice periods that are in place as stated in contract specific Appendix of the need for such work and shall in respect of work to be performed by the Telecommunications Services Provider comply with the requirements stated within contract specific Appendix .
Temporary Emergency Telephones Where described in contract specific Appendix Temporary Emergency Telephones shall be installed for use by the public when it would otherwise be necessary for the public to cross either a live traffic lane or the works to use the nearest working Emergency Roadside Telephone .
When not in use Temporary Emergency Telephones shall either be removed or covered up .
The direction of Temporary Emergency Telephones shall be indicated in a manner agreed by the Overseeing Organisation at metre intervals .
The location and orientation of Temporary Emergency Telephones shall be agreed with the Overseeing Organisation .
When Temporary Emergency Telephones are required they shall be supplied by the Overseeing Organisation or the Contractor as stated and detailed in contract specific Appendix .
The use of Global System for Mobile Communications GSM or other wirelessly connected Temporary Emergency Telephones may be agreed by the Overseeing Organisation as detailed in contract specific Appendix .
Locations for cable for Temporary Emergency Telephones shall be identified by the Contractor and the Telecommunications Services Provider .
Providing the location of a Temporary Emergency Telephone is within close proximity within metre and on the same side of the carriageway of an existing Emergency Roadside Telephone location the Telecommunications Services Provider shall be responsible for the installation and termination of temporary cables to support local telecommunications services in accordance with the requirements stated in contract specific Appendix .
The Contractor shall be responsible for the additional cost of works performed by the Telecommunications Services Provider where the location of any Temporary Emergency Telephone is not in close proximity of an existing Emergency Roadside Telephone .
The Contractor shall give at least two weeks written notice of the need for connections and disconnections from the live communications network by the Overseeing Organisation or Telecommunications Services Provider and shall in respect of work to be performed by the Telecommunications Services Provider comply with the requirements stated within contract specific Appendix .
Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Highway Communications The Contractor shall install place in position maintain cover up uncover reposition recable and remove Temporary Emergency Telephones and associated work as necessitated by the progress of the works and upon completion of the works return them to the Overseeing Organisation .
Maintenance of Temporary Emergency Telephones connected onto the network shall only be undertaken by a representative of the Overseeing Organisation or Telecommunications Services Provider as appropriate .
The Contractor shall allow full access arrangements to representatives of the Overseeing Organisation and the Telecommunications Services Provider .
Cable Ducts General The term cable duct is used in this Series to describe the ducts subducts or conduits used for installing the highway communications cable network .
The ducts shall comply with this Series and any other requirements described in contract specific Appendix .
The Contractor shall be responsible for ensuring that all components used within the duct are compatible with each other and with existing ducts .
With the exception of the cases listed in this subClause below cable ducts shall comply with the general essential requirements for cable management systems and for buried conduit systems under the Low Voltage Directive with a type N compression and impact resistance rating .
The specification of cable ducts for the following cases shall be listed in the contract specific Appendix in respect of i ducts in transverse crossings installed using trenchless installation techniques ii ducts located within or adjacent to filter drains refer to subClause .
iii ducts specified by the Telecommunications Services Provider in accordance of the Telecommunications Services Providers standards for communications infrastructure The Telecommunications Services Providers Duct Standards to meet the Telecommunications Services Providers requirements in contract specific Appendix .
Subducts shall be either i continuous HDPE subducts with a Standard Dimension Ratio SDR of or less installed between chambers individual subducts may be joined by low external profile mechanical or welded couplers welded couplers shall not present an internal bead of subduct material that locally reduces the internal diameter of the subduct either by more than or has a bead height of greater than mm or ii sectional HDPE or uPVC subducts preinstalled into HDPE or uPVC outer main ducts as a modular arrangement using internal spacers and keyed coupler and duct sealing arrangements to prevent misalignment of subducts and to preserve their colour coding between chambers outer main duct and inner subduct seals to provide protection to at least IP for the subduct or iii continuous or sectional HDPE subducts moulded directly within an outer main duct with keyed coupler arrangements and duct sealing to prevent misalignment of subducts outer main duct and inner subduct seals to provide protection to at least IP for the subduct individual subducts where exposed shall be uniquely identifiable within chambers .
For cable ducts identified in contract specific Appendix to be handed over to the Telecommunications Services Provider upon completion of the works the Contractor shall be free to elect whether the ducts to be handed over comply with the Overseeing Organisations standards or whether the ducts comply with The Telecommunications Services Providers duct standards .
Whichever duct standards are used the standard shall be applied consistently throughout the works .
Chambers shall be positioned at all locations where there is a change to a ducting standard and the ducting systems are not directly compatible by the application of standard duct couplers to achieve a smooth and ridge free internal bore .
Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Highway Communications Where the Contractor elects to use The Telecommunications Services Providers duct standards then The Telecommunications Services Providers duct standards shall in the case of a change or conflict in requirements have precedence over requirements stated in Clauses and otherwise the requirements of these Clauses remain .
The internal bore shall be smooth and even throughout the length of the duct and the duct joints to ensure the outer sheath of the cable is not damaged during installation .
The use of ducts that are designed to be laid to a small bend radius and do not present a smooth bore for the installation of cables shall not be used as ducts for longitudinal cable routes .
Use of such ducts shall only be permitted to avoid unforeseen obstacles within local ducts routes .
Two sections of such ducts each up to m in length separated by at least m shall be permitted in a local duct route .
With the exception of ducts in transverse crossings installed using trenchless installation techniques and unless otherwise described in contract specific Appendix the sizes of the ducts shall be as shown on the contract specific drawings .
The internal diameter of standard sized ducts shall be mm mm or mm .
Nonstandard sized ducts may be used where a duct is used to sleeve an existing duct or subducts are installed .
Ducts shall not be bent to internal radius less than the manufacturers requirements .
The internal radius of installed ducts shall be such that the performance of the cable and duct is safeguarded following cable pulling .
With the exception of ducts in transverse crossings installed using trenchless techniques and subducts the external wall of the ducts shall be selfcoloured purple in accordance with National Joint Utilities Group publication Guidelines on the Positioning and Colour Coding of Utilities Apparatus .
The materials from which the duct and fittings are made shall be treated so that they are protected from the deleterious effects of short term exposure to ultra violet light and shall be resistant to degradation by acids alkalis common chemicals bacteria fungi and moulds occurring in soils .
The Contractor shall protect the duct and fittings on site in accordance with the manufacturers written instructions .
Each duct shall be fitted with a pigmented rotproof material draw cord of kN breaking load and having a design life of not less than years the ends of which shall be made fast within the chambers to which the duct is terminated .
Draw cords shall be secured within a chamber .
Draw cords shall not be knotted within ducts .
Ducts in transverse crossings installed without a sleeve using directional drilling techniques conforming to the requirements of Series shall consist of four mm internal diameter Medium Density Polyethylene PE pipes conforming to BS EN and any other requirements described in contract specific Appendix .
i Where stated in contract specific Appendix the number of ducts may be reduced .
The pipe bores shall be smooth and even and terminated in a chamber at each end .
The ducts shall be securely bundled together and installed through the crossing with a minimum cover above the top of the combined bundle of eight times the reamed diameter of the bored hole .
Each duct shall be tested after installation in accordance with the requirements of Clause .
The duct network shall be protected against the ingress of water to IPX and gases .
This shall be achieved by the ducts having suitable joints and plugs or other proprietary duct sealing system that can easily be removed excluding expanding foam at the entry to all chambers and cabinets .
In addition the Telecommunications Services Providers requirements for duct plugs sealing systems and sealing of ducts shall be as stated in contract specific Appendix .
The minimum longitudinal duct provision is one communications duct of at least mm diameter fitted with four subducts complying with subClause .
and of a subduct size to accommodate the Telecommunications Services Providers cables .
Ducts for local communications cables may either be incorporated as subducts within a single longitudinal duct or as separate local ducts .
Local ducts and separate ducts for power cables installed in the same trench as ducts for longitudinal communications cables need not be continuous throughout the duct network .
Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Highway Communications The Contractor shall provide and install in the end of every duct and subduct and at every point of entry to chambers reusable duct plugs or other proprietary duct sealing system that can easily be removed excluding expanding foam to achieve ingress protection rating of IP on completion of mandrel and air pressure tests .
When cable is installed within the ducts the sealing system will be replaced with a plug preformed with the appropriate cable port configuration or other proprietary duct sealing system that can easily be removed excluding expanding foam to maintain the ingress protection rating of IP after cable installation .
The responsibility for the provision and installation of duct plugs or duct sealing systems shall be as stated in contract specific Appendix .
After installation ducting shall not cause damage to cables when they are drawn through .
Ducts shall be supplied with purpose made spacers and strapping in accordance with the manufacturers requirements .
The strapping shall bind the ducts tightly in the specified formation during installation backfilling and for the whole life of the duct .
Strapping shall be spaced longitudinally to ensure a duct separation of no more than mm .
Installation of Ducts General Ducts shall be laid at the levels and lines shown on the contract specific drawings and schedules contained in contract specific Appendix .
Longitudinal ducts shall generally be run parallel to the edge of the adjacent carriageway unless otherwise shown on the contract specific drawings .
Transverse ducts shall cross at right angles to the carriageway unless otherwise shown on the contract specific drawings .
Transverse duct crossings of existing carriageways shall be installed in accordance with the requirements of Series MCHW The exact location of the ducts shall be agreed with the Overseeing Organisation before the commencement of any associated works .
Excavations shall comply with Clauses and .
Immediately following the excavation of the trench the ducts shall be jointed and laid on the bedding material or prepared trench where the standard of duct installation does not require the duct to be laid on a bedding material .
The deviation in level from that specified at any point shall not exceed mm .
Ducts and fittings shall be examined for damage and the joint surfaces and components shall be cleaned immediately before laying .
Measures shall be taken to prevent soil or other material from entering ducts and to anchor each duct to prevent movement before the work is complete .
Ducts other than those in structures using conduits shall be installed in trenches .
The trenches and the fill shall be such that compaction either during installation or after by use e.g .
a vehicle shall not crush or damage the ducting or distort its route such that pulling a cable through will damage the cabling .
The bed and surround for ducts shall be granular material to Clause ..
This shall provide a minimum depth of cover to the uppermost duct of mm .
The minimum cover depth of overall backfill in nonhardened verges shall be mm in respect of longitudinal ducts and mm in respect of local ducts the balance comprising of Class material in accordance with Clause and Table .
Alternative installations or where minimum cover can not be achieved shall be as stated in contract specific Appendix subject to agreement with the Overseeing Organisation and Telecommunications Services Provider .
Transverse crossing ducts shall be installed in granular material to Clause .i .
For shallow transverse crossing ducts with between mm and mm cover the fill above the ducts shall be replaced with ST concrete to Clause a minimum depth of mm above the ducts .
Backfill shall be in accordance with Clause .
For installation of transverse ducts on existing highways a line and level drainage survey shall be conducted in order to determine the appropriate depths of the ducts to avoid groundwater .
Duct joints shall have the following characteristics i The joint and duct shall be free from burrs and other irregularities that may cause damage to cables when they are drawn through the duct .
ii The joint shall hold and maintain the ducts in axial alignment during installation and afterwards when subjected to foreseeable ground movement in accordance with the manufacturers written instructions .
Requirements for duct joints are defined in contract specific Appendix .
Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Highway Communications iii The joint shall not compromise the duct network protection of ingress protection rating IP .
Cable duct configurations and any alternative or additional requirements for bedding haunching surround backfilling surfacing or reinstatement shall be as in contract specific Appendix .
Backfilling shall be undertaken immediately after the required operations preceding it have been completed .
Trenches for the cable ducts shown shall be backfilled with Class lower trench fill material as described in subClause of this Clause and subClause .. For duct trenches requiring topsoiling grass seeding andor turfing shall be as described in Clauses and shall be placed in the top mm of the cable duct trench unless otherwise specified in contract specific Appendix .
In order to prevent damage from other works all trenched ducts shall have marker tape laid within the trench excavation at a depth of mm or at the Class topsoil interface whichever is the greater depth .
Prior to the interruption or extension of the cable duct network the Contractor shall confirm the operational and future status of cables within the duct route to be interrupted .
Where there is a requirement to permanently remove or pull back cables within a duct route the Contractor shall liaise with the Telecommunications Services Provider and coordinate the works with them .
The Contractor shall comply with Telecommunications Services Providers requirements for interruption or extension of the cable duct network as detailed in contract specific Appendix .
Following the completion of the works necessitating the interruption of a duct route chambers shall be installed at the interface to the new section of duct .
Chambers shall be installed at each end of the new duct route and at any intermediate transition points where any of the following conditions are met i the new duct section is routed through a structure or ii the new duct section includes a change of direction horizontal axis andor a step change in the vertical axis of the duct route that would otherwise impede the continuous pulling of cables through the completed duct route or iii the total length of the new duct section includes more than ten intermediate duct joints or a distance of m whichever is the greater or iv where there is a change of ducting standard or duct types that can not be directly mated to each other .
Where the above criterion is not met then new sections of duct may be mated with existing ducts without installing new chambers .
New sections of duct installed between chambers shall be tested and proved in accordance with Clause .
Existing duct mated directly to a section of new ducting shall be cleaned and swabbed prior to the installation of new cables or reinstallation of old cables .
There shall be no need to air pressure test existing sections of duct .
Ducts shall be provided for armoured or unarmoured cables that are laid across or within mm of filter drains .
The ducts shall be surrounded with mm of ST concrete in compliance with Clause .
Where a duct crosses the filter drain it may be necessary to provide additional drainage capacity or other measures to compensate for the volume occupied by the duct and associated concrete surround .
The Contractor shall provide the Overseeing Organisation with details of the proposed arrangements for additional capacity or other measures for acceptance .
This shall be clearly identified in the Contractors programme of works .
In the event that a duct route coincides with the line of a filter drain an alternative duct line shall be determined .
Any damage caused by the Contractor to any drain shall be satisfactorily repaired and reinstated at no cost to the Overseeing Organisation .
It shall be the responsibility of the Contractor to identify to the Overseeing Organisation any existing damage to drains prior to the commencement of works .
Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Highway Communications Where cables are subsequently to be laid by the Telecommunications Services Provider the Contractor shall lay sacrificial ducting along the cable route leaving cable pulling pits at intermediate locations in accordance with the Telecommunications Services Providers requirements in contract specific Appendix .
Details of sacrificial duct routes lengths number type and depth of sacrificial ducting the requirements for reinstatement and locations of intermediate cable pulling pits shall be as specified in contract specific Appendix .
Chambers for Highway Communications Cables Chambers shall be constructed of materials of sufficient strength for the purpose .
The walls base and top shall be of sufficient strength to prevent collapse and settlement for the local soil conditions depth of chamber number of ducts passing through the wall weight of cover and frame and any additional force for example a vehicle that may be applied to the top of the chamber .
In addition to these requirements plastic chambers shall be installed to manufactures requirements .
Chambers shall be as detailed in the schedule in contract specific Appendix and the Telecommunications Services Providers requirements in contract specific Appendix .
Chambers may be designated by type size and usage by a letter A to E. Chambers shall i be used solely for highway communications cables including power cables used for highway communications ii be located at the interface point to duct sections installed through a structure or under a carriageway iii be located where a section of duct includes a change of direction horizontal axis andor a step change in the vertical axis of the duct route that would otherwise impede the continuous pulling of cables through the completed duct route .
The exact location size and usage of these chambers shall be agreed with the Overseeing Organisation and the Telecommunications Services Provider as appropriate on site prior to the commencement of any associated works .
Brickwork chambers shall comply with the Series and be built with mortar designation in English bond .
The joints of brickwork where exposed shall be finished as specified for unpointed joints in Clause .
The ends of all ducts shall be neatly built into the brickwork and finished flush with mortar designation to prevent the ingress of water .
The walls of the chambers shall be mm in thickness and shall be treated with waterproofing material to prevent the ingress of moisture .
Precast concrete chambers shall comply with BS Concrete Pipes and Ancillary Concrete Products Specification for Unreinforced and Reinforced Concrete Manholes and Soakaways and BS EN Concrete Manholes and Inspection Chambers Unreinforced Steel Fibre and Reinforced .
Cast in situ chambers shall be constructed of ST concrete complying with Clause unless otherwise described in contract specific Appendix .
Chambers may be constructed from plastic units that comply with the requirements of BS .
Where plastic chambers are comprised of multiple sections all sections shall be sealed in accordance with the manufacturers requirements to prevent the ingress of water throughout the intended design life of the chamber .
The foundation and backfill for plastic chambers is location specific and shall be as described in Appendix .
The design of the chamber shall allow sufficient access for a person to enter and exit the chamber access to the ducting and provide a safe working environment appropriate to the needs and purpose of the chamber that would allow industry standard interchangeability .
The design of the chamber shall take into account all hazards that could occur as a result of a confined space .
Where steps are required for entry and exit from the chamber these shall conform to BS EN .
Hinged covers shall allow safe access without the cover unintentionally closing .
Access shall be possible by a single person .
The dimensions for chamber cover openings and chamber length and breadth shall be described in Appendix .
Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Highway Communications Where the depth of chambers exceeds mm below the finished surface of the carriageway or the adjacent ground manhole steps complying with BS EN shall be included .
Chamber covers gratings and frames shall be as described in contract specific Appendix and shall comply with BS EN .
Chambers containing a joint shall be equipped with x mm access ports to chambers for the installation of network bypass interrupter cables .
Reinforced concrete cover slabs shall be installed at the top of the chamber on all sides to provide suitable support for the chamber covers to be installed .
Where access ports are required for temporary interrupter cables these shall be agreed by the Telecommunications Services Provider as stated in contract specific Appendix .
Where required by contract specific Appendix lockable chamber covers or other measures to deter unauthorised access to chambers shall be provided .
Where the telecommunications infrastructure is provided for the operation and maintenance of the Telecommunications Services Provider lockable covers shall also meet requirements in contract specific Appendix .
The Contractor shall supply four sets of keys for each type of locking system to the Overseeing Organisation and four sets of keys for each type of locking system to the Telecommunications Services Provider .
Four sets of chamber cover lifting keys as described in contract specific Appendix shall be delivered to the Overseeing Organisation and to the Telecommunications Services Provider for each type of cover supplied .
i Additionally a suitable cover lifter shall be delivered for each type of cover to the Overseeing Organisation or Telecommunications Services Provider as appropriate where the mass of an individual cover exceeds manual handling regulations or as stated in contract specific Appendix .
ii The quantities of cover lifters required for compliance with manual handling regulations shall be as stated in contract specific Appendix .
Frames for chamber covers gratings shall be set in cement mortar complying with Clause or a suitable proprietary quick setting mortar of equivalent strength .
The chamber shall contain a sump to allow water to collect and drain away such that no water shall collect in the bottom of the chamber .
The size of the sump and position shall not affect the integrity of the structure or be too large to prevent a person to be able to stand and work from the bottom of the chamber .
The sump shall feed to a soakaway or highway drainage system that shall allow water entering the chamber to collect and drain away .
The sump and soakaway capacity or sump and drainage system shall be based on the location of the site including its varying water table throughout the year .
The sump shall be of sufficient size to fit a pump and shall be as agreed with the Telecommunication Services Provider and stated in contract specific Appendix .
Details of the drainage system shall be shown in contract specific Appendix .
Chambers shall be clearly identified by the legend HIGHWAY COMMUNICATIONS on each cover .
Where covers have a concrete infill a noncorrodible plate showing the above information shall be cast into the concrete flush with the concrete surface .
All chambers shall be referenced to their longitudinal position along the carriageway with an accuracy of m. The measurement point for each chamber will be the centre of the chamber cover .
The longitudinal position of the chamber and where used the chamber reference number shall be clearly displayed on the chamber apron or on a concrete block placed immediately adjacent to the cover .
The longitudinal position shall be in the form of an address comprising the marker post reference offset to the marker post carriageway identification and chamber reference .
Where required in contract specific Appendix Technology Performance Management Services TPMS barcode label mounting plates shall be provided .
Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Highway Communications Where detailed in contract specific Appendix stub ducts shall be incorporated into the chamber construction .
Ducts shall be as described in Clause and are either to be plugged in accordance with sub Clause .
or proprietary inserts or other proprietary duct sealing system that can easily be removed excluding expanding foam .
Details of sealing system shall be supplied by the Contractor for acceptance of the Telecommunications Services Provider as defined in the Contractors programme of works .
Where a Chamber installed as part of a cross carriageway duct crossing does not lie on the line of the longitudinal network a second chamber shall be constructed on the line of the longitudinal network under and connected to the cross carriageway duct crossing chamber by means of a way duct .
Where the water table is within m of the ground surface or the ground is poorly drained the chambers shall be surrounded by a minimum thickness of mm ST concrete to reduce the potential for water ingress detrimental deformity or movement .
Specific requirements will be defined in contract specific Appendix .
To accommodate the form of construction used for the chamber the spacing between local ducts entering the chamber shall be within mm of one another .
Chambers shall be constructed so that their covers are raised mm above the level of the adjacent ground and the insitu concrete hardstanding area surrounding chambers laid to falls to the adjacent ground level to prevent ponding of water over and adjacent to the chambers .
The fall shall be formed of a mm minimum deep layer of ST concrete to Clause with a U surface finish .
In order to maintain long term stability reinforcement shall be applied .
The raised covers shall not cause a trip hazard .
Where type A chambers are required for telecommunications cable joints cable joint bearer systems will be installed within the chamber .
The cable brackets shall be equipped with two CJE cable bearers but shall be capable of supporting an additional bracket for a third CJE if required .
Where more than three CJEs are required an additional type A chamber shall be provided .
Where power cables enter a chamber equipped for CJEs these cables shall be installed in such a way that the extraction of the CJE from the chamber for maintenance is not impeded by the power cables .
Specific requirements for cable bearers will be defined in contract specific Appendix .
All ducts shall enter the chamber wall perpendicularly such that the drawing of cables through the ducts shall not cause any damage to the cables and shall be sealed to prevent the ingress of water unless otherwise stated in contract specific Appendix .
Type B chambers shall not be used for the housing of CJEs where power cable reduction joints are required or where power cable size exceeds mm .
For type A chambers longitudinal subduct ducts may be continuous through the chamber where no access to the cables within is required .
For type B chambers longitudinal ducts may be continuous through the chamber where no access to the cables within is required .
The maximum depth of type B chambers shall be mm measured from the underside of the chamber cover and the base of the chamber .
Where the depth of transverse ducts dictates a greater depth than mm the use of a more suitable chamber such as a type A chamber shall be considered .
Type C chambers shall not be used for the housing of CJEs where power cable reduction joints are required where power cable size exceeds mm or as an interface to equipment cabinets .
The chamber size shall be selected to ensure that cable minimum bend radii and maximum cable tension parameters during installation according to TRH or the cable manufacturers written specification are not exceeded .
The chamber shall have a design life of not less than years unless otherwise stated in contract specific Appendix .
The chamber shall have an area of hardstanding around it to allow for safe working and lifting of covers .
It shall be flush with the finished ground level .
The hardstanding cover and frame shall be sufficient for the loading that might be placed on it including any vehicles and have life span of a minimum of years unless otherwise stated in contract specific Appendix .
Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Highway Communications Proving and Testing of Ducts Longitudinal and cross carriageway cable ducts shall be proved by drawing a mandrel of mm length through each as the ducts are laid .
Local ducts from chambers to cabinets shall be proved by drawing through each completed length of duct a spherical mandrel .
The mandrel will have a diameter of less than the internal bore of the duct .
On the successful completion of each mandrel test the Contractor shall certify compliance of the duct and immediately seal the duct in accordance with subClause .. Longitudinal and cross carriageway cable ducts within a ducted nonarmoured cable network shall be tested in chambertochamber sections by means of the air test described in subClause .. On the successful completion of each test the Contractor shall certify compliance of the duct and immediately seal the duct in accordance with subClause .. To undertake the test air shall be pumped in by suitable means until a stable pressure of mm head of water is indicated in a Utube connected to the system .
The air pressure shall not fall to less than mm head of water during a period of five minutes without further pumping after an initial period to allow for stabilization .
Continuous sections of ducts and subducts including subducts jointed as part of a modular inner and outer duct arrangement shall be tested and proven by blowing a close fitting foam plug or similar arrangement that tests the integrity of the duct in respect of diameter and airtightness in a single operation .
There is no requirement to additionally test the outer main duct that houses a subduct .
The design and dimension of the foam plug shall inhibit the progression of the foam plug within the duct where the diameter of the duct has suffered deformity or presents a discontinuity in size that is outside of the duct manufacturers written specifications .
No testing and proving of sacrificial ducts shall be required prior to the installation of armoured cables .
The Contractor shall satisfy themselves that the sacrificial duct is fit for purpose and the Telecommunications Services Provider where applicable will be able to correctly install the armoured cable .
The Contractor shall comply with any additional or amended requirements in respect of the proving and testing of ducts as contained within contract specific Appendix .
A register of mandrel and air test certificates shall be maintained by the Contractor as appropriate and handed to the Overseeing Organisation and Telecommunications Services Provider on the successful completion of the ducting work .
Closed Circuit Television Unless specified otherwise in contract specific Appendix the camera and outstation equipment for closed circuit television CCTV shall be provided by the Contractor in accordance with specifications MCE Pan tilt zoom cameras MCE fixed cameras and MCE .
The provision of cabinets and ancillary items for CCTV shall be as described in contract specific Appendix .
The Contractor shall install and commission CCTV equipment in accordance with the requirements detailed in contract specific Appendix .
The provision of masts shall be as scheduled in Series contract specific Appendices .
Provision of the Telecommunications Services In the case where the Contractor provides the telecommunications services the requirements in respect of the telecommunications services shall be contained in contract specific Appendix .
In the case where the Telecommunications Services Provider provides the communications infrastructure the requirements in respect of communications infrastructure to support the provision of the telecommunications services shall be contained in contract specific Appendices and .
Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Highway Communications In the case where the Telecommunications Services Provider provides the telecommunications services the Contractor in addition to the requirements specified elsewhere in this Series shall comply with the Telecommunications Services Providers requirements detailed in contract specific Appendix in respect of the following .
i Designs for Telecommunications Services including authorised changes to designs and departures from the Telecommunication Services Providers standards .
ii The confirmation of accommodation requirements for the installation of the Telecommunications Services Providers equipment within the Overseeing Organisations cabinets including the allocation of space and power supply load allocation total power dissipation and power supply distribution arrangements within the Overseeing Organisations cabinets .
iii Changes or additions to the telecommunications services contained in contract specific Appendix and the processes relating to any changes or additions to the telecommunications services including any associated change control design ordering and notification periods .
iv The provision and updating of service configuration information related to the telecommunications services including geographic IP URL or other electronic address information as appropriate to the telecommunications service andor the roadside and central control system technologies .
v The Telecommunications Services Providers process related to the activation and deactivation of telecommunications services including methods of notification offered by the Telecommunications Services Provider and associated notification periods as part of any request for the activation and deactivation of telecommunications services .
vi The inspection witnessing and acceptance criteria with respect to the installation of communications infrastructure and cabinets provided by the Contractor and associated preinstallation requirements of the Telecommunications Services Provider .
vii The processes including notification reporting and periods for remedial actions associated with any defects and remedial works that result from the Telecommunications Services Providers inspection witnessing and acceptance activities with respect to the installation of communications infrastructure and cabinets .
viii The provision of copies of electrical test certificates prior to the Telecommunications Services Providers connection to the Contractors or Overseeing Organisations power supplies .
Electricity Connections The type of electricity connection whether an exit point with standard Distribution Network Operator DNO single or a more secure dual feed i.e .
incoming feeds from two primary sub stations shall be agreed with the Overseeing Organisation and shall be as stated in contract specific Appendix .
The Contractor shall record all equipment that is connected and disconnected from the roadside electricity supply during the works with a date and time of the connectiondisconnection .
They shall provide this information to the Overseeing Organisation within five working days of the connectiondisconnection or as agreed by the Overseeing Organisation .
The Contractor shall provide infrastructure for the electricity DNO for electricity connections to roadside technology and infrastructure .
The Contractor shall provide the required total load requirements and equipment types to the DNO .
The information shall be sufficient for the DNO to provide the correct supply capacity and phase single and multiple at an exit point .
The Contractor shall provide the DNO the information required for both metered and unmetered exit points .
Equipment to be connected to unmetered exit points must possess an Unmetered Supplies User Group UMSUG charge code .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Highway Communications Amendment February F For any equipment without charge codes the Contractor shall request one from UMSUG at Elexon .
The Contractor shall agree with the DNO and Overseeing Organisation access requirements for meter reading and maintenance .
The electricity supplier shall fit the supply meter .
This shall remain in their ownership .
In the case of a DNO offer for a three phase supply capacity at an exit point being slightly above the DNO single phase limit then discussions shall be started with the DNO to ascertain whether a single phase supply could be offered .
Where the provision of three phase supply is the only viable means of obtaining an exit point the Contractor shall i clarify the responsibility for balancing the load with the DNO ii comply with any DNO requirements for balancing the load across the three phases iii in the case of double span gantries that require equipment to be fed from separate phases the Contractor shall ensure the risk of receiving shock at V is eliminated iv in areas where equipment fed from separate phases are within reach of each other clear warning labelling shall be provided to BS section .. v the Contractor shall ensure a switch is available to isolate both sides of a double span gantry .
The Contractor shall ensure electricity connections provided by the DNO to be a Protective Multiple Earthing PME termination TNCS including the provision of a customer earth terminal .
In the case where the DNO will not provide a PME terra terra TT termination the Contractor shall ensure that additional protective equipment is installed .
If a PME TNCS is not offered in the proposed location the DNO may agree to a PME termination in the following circumstances i the EI cab is installed in an enclosed area fenced off from public access ii installation a Class II EI cabinet .
March MANUAL OF CONTRACT DOCUMENTS FOR HIGHWAY WORKS VOLUME SPECIFICATION FOR HIGHWAY WORKS SERIES PILING AND EMBEDDED RETAINING WALLS Contents Clause Title Page General Requirements for Piling and Embedded Retaining Walls Precast Reinforced and Prestressed Concrete Piles and Precast Reinforced Concrete Segmental Piles Bored CastinPlace Piles Bored Piles Constructed Using Continuous Flight Augers and Concrete or Grout Injection Through Hollow Auger Stems Driven CastinPlace Piles Steel Bearing Piles Reduction of Friction on Piles NonDestructive Methods for Testing Piles Static Load Testing of Piles Diaphragm Walls HardHard Secant Pile Walls HardSoft Secant Pile Walls Contiguous Bored Pile Walls King Post Walls Steel Sheet Piles Integrity Testing of Wall Elements Instrumentation of Piles and Embedded Walls Support Fluid Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Piling and Embedded Retaining Walls PILING AND EMBEDDED RETAINING WALLS General Requirements for Piling and Embedded Retaining Walls Definitions Allowable pile capacity a capacity which takes into account the piles bearing capacity the materials from which the pile is made the required load factor settlement pile spacing downdrag the overall bearing capacity of the ground beneath the piles and other relevant factors .
Commencing surface the level at which the piling equipment first enters the ground .
Compression pile a pile which is designed to resist an axial force such as would cause it to penetrate further into the ground .
Constant rate of penetration CRP test a test in which the pile is made to penetrate the ground at a constant controlled speed while the force applied at the top of the pile to maintain the rate of penetration is continuously measured .
Constant rate of uplift CRU test a test in which the pile is made to lift out of the ground at a constant controlled speed while the force applied at the top of the pile to maintain the rate of extraction is continuously measured .
Cutoff level the level to which the pile is trimmed .
Design Verification Load DVL a load which will be substituted for the Specified Working Load for the purpose of a test .
Kentledge dead load used in a loading test .
Load factor the ratio between the piles ultimate bearing capacity and maximum safe bearing capacity .
Maintained load test a loading test in which each increment of load is held constant either for a defined period of time or until the rate of movement settlement or uplift falls to a specified value .
Preliminary pile a pile installed before the commencement of the main piling works or specific part of the Works .
Proof load a load applied to a selected working pile to confirm that it is suitable for the load at the settlement specified .
Raking pile a pile installed at an inclination to the vertical .
Reaction system the arrangement of the kentledge piles anchorages or spread foundations that provide a resistance against which the pile is tested .
Pile settlement the axial movement at the top of the pile .
The value of pile settlement specified for a given load refers to the value reached at the end of the first cycle of loading .
Where piles are to be loaded and unloaded through a number of cycles settlement shall be the cumulative vertical movement .
Specified Working Load SWL the specified load on the head of the pile as stated in the relevant Appendix .
Tension pile a pile which is designed to resist an axial force such as would tend to cause it to be extracted from the ground .
Test pile any pile to which a test load is or is to be applied .
Ultimate bearing capacity the maximum resistance offered by the pile when the strength of the soil is fully mobilised .
Working pile one of the piles forming the foundation of a structure .
Embedded retaining wall retaining wall with shuttering provided either by the surrounding ground ie .
cast against an excavated soil face or sheet piles inserted into the ground .
Embedded retaining wall element an individual component utilised in a particular embedded retaining walling system eg .
diaphragm wall panel or primary or secondary pile in a secant wall which can be constructed in isolation .
General Piles and embedded retaining walls shall be constructed from one of the permitted options described in Appendix and in compliance with this Series and appropriate Clauses of Series and unless otherwise described in Appendix .
Layout design and construction Where applicable Appendices and in Series list structures and elements which the Amendment November Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Piling and Embedded Retaining Walls Contractor has to design in accordance with the Specification and relevant Appendices to .
Where required in Appendix the Contractor shall also submit design calculations details of materials to be used and a schedule of dimensions .
Pile tolerances Piles shall be installed within the following maximum permitted tolerances Position mm in any direction at commencing level .
Verticality in deviation from the vertical Rake in deviation from the specified rake for piles raking up to and in for piles raking more than .
No method of forcible correction will be permitted unless it can be proved that the integrity durability and performance of the piles will not be adversely affected .
Piling method Where required in Appendix the Contractor shall supply all relevant details of the method of piling the plant and monitoring equipment he plans to adopt .
Alternative piling methods may be used provided that they satisfy the requirements of the Specification .
Records The Contractor shall keep records as indicated by an asterisk in Table for the installation of each pile or for each element in embedded retaining walls or as listed in Clause for sheet pile walls .
The signed records will form a record of the work .
Copies of these records shall be provided where required in Appendix .
Any unexpected driving or boring conditions shall be noted in the records .
Damage Damage criteria for adjacent structures or services Damage criteria for adjacent structures or services are given in Appendix .
Where required in Appendix the Contractor shall submit his plans for making surveys and monitoring movements or vibration before the commencement of the piling works .
Damage to piles or completed wall elements The Contractor shall ensure that during the course of the work displacement or damage which would impair either performance or durability does not occur to completed piles or wall elements .
Where required in Appendix the Contractor shall submit his planned sequence and timing for driving or boring piles or for installing wall elements having regard to the avoidance of damage to adjacent piles or wall elements .
Temporary support The Contractor shall ensure that where required any permanently freestanding piles are temporarily braced or stayed immediately after driving to prevent loosening of the piles in the ground and to ensure that no damage resulting from oscillation vibration or movement can occur .
Ordering of piles The Contractor shall ensure that the piles are available in time for incorporation in the Works .
All piles and production facilities shall be made available for inspection at any time .
Piles shall be examined by the Contractor at the time of delivery and any faulty units replaced .
Where required in Appendix the records of testing of the concrete and steel used in the piles shall be provided .
Testing of materials shall be in accordance with Appendix .
For steel piles the Contractor shall submit details of all preliminary test results at least working days prior to ordering piles for the main works other than temporary works .
Precast Reinforced and Prestressed Concrete Piles and Precast Reinforced Concrete Segmental Piles Materials and components Steel and iron components In the manufacture of precast concrete piles and jointed precast concrete segmental piles fabricated steel components shall comply with BS EN and BS EN Grades S or S cast steel components with BS grade A A A or A and ductile iron components with BS EN material designation symbol ENGJS ENGJS ENGJS .
Pile joints for segmental piles The joints shall be closefitting face to face and the locking method shall be such as to hold the faces in intimate contact .
Where required in Appendix details of the design manufacture and tests of the jointing system shall be submitted prior to the commencement of the piling works .
Amendment November Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Piling and Embedded Retaining Walls A jointed pile shall be capable of withstanding the same driving stresses as a single unjointed pile of the same crosssectional dimensions and materials .
The welding of a joint to main reinforcement in lieu of a lapped connection with projecting bars affixed to the joint shall not be permitted .
Each pile joint shall be square to the axis of the pile within a tolerance of in .
The centroid of the pile joint shall lie within mm of the true axis of the pile element .
Pile toes Pile toes shall be constructed so as to ensure that damage is not caused to the pile during installation .
Pile head reinforcement Pile heads shall be so reinforced or banded as to prevent bursting of the pile under driving .
March TABLE Records to be kept indicated by an asterisk Data Driven Driven Driven Bored Continuous precast segmental castin castin flight concrete concrete place place auger and piles concrete concrete concrete or steel piles piles grout bearing piles piles Contract Pile reference number location Pile type Nominal crosssectional dimensions or diameter Nominal diameter of underreambase Length of preformed pile Standing groundwater level from direct observation or given site investigation data Date and time of driving redriving or boring Date of concreting Ground level at pile position at commencement of installation of pile commencing surface Working level on which piling base machine stands Depth from ground level at pile position to pile toe Toe level Pile head level as constructed Pile cutoff level Length of temporary casing Length of permanent casing Type weight drop and mechanical condition of hammer and equivalent information for other equipment Number and type of packing used and type and conditions of dolly used during driving of the pile Set of pile or pile tube in millimetres per blows or number of blows per mm of penetration Temporary compression of ground and pile Driving resistance taken at .
m intervals Soil samples taken and in situ tests carried out during pile formation or adjacent to pile position Length and details of and cover to reinforcement Concrete mix Volume of concrete supplied to pile where this is practical All information regarding obstructions delays and other interruptions to the sequence of work Pile forming equipment including rig no .
Description of ground excavated Depth from commencing surface to changes in strata and to standing ground water and any fluctuations Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Piling and Embedded Retaining Walls March TABLE Records to be kept contd Data Driven Driven Driven Bored Continuous precast segmental castin castin flight concrete concrete place place auger and piles concrete concrete concrete or steel piles piles grout bearing piles piles Depth to average levels of concrete surface before and after withdrawing temporary lining Type torque assessed efficiency of motor Depth to concrete surface after every concrete load For raking piles angle of rake Support fluid tests Monitoring information referred to in Clause subClause Level of top of reinforcement cage as constructed Contract Element reference number location Element type Nominal crosssectional dimensions Top and bottom of guidewall level as appropriate Length of preformed element as appropriate Groundwater level from direct observation Date and time of excavation Date of concreting Details of material samples taken Ground level at element position at commencement of element installation commencing surface Working level on which base machine stands Depth from ground level or guide wall as appropriate at element position to element toe Toe level Element head level as constructed Element cutoff level Stop end details Length of temporary casing as appropriate Length of permanent casing as appropriate Soil samples taken and in situ tests carried out during element formation or adjacent to element position Tests on support fluid as appropriate Length and details of steel reinforcement as appropriate Concrete mix or grout as appropriate Volume of concrete supplied to element Graph of top of concrete or grout level vs volume placed by batch as appropriate All information regarding obstructions delays and other interruptions to the sequence of work As constructed positional records vertical and horizontal as required Movements of ground and structures and services as specified NOTES .
All levels shall be relative to the Datum specified in Appendix . . All times shall be given in hour format .
Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Piling and Embedded Retaining Walls Tolerances in pile dimensions The crosssectional dimensions of the pile shall be not less than those specified and shall not exceed them by more than mm .
Each face of a pile shall not deviate by more than mm from any straight line m long joining two points on that face nor shall the centre of area of the pile at any crosssection along its length deviate by more than of the pile length from a line joining the centres of area at the ends of the pile .
Where a pile is less than m long the permitted deviation from straightness shall be reduced below mm on a pro rata basis in accordance with actual length .
The head of a pile element or the end of the pile upon which the hammer acts shall be square to the pile axis within a tolerance of in .
Reinforcement for precast reinforced and prestressed concrete piles Steel reinforcement shall be as described in Appendix and in accordance with Series .
The main longitudinal reinforcing bars in piles not exceeding m in length shall be in one continuous length .
In piles more than m long joints will be permitted in main longitudinal bars so that the number of joints is minimised .
Joints in reinforcement shall be such that the full strength of the bar is effective across the joint .
Lap or splice joints shall be provided with link bars designed to resist eccentric forces .
Reinforcement shall be incorporated for lifting and handling purposes .
Spacers shall be designed and manufactured using durable materials which shall not lead to corrosion of the reinforcement or spalling of the concrete cover .
Where required in Appendix details of the means by which the Contractor plans to ensure the correct cover to and position of the reinforcement shall be submitted .
Reinforcement for precast reinforced concrete segmental piles Steel reinforcement shall be as described in Appendix and in accordance with Series .
The main longitudinal reinforcing bars shall be in one continuous length .
Reinforcement shall be incorporated for lifting and handling purposes .
Spacers shall be designed and manufactured using durable materials which shall not lead to corrosion of the reinforcement or spalling of the concrete cover .
Where required in Appendix details of the means by which the Contractor plans to ensure the correct cover to and position of the reinforcement shall be submitted .
Formwork If a pile is constructed with a shaped point or shoe then the end of the pile shall be symmetrical about the longitudinal axis of the pile .
Holes for handling or pitching where provided in the pile shall be lined with steel tubes alternatively inserts may be cast in .
Formwork shall be robust clean and so constructed as to prevent loss of grout or aggregate from the wet concrete and ensure the production of uniform pile sections free from defects .
The piles shall be removed from the formwork in such a manner that damage to the pile is prevented .
Concrete General Cement materials aggregates admixtures and water shall be in accordance with Series .
The method of placing and compacting the concrete shall be such as to ensure that the concrete in its final position is dense and homogeneous .
Protecting and curing concrete Immediately after compaction concrete shall be adequately protected from the harmful effects of the weather including wind rain rapid temperature changes and freezing .
Curing and accelerated curing shall comply with Clause .
Piles shall not be removed from formwork until a sufficient pile concrete strength has been achieved to allow the pile to be handled without damage .
Prestressing General Prestressing operations shall be carried out only under the direction of an experienced and competent supervisor .
All personnel operating the stressing equipment shall have been trained in its use .
The extensions and total forces including allowance for losses shall be calculated before stressing commences .
Stressing of tendons and transfer of prestress shall be carried out at a gradual and steady rate .
The force in the tendons shall be obtained from readings on a recently calibrated load cell or pressure gauge incorporated in the equipment .
The extension of the tendons under the total forces shall be within of the calculated extension .
Amendment November Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Piling and Embedded Retaining Walls Concrete strength The Contractor shall cast sufficient cubes cured in the same manner as the piles to be able to demonstrate by testing two cubes at a time with appropriate intervals between pairs of cubes that the necessary in situ strength of the concrete has been reached .
Concrete in the piles shall not be stressed until two test cubes attain the necessary strength .
Records The Contractor shall keep detailed records of times of tensioning measured extensions pressure gauge readings or load cell readings and the amount of pullin at each anchorage .
The Contractor shall also check the cover to reinforcement of each pile and shall ensure it is at least that specified .
Copies of these records shall be provided where required in Appendix .
Posttensioned piles Apart from the requirement for ducts and vents in posttensioned piles to be grouted after the transfer of prestress the requirements for prestressed piles apply .
Grouting procedure Grout shall be mixed for a minimum of minutes and until a uniform consistency is obtained .
Ducts shall not be grouted when the air temperature in the shade is lower than C. Before grouting is started all ducts shall be thoroughly cleaned by means of compressed air which shall be free of oils .
Grout shall be injected near the lowest point in the duct in one continuous operation and allowed to flow from the outlet until the consistency is equivalent to that of the grout being injected .
Vents in ducts shall be provided in accordance with Clause .
Grout Grout for prestressing shall have the following properties a The design and consistence of grout to be used in the formation of piles shall produce a mix which is suitable for pumping .
b Grout shall consist only of Portland cement CEM I to BS EN water and admixtures .
Admixtures are only to be used in accordance with the Manufacturers instructions and shall comply with Clause .
c Grout shall have a watercement ratio as low as possible consistent with the necessary consistence and the water cement ratio shall not exceed .. d Grout shall not bleed in excess of after hours or a maximum of when measured at C in a covered glass cylinder approximately mm in diameter with a height of grout of approximately mm and the water shall be reabsorbed after hours .
Testing works grout Cube strength testing shall be carried out in accordance with BS EN .
A sample shall consist of a set of six mm cubes .
Three cubes shall be tested at seven days and the remaining three at days after casting .
Batching grout The weighing and waterdispensing mechanisms shall be maintained at all times to within the limits of accuracy described in BS .
The weights of each component of the mix shall be within of the respective weights per batch .
Mixing grout Cement grouts shall be mechanically mixed using a high speed colloidal mixer minimum speed revsminute or b paddle mixer minimum speed revsminute or other suitable mixer subject to satisfactory evidence of performance .
The grout shall be mixed on site until a homogenous grout is obtained and shall be kept in continuous movement until it is used .
It shall be used within minutes from the start of mixing .
Following mixing the grout shall be passed through a mm aperture sieve and shall be remixed if lumps are retained .
Transporting grout Grout shall be transported from the mixer to the position of the pile in such a manner that segregation of the mix does not occur .
Placing grout in cold weather Grout shall have a minimum temperature of C when placed .
No frozen material or material containing ice shall be used for making grout .
All plant and equipment used in the transporting and placing of grout shall be free of ice that could enter the grout .
Amendment November Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Piling and Embedded Retaining Walls Records The Contractor shall keep records of grouting including the date the proportions of the grout and any admixtures used the pressure details of interruption and topping up required .
Copies of these records shall be provided where required in Appendix .
Pile quality A certificate of quality from the pile manufacturer shall be provided where required in Appendix stating that the requirements of this Specification have been fulfilled during manufacture .
Marking of piles Each pile shall be marked in such a manner that it can be identified with the records of manufacture which shall state the date of casting the cement type concrete strength class element length the prestressing force where appropriate and any other relevant data .
On delivery the piles shall be accompanied by records of manufacture .
Lifting positions shall be marked on each pile in accordance with the requirements of design .
Handling transportation and storage of piles The method and sequence of lifting handling transporting and storing piles shall be such as to avoid shock loading and to ensure that the piles are not damaged .
Only designed lifting and support points shall be used .
During transport and storage piles shall be appropriately supported under the marked lifting points or fully supported along their length .
All piles within a stack shall be in groups of the same length .
Packing of uniform thickness shall be provided between piles at the lifting points .
Concrete shall at no time be subjected to loading including its own weight which will induce a compressive stress in it exceeding .
of its strength at the time of loading or of the specified strength whichever is the lesser .
For this purpose an assessment of the strength of the concrete and of the stresses produced by the loads shall be carried out .
A pile shall be rejected when the width of any transverse crack exceeds the value given in Table of BS Part .
The measurement shall be made with the pile in its working attitude .
Driving piles Strength of piles Piles shall not be driven until the concrete cubes have achieved the specified characteristic strength or the pile has attained the strength to resist driving stresses whichever is the greater .
Leaders and trestles At all stages during driving and until incorporation into the structure the pile shall be adequately supported and restrained by means of leaders trestles temporary supports or other guide arrangements to maintain position and alignment and to prevent damage to the pile .
Performance of driving equipment Where required in Appendix the Contractor shall provide information on the efficiency and energy of the driving equipment including when followers are used .
Where required in Appendix or as appropriate dynamic evaluation and analysis shall be provided .
Where a drop hammer is used the mass of the hammer shall be at least half that of the pile or pile segment .
For other types of hammer the energy delivered to the pile per blow shall be at least equivalent to that of a drop hammer of the stated mass .
Drop hammers shall not be used from floating craft in such a manner as to cause instability of the craft or damage to the pile .
Length of piles The length of pile to be driven in any position shall be as specified in Appendix .
During the execution of the Works any amendments to the scheduled lengths shall be recorded by the Contractor and a full statement of the reasons included in the pile record .
Driving procedure and redrive checks The driving procedure shall be such as to avoid damage to the piles .
The Contractor shall comply with all the particular requirements of Appendix on driving resistances and characteristics .
The driving of each pile shall be continuous until the depth or set as required by the design has been reached .
In the event of unavoidable interruption to driving the pile may be redriven provided it can subsequently be driven to the designed depth andor resistance or set without damage .
A follower shall not be used unless the set is revised where applicable in order to take into account reduction in the effectiveness of the hammer blow .
Driving records shall be made for every pile .
This record shall contain the weight and fall of the hammer or ram and the number of blows for each .
m of penetration unless otherwise specified in Appendix or or as appropriate .
Amendment November Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Piling and Embedded Retaining Walls Any unexpected change in driving characteristics shall be included in the pile record .
Set The set and temporary compression shall be measured and recorded for each pile at the completion of driving unless otherwise stated in Appendix or as appropriate .
When a set is being measured the following requirements shall be met .
a The exposed part of the pile shall be in good condition without damage or distortion .
b The helmet dolly and any packing shall be in sound condition .
c The hammer blow shall be in line with the pile axis and the impact surfaces shall be flat and at right angles to the pile and hammer axis .
d The hammer shall be in good condition delivering adequate energy per blow and operating correctly .
e The temporary compression of the pile shall be recorded if required in Appendix or as appropriate .
The set shall be recorded either as the penetration in millimetres per blows or as the number of blows required to produce a penetration of mm .
Driving sequence and risen piles Piles shall be driven in a sequence to minimise any detrimental effects of heave and lateral displacement of the ground .
The sequence and method of piling including preboring shall limit uplift and lateral movement so that the final position of each pile is within the specified tolerances .
At all times the deflections of each pile from its axis as driven shall not be such as to cause damage or impair durability of the piles or any structures or services .
The maximum permitted uplift of each pile due to any one pile driven within a pile centre to centre radius of eight pile diameters is mm or such figure as shall be specified unless it can be demonstrated by static load testing that uplift exceeding this amount does not affect the ability of the pile to meet the requirements of this Specification .
Even if during the installation of preliminary piles uplift is shown to be within the permitted maximum and the preliminary piles tested meet the requirements of the Specification checks of uplift on working piles shall be made by the Contractor at least once a week throughout the period of the piling work and the results recorded .
If preliminary piles are not installed the Contractor shall commence installation of working piles taking measures to reduce or eliminate uplift until it can be established by site measurements that such measures are no longer necessary .
Thereafter checks on uplift shall be made by the Contractor at least once a week and the results recorded .
If a static load test shows that a pile which uplifted more than the maximum permitted amount due to any pile driven within a radius of eight pile diameters does not comply with the requirements of the Specification all such piles that may have been uplifted shall be redriven .
If records and measurements show that piles have been laterally displaced so as to be outside the permitted tolerance or damaged the measures the Contractor plans to adopt to enable the piles to comply with the Specification shall be provided in accordance with Appendix .
Laterally displaced piles shall not be corrected by forcible correction at the heads .
Preboring If preboring is specified the diameter and depth of prebore shall be as stipulated in Appendix .
Other means to ease pile drivability may be used provided the completed piles meet the requirements of the Specification .
Repair and lengthening of piles Repair of damaged pile heads If it is necessary to repair the head of a pile before it has been driven to its final level the Contractor shall carry out such repair in a way which allows the pile driving to be completed without further damage .
If the driving of a pile has been completed but the level of sound concrete of the pile is below the required cutoff level the pile shall be made good to the cutoff level or the pile cap or substructure may be locally deepened so that the completed foundation will safely withstand the specified working load .
Lengthening of precast reinforced and prestressed concrete piles Any provision for lengthening piles incorporated at the time of manufacture shall be designed by the Contractor to resist all stresses to which it may be subjected .
March Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Piling and Embedded Retaining Walls If no provision for lengthening piles was incorporated at the time of manufacture any method for lengthening shall be such that the extended pile including any joints is capable of taking safely the stresses during driving and under load .
Lengthening of segmental piles Where piles are driven to depths exceeding those expected leaving insufficient projection for penetration into the following works the piles shall be extended or replaced so that the completed piles are capable of meeting the requirements of the Specification .
Driving repaired or lengthened piles Repaired or lengthened piles shall not be driven until cubes for the added concrete have reached the specified characteristic strength of the concrete of the pile .
Cutting off pile heads When the driving of a pile has satisfied the Specification requirements the concrete at the head of the pile shall be cut off to the level specified .
Reinforcing bars projecting above this level shall be as specified .
Care shall be taken to avoid shattering or otherwise damaging the rest of the pile .
Any cracked or defective concrete shall be cut away and the pile repaired to provide a full and sound section to cutoff level .
Bored CastinPlace Piles Support fluid Where support fluid is used to maintain the stability of the excavation it shall be in accordance with Clause .
Diameter of piles The diameter of a pile shall be not less than the specified diameter .
The auger width shall be checked as necessary and recorded for each pile to ensure the specified diameter is achieved .
A tolerance of on the auger width is permissible .
Boring Boring near recently cast piles Piles shall be bored in an order and in such a manner that no damage is sustained by previously formed piles .
Casings Temporary casings shall be of quality of material length and thickness adequate for the purpose of preventing water and unstable soil from entering the pile excavations .
A short length of temporary casing shall be provided for all piles to provide an upstand of at least m above surrounding ground level for safety and to prevent contamination of the concrete in the bore .
Temporary casings shall maintain the excavations to their full dimensions and ensure that piles are completed to their full crosssectional dimensions .
The use of a vibrator to insert and withdraw temporary casings is subject to compliance with Clause Control of Noise and Vibration and subClause .
and to the method not causing disturbance of the ground which would adversely affect the construction or the capacity of piles .
Temporary casings shall be free from significant distortion .
They shall be of uniform crosssection throughout each continuous length .
During concreting they shall be free from internal projections and encrusted concrete which might adversely affect the proper formation of piles .
Where piles are bored under water or support fluid in an unlined state the insertion of a fulllength loosely fitting casing to the bottom of the bore prior to placing concrete will not be permitted .
If required permanent casings shall be specified in Appendix .
Stability of pile bore Where boring takes place through unstable water bearing strata the process of excavation and the support fluid and depth of temporary casing where employed shall be such that soil from outside the area of the pile is not drawn into the pile section and cavities are not created outside the temporary casing as it is advanced .
Where a support fluid is used for maintaining the stability of a bore an adequate temporary casing shall be used in conjunction with the support fluid so as to ensure stability of the strata near ground level until concrete has been placed .
During construction the level of drilling fluid in the pile excavation shall be maintained within the cased or stable bore so that it is not less than m above the level of external standing groundwater at all times unless stated otherwise in Appendix .
Pumping from pile bores Pumping from pile bores shall not be permitted unless the bore has been sealed against further water Amendment November Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Piling and Embedded Retaining Walls entry by casing or unless the soil is stable and will allow pumping to take place without ground disturbance below or around the pile .
Continuity of construction The pile shall be bored and the concrete shall be placed without such delay as would lead to impairment of the performance of the pile .
The time period during which each pile is excavated and the concrete is placed shall not exceed hours .
The time period shall start when excavation below the temporary lining tubes commences .
Where the construction sequence is such that the time period of hours will be exceeded even if no delays are taken into account a realistic time period during which the pile is excavated and concrete placed shall be stated in the Contractors method statement .
The Contractor shall advise on the likely effect of this extended pile construction period on the performance and capacity of the pile .
Enlarged pile bases A mechanically formed enlarged base shall be no smaller than the dimensions specified and shall be concentric with the pile shaft to within a tolerance of of the shaft diameter .
The sloping surface of the frustum forming the enlargement shall make an angle to the axis of the pile of not more than .
At the specified diameter of the underream at the perimeter of the base there shall be a minimum height of mm .
Inspection Each pile bore which does not contain standing water or support fluid shall be inspected from the ground surface prior to concrete being placed in it to ensure the base is clean .
Adequate means of lighting measuring tapes and a means of measuring verticality shall be used .
For piles of mm diameter or larger and where manned inspection of the pile base is specified in Appendix equipment shall be provided by the Contractor to enable his representatives to descend into the bore for the purpose of inspection .
The Contractor shall provide all necessary facilities to enable an inspection of any pile excavation to be made including facilities to check the depth verticality and position .
The full requirements of BS shall be followed .
The Contractor shall designate a Supervisor to supervise each inspection .
The Supervisor shall have a copy of BS and shall ensure that every person involved in the descent of piles is familiar with its requirements .
Cleanliness of pile bases On completion of boring loose disturbed or softened soil shall be removed from the bore using appropriate methods which shall be designed to clean while at the same time minimizing ground disturbance below the pile bases .
Water or support fluid shall be maintained at such levels throughout and following the cleaning operation that stability of the bore is preserved .
At all times when the pile head is unattended the bore shall be clearly marked and fenced off so as not to cause a safety hazard .
Reinforcement Steel reinforcement shall be as described in Appendix and in accordance with Series .
Where steel sections are used for reinforcement they shall be in accordance with Series .
The number of joints in longitudinal steel bars shall be kept to a minimum .
Joints in steel reinforcement shall be such that the full strength of each bar is effective across the joint and shall be made so that there is no detrimental displacement of the reinforcement during the construction of the pile .
Reinforcement shall be maintained in its correct position during concreting of the pile to allow a vertical tolerance of mm on the level of the reinforcement projecting above the final cut off level .
Where reinforcement is made up into cages they shall be sufficiently rigid to enable them to be handled placed and concreted without damage .
If the cage is to be welded together welding shall be carried out to the requirements of BS .
Unless otherwise specified reinforcement shall extend to the base of the pile or to at least m below the bottom of the temporary casing whichever is the lesser .
Spacers shall be designed and manufactured using durable materials which shall not lead to corrosion of the reinforcement or spalling of the concrete cover .
Where required in Appendix details of the means by which the Contractor plans to ensure the correct cover to and position of the reinforcement shall be submitted .
Concrete General Cement materials aggregates admixtures and water shall be in accordance with Series .
The consistence and method of placing of the concrete shall be such that a continuous monolithic concrete or grout shaft of the full crosssection is formed .
Concrete shall be transported from the mixer to the position of the pile in such a manner that segregation of the concrete constituents does not occur .
Amendment November Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Piling and Embedded Retaining Walls Placing concrete under water or support fluid Before placing concrete measures shall be taken in accordance with subClause .
to ensure there is no accumulation of silt or other material at the base of the boring and the Contractor shall ensure that heavily contaminated support fluid which could impair the free flow of concrete from the tremie pipe has not accumulated in the bottom of the hole .
A sample of support fluid shall be taken from the top and bottom of the boring using an appropriate device .
The fluid shall be prepared sampled and tested as stated in the Contractors submission .
If tests show the fluid does not comply with the limits stated by the Contractor for the particular type of support fluid the fluid shall be wholly or partly replaced as appropriate before concrete is placed .
Concrete to be placed under water or support fluid shall be placed by tremie in one continuous operation and shall not be discharged freely into the water or support fluid .
Pumping of concrete may be used where appropriate .
The bottom end of the tremie must be square to the axis of the tremie and its circumference must be continuous .
The tremie must be fully charged with concrete before it is lifted off the base of the pile .
The concrete shall be of high consistence and cement content in accordance with Series and Table mix C. The concrete shall be placed in a manner that shall not cause segregation of the constituents of concrete mix .
The concrete shall be placed without such interruption as would allow the previously placed batch to have achieved a stiffness which prevents proper amalgamation of the two concrete batches .
The Contractor shall take all precautions in the design of the concrete mix and placing of the concrete to avoid arching of the concrete .
No soil liquid or other foreign matter shall be permitted to contaminate the concrete .
Consistence of concrete Consistence measured at the time of discharge into the pile bore shall be in accordance with the limits shown in Table Compaction Internal vibrators shall not be used to compact concrete .
Placing concrete in dry borings Measures shall be taken to ensure that the structural strength of the concrete placed in all piles is not impaired through grout loss segregation or bleeding .
The method of placing shall be such as to ensure that the concrete or grout in its final position is dense and homogeneous .
Concrete shall be introduced into the pile via a hopper and suitable length of rigid delivery tube to ensure that the concrete falls vertically and centrally down the shaft .
The tube shall be at least m long .
Amendment November TABLE Piling Mix Consistence Piling mix Consistence Typical conditions of use Consistence The concrete and aggregate size must be compatible with the reinforcement spacing Flow class Range Slump class mm Range mm A Not SS Placed into waterfree unlined or permanently lined bore of applicable mm diameter or over or where casting level lies below temporary casing reinforcement spaced at mm centres or greater leaving ample room for free movement of concrete between bars .
B FF SSb Where reinforcement is spaced at less than mm centres where cutoff level of concrete is within temporary casing where pile bore is waterfree and the diameter is less than mm .
C FF S or more Where concrete is to be placed by tremie under water or support fluid or by pumping or by continuous flight auger .
Notes .
The slump test method is not suited to these very high consistence and the flow test is to be preferred . .
The test method may lack sensitivity with this class .
Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Piling and Embedded Retaining Walls The depths to the surface of the concrete shall be measured and the length of the tremie tubes recorded at regular intervals corresponding to the placing of each batch of concrete .
The depths measured and volumes placed shall be plotted immediately on a graph and compared with the theoretical relationship of depth against volume .
The hopper and pipe of the tremie shall be clean and watertight throughout .
The pipe shall extend to the base of the bore and a sliding plug or barrier shall be placed in the pipe to prevent direct contact between the first charge of concrete in the tremie and the water or support fluid .
The pipe shall at all times penetrate the concrete which has previously been placed with a minimum embedment of m and shall not be withdrawn from the concrete until completion of concreting .
A sufficient quantity of concrete shall be maintained within the pipe to ensure that the pressure from it exceeds that from the water or support fluid .
The internal diameter of the pipe of the tremie shall be not less than the greater of mm or six times the maximum aggregate size .
It shall be so designed that external projections are minimized allowing the tremie to pass within reinforcing cages without causing damage .
The internal face of the pipe of the tremie shall be free from projections .
Extraction of casing Consistence of concrete Temporary casings shall be extracted while the concrete within them remains sufficient consistence to ensure that the concrete is not lifted .
During extraction the motion of the casing shall be maintained in an axial direction relative to the pile .
Concrete level When the casing is being extracted a sufficient quantity of concrete shall be maintained within it to ensure that pressure from external water support fluid or soil is exceeded and that the pile is neither reduced in section nor contaminated .
TABLE Casting Tolerance above Cutoff Level for Piles cast in Dry Bores using Temporary Casing and without the use of Permanent Lining Cutoff distance below Casting tolerance above commencing surface H m cutoff level m . . . HC where C length of temporary casing below the commencing surface Beyond H m the casting tolerance applying to H m shall apply .
If H is greater than C then this tolerance is no longer applicable and the tolerances in Table will apply .
TABLE Casting Tolerance above Cutoff Level for Piles cast in Dry Bores within Permanent Lining tubes or Permanent casings or where their Cutoff Levels are in Stable Ground below the Base of any Casing used Cutoff distance below Casting tolerance above commencing surface H m cutoff level m . . . H Beyond H m the casting tolerance applying to H m shall apply .
TABLE Casting Tolerance above Cutoff Level for Piles cast under Water or Support Fluid Cutoff distance below Casting tolerance above commencing surface H m cutoff level m . . . H C where C length of temporary casing below the commencing surface Beyond H m the casting tolerance applying to H m shall apply .
In cases where a pile is cast so that the cutoff is within a permanent lining tube the appropriate tolerance is given by deletion of the casing term C in the table .
The concrete level within a temporary casing in a dry bore may be topped up where necessary during the course of casing extraction so that the base of the casing is always below the concrete surface until the casting of the pile has been completed .
Adequate precautions shall be taken in all cases where excess heads of water or support fluid could occur as the casing is withdrawn because of the displacement of water or fluid by the concrete as it flows into its final position against the walls of the pile bore .
Where two or more discontinuous lengths of casing double casing are used in the construction the Contractors method of working shall produce piles to their full designed cross sections .
The depth to the average levels of the concrete surface of the pile shall be measured before and after each temporary casing is removed .
These measurements shall be recorded on the pile record .
Pile head casting level tolerances For piles cast in dry bores using temporary casing and without the use of a permanent casing piles heads shall be cast to a level above the specified cutoff so that after trimming a sound concrete connection with the pile can be made .
The casting level shall be above the cutoff level and within the tolerance shown in Table but shall not be above the commencing surface level .
No pile shall be cast with its cutoff level below standing water level unless appropriate measures Amendment November Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Piling and Embedded Retaining Walls are taken to prevent inflow of water causing segregation of the concrete as temporary casing is extracted .
For piles cast in dry bores within permanent lining tubes or permanent casings to where their cutoff levels are in stable ground below the base of any casing used pile heads shall be cast to a level above the specified cutoff so that after trimming a sound concrete connection with the pile can be made .
The casting level shall be above the cutoff level and within the tolerance shown in Table but shall not be above the commencing surface level .
For piles cast under water or support fluid the pile heads shall be cast to a level above the specified cutoff so that after trimming to remove all debris and contaminated concrete a sound concrete connection with the pile can be made .
The casting level shall be above the cutoff level and within the tolerance shown in Table but shall not be above the commencing surface level .
Cutoff levels may be specified below the standing groundwater level and where this condition applies the borehole fluid level shall not be reduced below the standing groundwater level until the concrete has set .
Where either support fluid or water is mixed in the ground by the drilling equipment to assist with the installation of temporary casings the casting level shall be coincident with the commencing surface .
Temporary backfilling above pile casting level After each pile has been cast any empty bore remaining shall be carefully backfilled as soon as possible with inert spoil .
Cutting off pile heads When cutting off and trimming piles to the specified cutoff level the Contractor shall take care to avoid shattering or otherwise damaging the rest of the pile .
Any cracked or defective concrete shall be cut away and the pile repaired in a manner to provide a full and sound section at the cutoff level .
Grout The use of grout containing fine aggregate is permitted in place of concrete specified elsewhere in this Clause .
The requirements of Clause sub Clauses to shall apply .
The sand shall be in accordance with the limits of CP or MP of BS EN .
The moisture content of aggregates shall be measured immediately before mixing and as frequently thereafter as is necessary to maintain consistency of the mix .
Allowance shall be made for the aggregate moisture when assessing batch weights .
Where the word concrete is used elsewhere in this Clause then grout shall be read in its place .
In particular subClauses to shall also apply to grout except the requirement for grout consistence shall be that in Clause subClause .
Pressure grouting Grouting of piles Where bases or sides of piles are to be pressure grouted as detailed in Appendix the Contractor shall construct the piles with grout tubes and any other necessary equipment preinstalled so that piles may subsequently be grouted .
Method of grouting The method of grouting shall be such that the completed pile meets the requirements of the Specification for loadsettlement behaviour and that during grouting pile uplift is within the limits specified .
Where required in Appendix the Contractor shall submit full descriptions of the equipment materials and methods that he plans to use before commencing grouting .
The method statement shall comprise at least the following information i Details of specialist contractor for grouting if applicable names of key personnel and their curricula vitae and previous experience on similar types of work .
ii Details of grout pump mixer agitator and any other equipment used for mixing and injection of grout .
iii Full details of grout to be used including admixtures .
iv Method of quality control on grout including details of number of cubes taken and checks on density flow and bleed of the grout .
v Method of measuring grout take which shall be automatic and include a physical method of checking grout take at the end of injection of each circuit .
vi Method of measuring grout pressures which shall include a continuous record .
Calibration certificates for pressure gauges .
vii Typical record sheet for grouting which shall include records of grout take grout pressure residual pressure times of grouting and pile uplift for each grouting circuit .
Typical continuous records of grout pressure and pile uplift shall also be included .
Amendment November Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Piling and Embedded Retaining Walls viii Target minimum maximum and residual grout pressures for each grout injection .
ix Method of grout injection including full details of any packers .
Target grout volumes for each injection .
x Method of measuring friction losses in the tubespackers .
Grout tubes The grouting tubes shall be tested to determine any grout leakage in joints under pressure prior to installation into the piles .
The grout tubes must be capable of withstanding the pressures to which they will be subjected .
Robust threaded caps shall be provided to protect the top of the grouting tubes during concreting and afterwards .
The grouting tubes shall be flushed with water after each grouting operation .
If the target volumes or grout pressures are not achieved or the specified uplift is not achieved then the pile shall be regrouted within hours .
The Contractor shall provide an engineer to monitor grout pressures and grout takes .
Pile uplift During base grouting the pile uplift shall be not less than .
mm and shall not exceed .
mm .
The Contractor shall provide an engineer to monitor the uplift of the piles during grouting .
The pile uplift shall be monitored with an appropriate level reading off a graduated scale attached to the pile head and by a dial gauge attached to a reference frame .
A continuous record of pile uplift shall be made using a displacement transducer also attached to the reference frame .
The accuracy of measurement shall be a minimum of .
mm for each monitoring device .
The design of the reference frame shall be made available on request .
Grout testing Close control of the mixing of the grout shall be carried out .
The Contractor shall provide and maintain on site all test facilities required to test and control the grout mixes .
Records In accordance with Appendix the Contractor shall provide duplicate copies of all grouting records for each pile within hours of the completion of grouting that pile .
The records shall comprise the following information a Pile number .
b Date .
c Leakage test on grout pipes .
d Grout mix .
e Continuous records of grout pressure and pile uplift to the same timescale .
The records shall be annotated at regular intervals with physical measurements from pressure gauges and dial gauges including times of such measurements .
Circuit number and pile number are also to be included .
f For each circuit the peak and residual grout pressures including times and sequence of grouting .
g The total pile uplift and the uplift after each circuit is grouted .
h For each circuit the physical and automatic measurements for grout volume injected and derived injected volumes .
The total grout volume .
i All tests made on grout .
Bored Piles Constructed Using Continuous Flight Augers and Concrete or Grout Injection Through Hollow Auger Stems Diameter of piles The diameter of a pile shall be not less than the specified diameter .
The cutting head width shall be checked as necessary and recorded for each pile to ensure the specified diameter is achieved and that the width is greater than the diameter of the following flight .
A tolerance of on the cutting head width is permissible .
Boring Boring near recently cast piles Piles shall be formed in an order and in such a manner that no damage is sustained by previously formed piles .
Removal of augers from the ground The auger shall not be extracted from the ground during the boring or construction of a pile in such a way that an open unsupported bore or inflow of water into March Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Piling and Embedded Retaining Walls the pile section would result .
As the auger is withdrawn from the ground it shall be cleaned of all rising .
Suitability of boring equipment The piles shall be bored using equipment capable of penetrating the ground without drawing surrounding soils laterally into the pile bore .
The Contractor shall record the fact if flighting of soil up the auger is excessive .
The verticality of the auger shall be checked at the commencement of boring .
Should it deviate during boring so that the pile verticality is outside the specified tolerance the fact shall be recorded on the pile record .
Sealing the base of the auger The base of the auger stem shall be fitted with a suitable means of sealing it against ingress of water and soil during boring .
Depth of piles Any failure of a pile to reach the required depth as given in Appendix shall be recorded by the Contractor and a full statement of the reasons included in the pile record .
Placing of concrete or grout Mix design and consistence concrete Where not otherwise stated in this section the concrete shall comply with Series .
The design and consistence of concrete to be used in the formation of a pile shall produce a concrete mix which is suitable for pumping .
It shall have a slump classs S or greater or flow classes F to F and a minimum cement content of kgm .
The concrete shall be designed so that segregation does not occur during the placing process and bleeding of the concrete shall be minimized .
The consistence of concrete mixes shall be measured by the method described in Appendix .
Equipment for supply of concrete or grout to piles Grout or concrete shall be supplied to the pile through suitable concrete pump tubing and the hollow auger stem .
All pipe fitments and connections shall be so constructed that grout does not leak during the injection process .
Commencement of concrete or grout supply to each pile At the beginning of concrete or grout placing the sealing device at the base of the auger stem shall be removed by the application of concrete or grout pressure .
Care shall be taken to ensure that the auger is lifted only the minimum distance necessary to initiate the flow of concrete or grout and that water inflow and soil movement at the base of the auger are minimized .
The technique and equipment used to initiate and maintain the concrete or grout flow shall be such that a pile of the full specified crosssection is obtained from the maximum depth of boring to the final pile cutoff level .
Rate of supply of concrete or grout The concrete or grout shall be supplied to the pile at a sufficient rate during auger withdrawal to ensure that a continuous monolithic shaft of at least the full specified crosssection is formed free from debris or any segregated concrete or grout .
Completion of concreting or grouting of piles If the concrete or grout placing in any pile can not be completed in the normal manner then the pile shall be rebored to a safe level below the position of interruption in supply before the concrete or grout has achieved initial set and before further concrete or grout is injected .
The method statement shall set out the procedure .
Casting level of pile head Concrete or grout shall be cast to the commencing surface level in all cases .
The pile position shall be clearly marked and fenced off so as not to cause a safety hazard .
Mix design and consistence grout Where not otherwise stated in this section the grout shall comply with Clause subClauses to with the exception that sand may be used .
The sand shall be in accordance with the limits of CP or MP of BS EN .
The moisture content of aggregates shall be measured immediately before mixing and as frequently thereafter as is necessary to maintain consistency of the mix .
Allowance shall be made for the aggregate moisture content when assessing batch weights .
The procedure for monitoring the suitability of grout throughout the Works shall be established prior to commencement of the Works .
Reinforcement Steel reinforcement shall be as described in Appendix and in accordance with Series .
Where steel sections are used for reinforcement they shall be in accordance with Series .
Amendment November Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Piling and Embedded Retaining Walls All reinforcement shall be placed with the minimum delay after the completion of the concreting or grouting operation .
It shall be fabricated in cages or bundles of bars fixed securely to permit it to be placed in the correct position and to the depth specified through the concrete or grout of the pile .
Suitable spacers shall be provided to maintain the specified concrete or grout cover to steel .
The transverse reinforcement of any reinforcing cage shall meet the design requirements and shall maintain the longitudinal bars in position when the cage is inserted into the wet concrete or grout .
Longitudinal main steel reinforcement shall be continuous over the specified length .
Where joints are necessary no more than one joint shall be used and then only if the reinforcement cage length exceeds m. Joints in steel reinforcement shall be such that the full strength of each bar is effective across the joint and shall be made so that there is no detrimental displacement of the reinforcement during placing in the pile .
At the joint bars shall be welded to the requirement of BS or joined together in a suitable manner .
Reinforcement shall be placed and maintained in position to provide the specified projection of reinforcement above the final cutoff level .
A vertical tolerance of mm on the level of reinforcement projecting above the final cutoff level shall be met .
The Contractor shall provide such additional reinforcement as he may require to suit his method of placing the reinforcing steel cage .
Monitoring system for pile construction An automated system shall be provided for monitoring the construction of the piles .
It shall provide the operator with information on the depth of the auger tip flow of concrete and relative pressure of concrete as a minimum .
In addition the automatic monitoring equipment shall monitor continuously with depth the following parameters .
a During boring i auger penetration rate b During concreting i rate of extraction of the auger ii relative injection pressure of concrete or grout iii rate of supply of concrete or grout Equipment used for monitoring shall be calibrated at the start of the piling works and calibration certificates issued before commencing piling .
After the commencement of works the monitoring equipment shall be calibrated at the frequency specified below or at any time where there is reason to suspect malfunction .
Depth shall be calibrated once a week .
At full auger length the tolerance is .
m. Concrete flow rate shall be calibrated once during the progress of the works by passing a known volume of concrete through the flow meter .
The tolerance on flow is .
The pressure transducer shall have a calibration certificate .
The tolerance on pressure shall be stated in bars .
The automated monitoring system must be operational at the start of every pile .
The following information shall be recorded during the construction of each pile i the incremental time of auger penetration during boring ii final depth of the bore iii time for each .
m increment of auger extraction during concreting iv the volume of concrete or grout pumped for each .
m increment of auger extraction during concreting v total volume of concrete or grout for completion of the pile vi the time at the start and end of boring concreting and insertion of the reinforcement cage and any time intervals for delays or stoppages vii relative concrete pressure during concreting viii the direction of rotation of the auger during concreting If the number of auger revolutions relative to auger penetration becomes abnormally high at any stage during boring the fact shall be recorded as shall the occurrence of excessive flighting .
The rig operator shall be competent and experienced in the construction of continuous flight auger piles and a full time supervisor shall be devoted to pile construction .
Where required in Appendix details of their relevant experience shall be submitted prior to work commencing .
In accordance with Appendix the Contractor shall submit proposals on how he shall complete a pile in the event of failure of all or part of the rig instrumentation system prior to work commencing .
This proposal shall include the recording of the depth at which failure occurred the time for auger extraction during concreting and the total volume of concrete or grout March Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Piling and Embedded Retaining Walls delivered .
Any pile which was subject to an instrumentation failure during construction shall be integrity tested in accordance with Clause .
The monitoring results must be available immediately on completion of every pile .
Cutting off pile heads When cutting off and trimming piles to the specified cutoff level the Contractor shall take care to avoid shattering or otherwise damaging the rest of the pile .
Any laitence or contaminated cracked or defective concrete shall be cut away and the pile made good in a manner to provide a full and sound section up to the cutoff level .
Driven CastinPlace Piles Materials Permanent casings Permanent casings shall be as specified in Appendix .
Where a permanent casing is to be made from a series of short sections it shall be watertight .
The dimensions and quality of the casing shall be adequate to withstand the stresses caused by handling and driving without damage or distortion .
Pile shoes Pile shoes shall be manufactured from durable material capable of withstanding the stresses caused by driving without damage and shall be designed to give a watertight joint during construction .
Diameter of piles The diameter of a pile shall be not less than the specified diameter .
Temporary casings Temporary casings shall be free from significant distortion .
They shall be of uniform external cross section throughout each continuous length and shall be of sufficient strength to withstand driving and ground forces without deformation .
During concreting they shall be free from internal projections and encrusted concrete which might prevent the proper formation of piles .
Enlarged pile bases Where the Contractor wishes to form a pile with an enlarged base or where such a base is specified in Appendix details of the method of forming the base and the materials to be used shall be included in the Contractors method statement .
Driving piles Piling near recently cast piles Casings shall not be driven or piles formed so close to other piles which have recently been cast and which contain workable or unset concrete that a flow of concrete could be induced from or damage caused to any of the piles .
Performance of driving equipment Where required in Appendix the Contractor shall provide information on the efficiency and energy of the driving equipment including when followers are used .
Where required in Appendix dynamic evaluation and analysis shall be provided .
Drop hammers shall not be used from floating craft in such a manner as to cause instability of the craft or damage to the pile .
Length of piles The length of pile to be driven in any position shall be as specified in Appendix .
During the execution of the Works any amendments to the scheduled lengths shall be recorded by the Contractor and a full statement of the reasons included in the pile record .
Driving procedure and redrive checks Driving procedure and redrive checks shall be in accordance with subClause .. Set The set shall be measured and recorded for each pile at the completion of driving unless otherwise stated in Appendix .
When a set is being measured the following requirements shall be met .
a The exposed part of the pile casing shall be in good condition without damage or distortion .
b The dolly helmet and packing if any shall be in sound condition .
c The hammer blow shall be in line with the pile axis and the impact surfaces shall be flat and at right angles to the pile and hammer axis .
d The hammer shall be in good condition delivering adequate energy per blow and operating correctly .
March Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Piling and Embedded Retaining Walls The set shall be recorded either as the penetration in millimetres per blows or as the number of blows required to produce a penetration of mm .
Driving sequence and risen piles Requirements for the driving sequence and risen piles shall be in accordance with subClause .. Laterally displaced piles shall not be corrected by forceable correction at the heads .
Preboring If preboring is specified the pile casing shall be pitched after preboring to the depth and diameter stipulated in Appendix .
Other means to ease pile driveability may be used provided the completed piles meet their specified requirements .
Internal drop hammer Where a casing for a pile without an enlarged base is to be driven by an internal drop hammer a plug consisting of concrete strength class C with a watercement ratio not exceeding .
shall be placed in the pile .
This plug shall have a compacted height of not less than  times the diameter of the pile .
Fresh concrete shall be added to ensure that this height of driving plug is maintained in the casing throughout the period of driving and in any event a plug of fresh concrete shall be added after  hours of normal driving or after minutes of hard driving or should the piledriving be interrupted for minutes or longer fresh concrete shall be added prior to driving being resumed .
Repair of damaged pile heads and extending of piles to the cutoff level When repairing or extending the head of a pile the head shall be cut off square at sound concrete and all loose particles shall be removed by wire brushing followed by washing with water .
If the level of sound concrete of the pile is below the cutoff level the pile shall be extended to the cutoff level with concrete of a strength class not inferior to that of the concrete of the pile so that it will safely withstand the specified working load .
Lengthening of permanent pile casings during construction The lengthening of permanent steel pile casings by adding an additional length of steel casing during construction shall be carried out in accordance with Clause .
Inspection and remedial work Prior to placing concrete in a pile casing the Contractor shall check that the casing is undamaged and free from water or other foreign matter .
In the event of water or foreign matter having entered the pile casing the casing shall be withdrawn repaired if necessary and redriven or other action taken to continue the construction of the pile to meet the requirements of the Specification .
Reinforcement Steel reinforcement shall be as described in Appendix and in accordance with Series .
The number of joints in longitudinal steel bars shall be kept to a minimum .
The full strength of each bar shall be effective across each joint which shall be made so that there is no detrimental displacement of the reinforcement during the construction of the pile .
Reinforcement shall be maintained in its correct position during concreting of the pile to allow a vertical tolerance of mm on the level of the reinforcement projecting above the final cutoff level to be met .
Where reinforcement is made up into cages they shall be sufficiently rigid to enable them to be placed handled and concreted without damage .
If the cage is to be welded together welding shall be carried out to the requirements of BS .
Spacers shall be designed and manufactured using durable materials which shall not lead to corrosion of the reinforcement or spalling of the concrete cover .
Where required in Appendix details of the means by which the Contractor plans to ensure the correct cover to and position of the reinforcement shall be submitted .
Concrete General Cement materials aggregates admixtures and water shall be in accordance with Series .
The consistence and method of placing of the concrete shall be such that a continuous monolithic concrete shaft of the full crosssection is formed .
Concrete shall be transported from the mixer to the position of the pile in such a manner that segregation of the constituents of concrete mix does not occur .
The concrete shall be placed without such interruption as would allow the previously placed batch to have hardened .
The Contractor shall take all precautions in the design of the concrete mix and placing of the concrete to avoid arching of the concrete in the casing .
No spoil liquid or Amendment November Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Piling and Embedded Retaining Walls other foreign matter shall be permitted to contaminate the concrete .
Consistence of concrete Consistence measured at the time of discharge into the pile casing shall be in accordance with the requirement shown in Table except that these standards shall not apply to piling systems which use semidry concrete and employ special means for its compaction .
The concrete shall be of the consistence specified when in its final position and until all construction procedures in forming the pile have been completed .
Compaction Internal vibrators shall not be used to compact concrete castinplace .
Placing concrete Measures shall be taken as necessary in all piles to ensure that the structural strength of the placed concrete is not impaired through grout loss segregation or bleeding .
Extraction of casing Consistence of concrete Temporary casings shall be extracted while the concrete within them remains sufficiently workable to ensure that the concrete is not lifted .
Should a semi dry concrete mix have been used the Contractor shall ensure the concrete shall not lift during extraction of the casing .
Concrete level When the casing is being extracted a sufficient quantity of concrete shall be maintained within it to ensure that pressure from external water or soil is exceeded and that the pile is neither reduced in section nor contaminated .
Concrete shall be topped up as necessary while the casing is extracted until the required head of concrete to complete the pile in a sound and proper manner has been provided .
No concrete is to be placed once the bottom of the casing has been lifted above the top of the concrete .
Vibrating extractors The use of vibrating casing extractors will be permitted subject to Clause and Clause sub Clause .
Concrete casting tolerances For piles constructed without the use of a rigid permanent lining pile concrete shall be cast to the commencing surface level .
Where piles are constructed inside rigid permanent lining tubes or permanent casings pile heads shall be cast to a level above the specified cutoff so that after trimming a sound concrete connection with the pile can be made .
In this case the tolerance of casting above the cutoff level shall be determined according to Table .
Temporary backfilling above pile casting level After each pile has been cast any hole remaining shall be protected and shall be carefully backfilled as soon as possible with appropriate materials .
Cutting off pile heads When cutting off and trimming piles to the specified cutoff level the Contractor shall take care to avoid shattering or otherwise damaging the rest of the pile .
Any cracked or defective concrete shall be cut away and the pile repaired to provide a full and sound section to the cutoff level .
Steel Bearing Piles Materials Steel for bearing piles shall be in accordance with Series .
Cast steel shoes shall be of steel to BS EN Grade A .
Strengthening of piles The strengthening to the toe of a pile in lieu of a shoe or the strengthening of the head of a pile shall be made using material of the same strength class as the pile .
Manufacturing tolerances All piles shall be of the type and crosssectional dimensions as designed .
For standard rolled sections the dimensional tolerances and weight shall comply with the relevant standard .
Length tolerance of Hsection steel bearing piles shall be mm in accordance with BS EN .
The tolerance on length of other steel bearing piles shall be and mm unless otherwise specified .
For proprietary sections the dimensional tolerances shall comply with the manufacturers standards .
The rolling or manufacturing tolerances for proprietary sections shall be such that the actual weight Amendment November Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Piling and Embedded Retaining Walls of section does not differ from the theoretical weight by more than or ..
The rolling or manufacturing tolerances for steel tubular piles shall be such that the actual weight of section does not differ from the theoretical weight by more than .
The rolling or proprietary tolerances for Hsection steel bearing piles shall be such that the actual weight of the section does not differ from the theoretical weight by more than .. Straightness of sections For standard rolled sections the deviation from straightness shall be within the compliance provisions of BS EN .
When two or more rolled sections are joined by buttjointing the deviation from straightness shall not exceed of the overall length of the pile .
For proprietary sections made up from rolled sections and for tubular piles the deviation from straightness on any longitudinal face shall not exceed of the length of the pile nor mm in any m length .
Fabrication of piles For tubular piles where the load will be carried by the wall of the pile and if the pile will be subject to loads that induce reversal of stress during or after construction the external diameter at any section as measured by using a steel tape on the circumference shall not differ from the theoretical diameter by more than .
The ends of all tubular piles as manufactured shall be within a tolerance on ovality of as measured by a ring gauge for a distance of mm at each end of the pile length .
The root edges or root faces of lengths of piles that are to be shop buttwelded shall not differ by more than of the thickness of pile walls not exceeding mm thick or by more than mm for piles where the wall is thicker than mm .
When piles of unequal wall thickness are to be buttwelded the thickness of the thinner material shall be the criterion .
Pile lengths shall be set up so that the differences in dimensions are matched as evenly as possible .
Matching of pile lengths Longitudinal seam welds and spiral seam welds of lengths of tubular piles forming a complete pile shall whenever possible be evenly staggered at the butt but if in order to obtain a satisfactory match of the ends of piles or the specified straightness the longitudinal seams or spiral seams are brought closely to one alignment at the joint then they shall be staggered by at least mm .
Welding All welding shall be to BS EN and BS EN and when appropriate shall be in accordance with Clause .
For a tubular pile where the load will be compressive and nonreversible and will be carried by the wall of the pile or by a concrete core the welding shall be to BS EN and BS EN or BS .
Welders qualifications Only welders who are qualified to BS EN or who have attained a similar standard shall be employed on the Works .
Proof of welders proficiency shall be made available on request .
Welding procedures All welding procedures shall have been qualified to BS EN ISO BS EN ISO BS EN ISO and BS EN ISO and the Contractor shall make available full details of the welding procedures and electrodes with drawings and schedules as may be necessary .
Tests shall be undertaken as may be required by the relevant British Standard or as may be required in Appendix .
Manufacturing processes Welded tube piles Where required in Appendix the Contractor shall submit details of the manufacturing and welding procedures before commencement of manufacture .
Welded box piles and proprietary sections Welded box piles or proprietary sections made up from two or more hotrolled sections shall be welded in accordance with the manufacturers standards .
Nondestructive testing of welds During production of welded tube piles one radiograph or ultrasonic test of a length of approximately mm shall be made at each end of a length as manufactured at the mill to provide a spot check on weld quality .
In addition on a spirally welded tube pile a further check shall be made on welded joints between strip lengths .
All the circumferential welds shall be fully radiographed or ultrasonically tested by the method specified in Appendix .
Results shall be made available within days of completion of the tests .
Amendment November Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Piling and Embedded Retaining Walls If the results of any weld test do not conform to the specified requirements two additional specimens from the same length of pile shall be tested .
In the case of failure of one or both of these additional tests the length of pile covered by the tests shall be rejected .
Standards for welds Longitudinal welds in tubular piles .
For piles of longitudinal or spiral weld manufacture where the load will be carried by the wall of the pile and if the pile will be subject to loads which induce reversal of stress during or after construction other than driving stresses the standard for interpretation of nondestructive testing shall be the American Petroleum Institute Specification L. The maximum permissible height of weld reinforcement shall not exceed .
mm for wall thicknesses not exceeding .
mm and .
mm for wall thicknesses greater than .
mm .
Longitudinal welds in proprietary box piles and proprietary sections .
Longitudinal welds joining the constituent parts of the box or proprietary section shall be in accordance with the manufacturers specification .
Circumferential welds .
For circumferential welds in tubular piles the same maximum height of weld reinforcement as specified above for longitudinal welds in tubular piles shall apply the standard for interpretation of nondestructive testing shall be the American Petroleum Institute Specification L. Sitewelded butt splices Support and alignment When lengths of pile are to be buttspliced on site adequate facilities shall be provided for supporting and aligning them prior to welding such that the specified straightness criterion can be achieved .
Weld tests Weld tests shall be performed by radiographic or ultrasonic methods as specified .
Provided that satisfactory results are being obtained one test of a length of mm shall be made for or more of the number of welded splices in the case where the load will be carried by the wall or section of the pile .
Where the load will be carried by the concrete core of a pile the number of tests will be as specified in Appendix but will not normally exceed of the number of butt splices .
Results shall be made available within days of completion of the tests .
Any defective weld shall be cut out replaced and reinspected .
Standards for site butt welds Welds shall comply with the requirements of the weld quality standards for site butt welds given in Series .
Protection during welding All work associated with welding shall be protected from the weather so that the quality of work meets the requirements of the Specification .
Coating piles for protection against corrosion Durability of coatings Where coatings are specified they shall be provided in accordance with Appendix .
Definition The term coating shall include the primer and the coats specified .
Specialist labour The preparation of surfaces and the application of the coats to form the coating shall be carried out by specialist labour having experience in the preparation of the surface and the application of the coating specified .
Protection during coating All work associated with surface preparation and coating shall be undertaken inside a waterproof structure .
Surface preparation All surfaces to be coated shall be clean and dry and prepared as follows Degreasing with detergent wash compatible with the coating shall be carried out where necessary .
All surfaces shall be blast cleaned to Sa .
of BS Part A. Blastcleaning shall be done after fabrication .
Unless an instantaneousrecovery blasting machine is used the cleaned steel surface shall be airblasted with clean dry air and vacuumcleaned or otherwise freed from abrasive residues and dust immediately after cleaning .
Application and type of primer Within hours after surface preparation before visible deterioration takes place the surface shall be coated with an appropriate primer or the specified coating .
No coating shall be applied to a metal surface which is not thoroughly dry .
Amendment November Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Piling and Embedded Retaining Walls The primer shall be compatible with the specified coating and shall be such that if subsequent welding or cutting is to be carried out it shall not emit noxious fumes or be detrimental to the welding .
Control of humidity during coating No coating shall be applied when the surface metal temperature is less than C above the dewpoint temperature or when the humidity could have an adverse effect on the coat .
When heating or ventilation is used to secure suitable conditions to allow coating to proceed care shall be taken to ensure the heating or ventilation of a local surface does not have an adverse effect on adjacent surfaces or work already done .
Parts to be welded The coating within mm of a weld shall be applied after welding .
The method of application shall comply with the manufacturers recommendations .
Thickness number and colour of coats The nominal thickness of the finished coating and if necessary of each coat shall be as specified .
The average coat or finished coating thickness shall be equal to or greater than the specified nominal thickness .
In no case shall any coat or finished coating be less than of the nominal thickness .
Each coat shall be applied after an interval that ensures the proper hardening or curing of the previous coat .
Where more than one coat is applied to a surface each coat shall if possible be of a different colour from the previous coat .
The colour sequence and final coating colour shall be established prior to application of coatings .
Inspection of coatings The finished coating shall be generally smooth of dense and uniform texture and free from sharp protuberances or pinholes .
Excessive sags dimpling or curtaining shall be retreated .
Any coat damaged by subsequent processes or which has deteriorated to an extent such that proper adhesion of the coating is in doubt shall be removed and the surface shall be cleaned to the original standard and recoated to provide the specified number of coats .
The completed coating shall be checked for thickness by a magnetic thickness gauge .
Areas where the thickness is less than that specified shall receive additional treatment .
When specified the completed coating shall be checked for adhesion by means of an adhesion test to BS EN ISO BS E carried out on of the piles .
The adhesion of any completed coating shall not be worse than Classification .
If adhesion tests on the initial batch are satisfactory then on further batches of the piles shall be tested .
Adhesion tests shall not be carried out until seven days after coating .
On completion of testing the test area shall be made good to the standard specified in Appendix .
Areas where the adhesion is defective shall be repaired and reinspected .
Marking handling and storage of piles Marking of piles Each pile shall be clearly numbered and its length shown near the pile head using white paint .
In addition before being driven each pile shall be graduated along its length at intervals of mm .
Handling and storage of piles All piles within a stack shall be in groups of the same length and on appropriate supports .
All operations such as handling transporting and pitching of piles shall be carried out in a manner such that no damage occurs to piles and their coatings .
Driving of piles Leaders and trestles At all stages during driving and until incorporation in the structure the free length of the pile shall be adequately supported and restrained by means of leaders trestles temporary supports or other guide arrangements to maintain position and alignment and to prevent buckling .
In marine works lengths which remain unsupported after driving shall be adequately restrained until incorporated into the Permanent Works .
These constraint arrangements shall be such that no damage occurs to piles or their coatings .
Performance of driving equipment Performance of driving equipment shall be in accordance with subClause .
of this Specification .
Length of piles The length of pile to be driven and any additional lengths of pile to be added during driving shall be as specified in Appendix .
During the execution of the Works any amendments to the scheduled lengths shall be recorded by the Contractor and a full statement of the reasons included in the pile record .
Amendment November Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Piling and Embedded Retaining Walls Driving procedure and redrive checks Driving procedure and redrive checks shall be in accordance with subClause .. Set Requirements for set shall be in accordance with subClause .. Driving sequence and risen piles Requirements for driving sequence and risen piles shall be in accordance with subClause .. Laterally displaced piles shall not be corrected by forceable correction at the heads unless the Contractor can demonstrate that the integrity durability and performance of the piles has not been adversely affected .
Preboring If preboring is specified the pile shall be pitched after preboring to the depth and diameter stipulated in Appendix .
Other means to ease pile drivability may be used provided the completed piles meet the requirements of the Specification .
Preparation of pile heads If a steel structure is to be welded to piles the piles shall be cut square and to within mm of the levels specified .
If pile heads are to be encased in concrete they shall be cut to within mm of the levels specified and protective coatings shall be removed from the surfaces of the pile heads down to a level mm above the soffit of the concrete .
Reduction of Friction on Piles General Where the particular method of reducing friction is not specified the Contractor shall provide full details of the method which he plans to employ .
The Contractor shall ensure that any product used will be compatible with the ground conditions into which it will be installed .
Particular requirements are detailed in Appendix .
Preapplied bituminous or other frictionreducing coating materials General Where a proprietary product is used the process of cleaning pile surfaces and the conditions and methods of application shall conform with the manufacturers current instructions .
All materials shall conform with the manufacturers specification which shall be made available before any coating is applied .
Protection from damage Where a frictionreducing material has been applied to a preformed pile prior to installation it shall be protected from damage during handling and transportation .
In the event of damage to the coating it shall be made good on site to the same specification as the original coating prior to the pile being driven .
Where bituminous materials are involved precautions shall be taken as necessary in hot weather to prevent excessive flow or displacement of the coating .
The coated piles shall be adequately protected against direct sunlight and if stacked they shall be separated to prevent their coatings sticking together .
Pile driving In the case of applied coatings the piles shall not be driven when the air temperature is such that the coating will crack flake or otherwise be damaged prior to entry into the ground .
Where bituminous materials are involved driving shall be carried out while the temperature is at or above C or as called for in the manufacturers instructions .
Preapplied lowfriction sleeving Where required in Appendix detailed design of the preapplied lowfriction sleeving shall be submitted prior to driving the piles .
All materials shall conform with the manufacturers specification which shall be made available before the material is used .
Formedinplace lowfriction surround Where required in Appendix detailed design of the formedinplace lowfriction surround shall be submitted prior to driving or forming the piles .
All materials shall conform with the manufacturers specification which shall be made available before the material is used .
Preinstalled lowfriction sleeving Where required in Appendix detailed design of the preinstalled lowfriction sleeving shall be March Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Piling and Embedded Retaining Walls submitted prior to driving or forming the piles .
All materials shall conform with the manufacturers specification which shall be made available before the material is used .
Inspection Where required in Appendix piles shall be partially exposed or extracted .
Where significant damage to the coating is found to have occurred the Contractor shall prepare a method statement for the repair or replacement of the coating prior to carrying out the work .
NonDestructive Methods for Testing Piles Integrity testing of piles Method of testing Where integrity testing is called for the method to be adopted shall be one of the following as specified a impulse method b Sonic Echo Frequency Response or Transient Dynamic steady state vibration method c sonic logging method .
Other methods may be considered subject to satisfactory evidence of performance .
Particular requirements are detailed in Appendix .
Age of piles at time of testing In the case of castinplace concrete piles integrity tests shall not be carried out until the number of days specified in Appendix have elapsed since pile casting .
Preparation of pile heads Where the method of testing requires the positioning of sensing equipment on the pile head the head shall be broken down to expose sound concrete and shall be clean free from water laitence loose concrete overspilled concrete and blinding concrete and shall be readily accessible for the purpose of testing .
Specialist Subcontractor The testing shall be carried out by a specialist firm subject to demonstration of satisfactory performance on other similar contracts before the commencement of testing .
Where required in Appendix the Contractor shall submit the name of the specialist integrity testing firm a description of the test equipment a test method statement and a programme for executing the specified tests prior to commencement of the Works .
Interpretation of tests The interpretation of tests shall be carried out by competent and experienced persons .
The Contractor shall give all available details of the ground conditions pile dimensions and construction method to the specialist firm before the commencement of integrity testing in order to facilitate interpretation of the tests .
Report Preliminary results of the tests shall be made available within hours of carrying out the tests .
The test results and findings shall be recorded and made available within days of the completion of each phase of testing .
The report shall contain a summary of the method of interpretation including all assumptions calibrations corrections algorithms and derivations used in the analyses .
If the results are presented in a graphical form the same scales shall be used consistently throughout the report .
The units on all scales shall be clearly marked .
Anomalous results In the event that any anomaly in the acoustic signal is found in the results indicating a possible defect in the pile the Contractor shall demonstrate that the pile is satisfactory for its intended use or shall carry out remedial works to make it so .
Sonic logging tubes shall be grouted up after the Contractor has demonstrated that the pile is satisfactory .
Dynamic piletesting General Particular requirements are detailed in Appendix .
Measuring instruments Current calibration certificates shall be made available for all instruments and monitoring equipment before testing commences .
March Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Piling and Embedded Retaining Walls Hammer The hammer and all other equipment used shall be capable of delivering an impact force sufficient to mobilize the equivalent specified dynamic test load without damaging the pile .
Preparation of the pile head The preparation of the pile head for the application of the dynamic test load shall involve trimming the head cleaning and building up the pile using materials which will at the time of testing safely withstand the impact stresses .
The impact surface shall be flat and at right angles to the pile axis .
Where pile preparation requires drilling holes or welding this preparation shall not adversely affect the performance of the pile when in service .
Interpretation of tests The interpretation of the tests shall be carried out by competent and experienced persons .
The Contractor shall give all available details of the ground conditions pile dimensions and construction method to the specialist firm carrying out the testing in order to facilitate interpretation of tests .
Time of testing The time between the completion of installation and testing for a preformed pile shall be more than hours and in the case of a castinplace pile shall be such that the pile is not damaged under the impact stresses .
Measurement of set If specified the permanent penetration per blow and temporary compression of the pile and soil system shall be measured independently of the instruments being used to record the dynamic test data from a fixed reference point unaffected by the piling operations .
Results Initial results shall be made available within hours of the completion of a test .
These shall include a the maximum force applied to the pile head b the maximum pile head velocity c the maximum energy imparted to the pile .
Subsequently a full report shall be made available within days of the completion of testing including a date of pile installation b date of test c pile identification number and location d length of pile below commencing surface e total pile length including projection above commencing surface at time of test f length of pile from instrumentation position to toe g hammer type drop and other relevant details h blow selected for analysis i test load achieved ie .
total mobilised deduced static load j pile head movement at equivalent Design Verification Load k pile head movement at equivalent Design Verification Load plus of Specified Working Load l pile head movement at maximum applied test load m permanent residual movement of pile head after each blow n temporary compression .
For all piles tested the following information shall be provided for typical blows a date of pile installation b date of test c pile identification number and location d length of pile below commencing surface e total pile length including projection above commencing surface at time of test f length of pile from instrumentation position to toe g hammer type drop and other relevant details h permanent set per blow i maximum force at pile head j maximum velocity at pile head k maximum downward energy imparted to the pile l dynamic soil resistance mobilised during the blow m static soil resistance mobilised during the blow assuming that soil damping is proportional to pile velocity n magnitude and location of possible pile damage .
March Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Piling and Embedded Retaining Walls Where required in Appendix an analysis of measurements from selected blows shall be carried out using a numerical model of the pile and soil to provide the following information .
a Magnitude and distribution of mobilised static soil resistance b Magnitude and distribution of soil stiffness and damping c Deduced static load deflection behaviour of the pile at the head and toe d Assumptions made in the analysis e Limitations of the method .
Static Load Testing of Piles General The design and construction of the load application system shall be satisfactory for the required test .
These details shall be made available prior to the commencement of testing .
Particular requirements are detailed in Appendix .
Construction of a pile to be tested Notice of construction The Contractor shall give at least hours notice of the commencement of construction of any preliminary pile which is to be testloaded .
Method of construction Each preliminary test pile shall be constructed in a manner similar to that to be used for the construction of the working piles and by the use of similar equipment and materials .
Extra reinforcement and concrete of increased strength will be permitted in the shafts of preliminary piles where necessary for carrying out the testing .
Boring or driving record For each preliminary pile which is to be tested a detailed record of the conditions experienced during boring or of the progress during driving shall be made available daily not later than noon on the next working day .
Where soil samples are required to be taken or in situ tests to be made the Contractor shall present the results without delay .
Concrete test cubes Four test cubes shall be made from the concrete used in the preliminary test pile and from the concrete used for building up a working pile .
If a concrete pile is extended or capped for the purpose of testing a further four cubes shall be made from the corresponding batch of concrete .
The cubes shall be made and tested in accordance with BS EN ISO .
The pile test shall not be started until the strength of the cubes taken from the pile exceeds twice the average direct stress in any pile section under the maximum required test load and the strength of the cubes taken from the cap exceeds twice the average stress at any point in the cap under the same load .
Preparation of working pile to be tested If a test is required on a working pile the Contractor shall cut down or otherwise prepare the pile for testing in accordance with Appendix and sub Clauses and .
Cutoff level The cutoff level for a preliminary test pile shall be as specified in Appendix .
Where the cutoff level of working piles is below the ground level at the time of pile installation and where it is required to carry out a proof test from that installation level either allowance shall be made in the determination of the design verification load for friction which may be developed between the cutoff level and the existing ground level or the pile may be sleeved appropriately or otherwise protected to eliminate friction which develops over the extended length .
Supervision The settingup of pile testing equipment shall be carried out under competent supervision and the equipment shall be checked to ensure that the settingup is satisfactory before the commencement of load application .
All tests shall be carried out only under the direction of an experienced and competent supervisor conversant with the test equipment and test procedure .
All personnel operating the test equipment shall have been trained in its use .
Safety precautions General Design erection and dismantling of the pile test reaction system and the application of load shall be carried out according to the requirements of the various applicable statutory regulations concerned with lifting and handling heavy equipment and shall safeguard operatives and others who may from time to time be in the vicinity of a test from all avoidable hazards .
Amendment November Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Piling and Embedded Retaining Walls Kentledge Where kentledge is used the Contractor shall construct the foundations for the kentledge and any cribwork beams or other supporting structure in such a manner that there will not be differential settlement bending or deflection of an amount that constitutes a hazard to safety or impairs the efficiency of the operation .
The kentledge shall be adequately bonded tied or otherwise held together to prevent it becoming unstable because of deflection of the supports or for any other reason .
The weight of kentledge for each test shall be greater than the maximum test load for that test and if the weight is estimated from the density and volume of the constituent materials an adequate factor of safety against error shall be allowed .
Additional kentledge required shall be determined taking into account the accuracy of positioning of the centre of gravity of the stack .
Tension piles reaction piles and ground anchorages Where tension piles reaction piles or ground anchorages are used to provide the necessary load reaction they shall be so designed that they will resist the forces applied to them safely and without excessive deformation which could cause a safety hazard during the work .
Such piles or anchorages shall be placed in the specified positions and bars tendons or links shall be aligned to give a stable reaction in the direction required .
Any welding employed to extend or to fix anchorages to a reaction frame shall be carried out so that the full strength of the system is adequate and unimpaired .
Testing equipment In all cases the Contractor shall ensure that when the hydraulic jack and loadmeasuring device are mounted on the pile head the whole system will be stable up to the maximum load to be applied .
If in the course of carrying out a test any unforeseen occurrence should take place further loading shall not be applied until a proper engineering assessment of the condition has been made and steps have been taken to rectify any fault .
Reading of gauges shall however be continued where possible and if it is safe to do so .
Where an inadequacy in any part of the system might constitute a hazard means shall be provided to enable the test to be controlled from a position clear of the kentledge stack or test frame .
The hydraulic jack pump hoses pipes couplings and other apparatus to be operated under hydraulic pressure shall be capable of withstanding a pressure of  times the maximum pressure used in the test without leaking .
The maximum test load expressed as a reading on the gauge in use shall be displayed and all operators shall be made aware of this limit .
Pile head for compression test For a pile that is tested in compression the pile head or cap shall be formed to give a plane surface which is normal to the axis of the pile sufficiently large to accommodate the loading and settlement measuring equipment and adequately reinforced or protected to prevent damage from the concentrated application of load from the loading equipment .
Any pile cap shall be concentric with the test pile the joint between the cap and the pile shall have a strength equivalent to that of the pile .
Sufficient clear space shall be made under and around any part of the cap projecting beyond the section of the pile so that at the maximum expected settlement load is not transmitted to the ground by the cap .
Pile connection for tension test For a pile that is tested in tension means shall be provided for transmitting the test load axially without inducing moments in the pile .
The connection between the pile and the loading equipment shall be constructed in such a manner as to provide a strength equal to the maximum load which is to be applied to the pile during the test with an appropriate factor of safety on the structural design .
Reaction systems Compression tests Compression tests shall be carried out using kentledge tension piles or specially constructed anchorages .
Kentledge shall not be used for tests on raking piles .
Where kentledge is to be used it shall be supported on cribwork and positioned so that the centre of gravity of the load is as close as possible to the axis of the pile .
The bearing pressure under supporting cribs shall be such as to ensure stability of the kentledge stack .
Tension tests Tension tests may be carried out using compression piles rafts or grillages constructed on the ground to provide the necessary reaction .
In all cases the resultant force of the reaction system shall be coaxial with the test pile .
Where inclined piles or reactions are specified or their use is planned by the Contractor full details shall be made available prior to the commencement of testing .
Amendment November Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Piling and Embedded Retaining Walls Working piles If the Contractor plans to use working piles as reaction piles he shall notify his intention prior to commencement of work .
Working reaction piles shall not uplift by more than half their specified permissable settlement at working load .
The integrity of all working piles used as reaction piles shall be checked on completion of static load testing .
Where working piles are used as reaction piles their movement shall be measured and recorded to within an accuracy of .
mm .
Spacing Where kentledge is used for loading vertical piles in compression the distance from the edge of the test pile to the nearest part of the crib supporting the kentledge stack in contact with the ground shall be not less than .
m. The centretocentre spacing of vertical reaction piles including working piles used as reaction piles from a test pile shall be not less than three times the diameter of the test pile or the reaction piles or m whichever is the greatest .
Where a pile to be tested has an enlarged base the same criterion shall apply with regard to the pile shaft with the additional requirement that no surface of a reaction pile shall be closer to the base of the test pile than one half of the enlarged base diameter .
Where vertical reaction piles penetrate deeper than the test pile the centretocentre spacing of the reaction piles from the test pile shall be not less than five times the diameter of the test pile or the reaction piles whichever is the greatest unless the base capacity of the test pile is less than of the total ultimate capacity .
Where ground anchorages are used to provide a test reaction for loading in compression no section of fixed anchor length transferring load to the ground shall be closer to the test pile than three times the diameter of the test pile .
Where the pile to be tested has an enlarged base the same criterion shall apply with regard to the pile shaft with the additional requirement that no section of the fixed anchor transferring load to the ground shall be closer to the pile base than a distance equal to the base diameter .
Adequate reaction The reaction frame support system shall be adequate to transmit the maximum test load in a safe manner without excessive movement or influence on the test pile .
Calculations shall be provided when required to justify the design of the reaction system .
Care of piles The method employed in the installation of the reaction system shall be such as to prevent damage to any test pile or working pile .
Equipment for applying load The equipment used for applying load shall consist of a hydraulic ram or jack .
The jacking system shall be arranged in conjunction with the reaction system to deliver an axial load to the test pile and maintain it constant when required .
The complete system shall be capable of safely transferring the maximum load required for the test .
The length of stroke of a ram shall be sufficient to cater for deflection of the reaction system under load plus a deflection of the pile head up to of the pile shaft diameter unless otherwise specified in Appendix .
Measurement of load The test load shall be measured by a single load cell or proving ring calibrated in divisions not exceeding of the maximum load to be applied .
If an electronic transducer is used each reading shall be immediately stored magnetically so that in case of power failure the readings are not lost .
The load cell or proving ring shall be calibrated immediately prior to the test and a certificate of calibration shall be made available .
All increments of load shall be maintained to within of the specified load .
A spherical seating of appropriate size shall be used to avoid eccentric loading .
Care shall be taken to avoid any risk of buckling of the load application and measuring system .
Load measuring and application devices shall be short in axial length in order to secure stability .
The Contractor shall ensure that axial loading is maintained .
Control of loading The loading equipment shall enable the load to be increased or decreased smoothly or to be held constant at any required value .
Measuring pile head movement Maintained load test In a maintained load test movement of the pile head shall be measured by the method in subClause and by one of the methods in subClauses and in the case of vertical piles or by one of the methods in subClauses and in the case of the raking piles as required .
March Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Piling and Embedded Retaining Walls CRP and CRU test In a constant rate of penetration CRP or a constant rate of uplift CRU test the method in sub Clause shall be used .
Checklevelling of the reference frame or the pile head shall not be required .
The dial gauge shall be graduated in divisions of .
mm or less .
Optical levelling method An optical levelling method by reference to a remote datum may be used .
Where a level and staff are used the level and scale of the staff shall be chosen to enable readings to be made to within an accuracy of .
mm .
A scale attached to the pile or pile cap may be used instead of a levelling staff .
At least two reliable independent datum points shall be established .
Each datum point shall be so situated as to permit a single settingup position of the level for all readings .
No datum point shall be located where it can be affected by the test loading or other operations on or off the Site .
Reference beams and dial gauges An independent reference beam or beams shall be set up to enable measurement of the movement of the pile to be made to the required accuracy .
The supports for a beam shall be founded in such a manner and at such a distance from the test pile and reaction system that movements of the ground do not cause movement of the reference beam or beams which will affect the accuracy of the test .
The supports of the beam or beams shall be at least three test pile diameters or m from the centre of the test pile whichever distance is the greater .
The beam must be free to move horizontally at one end .
Check observations of any movements of the reference beam or beams shall be made and a check shall be made of the movement of the pile head relative to a remote reference datum at the start and end and at maximum load for each loading cycle .
The measurement of pile movement shall be made by four dial gauges rigidly mounted on the reference beam or beams bearing on prepared flat surfaces fixed to the pile cap or head and normal to the pile axis .
Alternatively the gauges may be fixed to the pile and bear on prepared surfaces on the reference beam or beams .
The dial gauges shall be placed equidistant from the pile axis and from each other .
The dial gauges shall enable readings to be made to an accuracy of at least .
mm and have a stem travel of at least mm .
Machined spacer blocks may be used to extend the range of reading .
Equivalent electrical displacement measuring devices may be substituted .
Reference wires and scales Two parallel reference wires one on either side of the pile shall be held under constant tension at right angles to the test pile axis between supports formed as in the method in subClause .
The wires shall be positioned against scales fixed to the test pile head in an axial direction and the movements of the scales relative to the wires shall be determined .
Check observations of any movements of the supports of the wires shall be made and a check shall be made on the movement of the pile head at appropriate time intervals .
Readings shall be taken to within an accuracy of .
mm .
Other methods Where appropriate the Contractor may use an alternative method of measuring the movement of the test pile head .
The method shall be accurate to within .
mm of the pile head movement .
Protection of testing equipment Protection from weather Throughout the test period all equipment for measuring load and movement and beams shall be protected from adverse effects of sun wind and precipitation .
Temperature reading shall be taken at the start end and at the maximum load of each loading cycle .
Prevention of disturbance Construction activity and persons who are not involved in the testing process shall be kept at a sufficient distance from the test to avoid disturbance to the measuring apparatus .
Full records shall be kept of any unavoidable activity and its effects .
Notice of test The Contractor shall give at least hours notice of the commencement of the test .
No load shall be applied to the test pile before the commencement of the specified test procedure .
Test procedure Proof load test procedure working compression piles The maximum load which shall be applied in a proof test shall normally be the sum of the design verification load DVL plus of the specified working load SWL .
The loading and unloading shall March Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Piling and Embedded Retaining Walls TABLE Minimum Loading Times for Pile Test Load Minimum Time of Holding Load DVL minutes DVL minutes DVL minutes DVL hours DVL minutes DVL minutes DVL minutes hour DVL hour DVL SWL hour DVL SWL hours DVL SWL minutes DVL minutes DVL minutes DVL minutes DVL minutes hour SWL denotes specified working load DVL denotes design verification load.be carried out in stages as shown in Table .
Any particular requirements given in Appendix shall be complied with .
Following each application of an increment of load the load shall be maintained at the specified value for not less than the period shown in Table and until the measured rate of settlement in a period of minutes is less than .
of the current cumulative settlement which has occurred subject to a minimum settlement rate of .
mm in minutes .
The rate of settlement shall be calculated from the slope of the line obtained by plotting values of settlement versus time and drawing a smooth curve through the points .
Each stage of unloading shall proceed after the expiry of the period shown in Table .
For any period when the load is constant time and settlement shall be recorded immediately on reaching the load at not more than five minute intervals up to minutes at approximately minutes intervals up to one hour at minute intervals between one hour and four hours and hour intervals between four hours and hours after the application of the increment of load .
Where the methods of measuring pile head movement given in subClauses and are used the periods of time for which loads must be held constant to achieve the specified rates of settlement shall be extended as necessary to take into account the lower levels of accuracy available from these methods and to allow correct assessment of the settlement rate .
Test procedure for preliminary compression piles The procedure to be adopted for carrying out preliminary load tests on compression piles shall be in accordance with the requirements specified in Appendix and either the extended proof load test procedure or the constant rate of penetration testing procedure given below .
A normal proof load test will constitute the first stage of such a preliminary test unless otherwise specified .
Extended proof load test procedure Where verification of the required minimum load factor is called for the loading procedure may be carried out as a continuation of the proof load testing procedure given in subClause .
Following the completion of the proof load test the load shall be restored in two stages DVL DVL SWL and shall subsequently be increased by stages of of the specified working load or other specified amount until the maximum specified load for the test is reached .
Following each application of an increment of load the load shall be maintained at the specified value for not less than minutes and until the additional measured settlement in a period of minutes is less than .
of the current cumulative settlement which has occurred since the start of the current load increment subject to a minimum settlement rate of .
mm in minutes .
The rate of settlement shall be calculated from the slope of the line obtained by plotting values of settlement versus time and drawing a smooth curve through the points .
Reduction of load at the end of the test shall be gradual as required by sub Clause and the final recovery of the pile head shall be recorded .
Permissible settlement at the load corresponding to the required minimum factor of safety called for in the design will not normally be specified .
The mobilization of ultimate load for compression piles normally involves settlements of at least of the pile base diameter in clay and more in granular soils .
The settlement of piles bearing on rock requires special consideration and failure of pile materials may precede failure of the rock .
Constant rate of penetration CRP testing procedure The rate of movement of the pile head shall be maintained constant in so far as is practicable and shall be approximately .
mms for piles in predominantly cohesive soils and .
mms for piles in predominantly cohesionless soils .
Readings of loads penetration and time shall be made simultaneously at regular intervals the interval chosen shall be such that a curve of load versus penetration can be plotted without ambiguity .
March Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Piling and Embedded Retaining Walls Loading shall be continued until one of the following results is obtained a the maximum required test load as specified in accordance with Appendix is reached b a constant or reducing load has been recorded for an interval of penetration of mm c a total movement of the pile base equal to of the base diameter or any other greater value of movement specified in Appendix has been reached .
The load shall then be reduced in five approximately equal stages to zero load penetration and load at each stage and at zero load being recorded .
Testing of piles designed to carry load in tension The testing of piles designed to carry load in tension shall follow the same procedure as specified in subClauses and .
The rate of movement of the pile head shall be maintained at approximately .
mms in so far as is practicable .
Presentation of results Results to be submitted During the progress of a test all records taken shall be available for inspection .
Results shall be made available as follows a a preliminary copy of the test records unless otherwise directed within hours of the completion of the test which shall show i for a test by maintained load for each stage of loading the period for which the load was held the load and the maximum pile movement at the end of the stage ii for a CRP or CRU test the maximum load reached and a graph of load against penetration or load against uplift b the completed schedule of recorded data as prescribed in subClause within days of the completion of the test .
Schedule of recorded data The Contractor shall provide information about the test pile in accordance with the following schedule where applicable .
a General Site location Contract identification Proposed structure Main contractor Piling contractor ClientOverseeing Organisation Date and time of test b Pile details All types of pile Identification number and location Specified working load SWL Design verification load DVL Commencing surface level at pile position Head level at which test load was applied Type of pile Vertical or raking compression or tension Shape and size of crosssection of pile and position of any change in crosssection Shoe or base details Head details Length in ground Level of toe Dimensions of any permanent casing Concrete Piles Concrete mixstrength class Aggregate type and source Cement type and cement replacement and type where used Admixtures Slump class Cube test results for pile and cap Date of casting of precast pile Reinforcement Steel piles Steel quality Coating Filling or core materials type and quality c Installation details All piles Dates and times of boring driving and concreting of test pile Difficulties and delays encountered Date and time of casting concrete pile cap Bored piles Type of equipment used and method of boring Temporary casing diameter type and length Full log of pile borehole Method of placing concrete Volume of concrete placed Amendment November Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Piling and Embedded Retaining Walls Driven preformed and driven castinplace piles Method of support of hammer and pile Driven length of pile or temporary casing at final set Hammer type and size or weight Dolly and packing type and condition Driving log depth hammer drop blows per mm interruptions or breaks in driving Final set in number of blows to produce penetration of mm Redrive check time interval and set in number of blows to produce penetration of mm At final set and at redrive set for a drophammer or for a single acting hammer the length of the drop or stroke for a diesel hammer the length of the stroke and the blows per minute for a double acting hammer the operating pressure and the number of blows per minute .
Condition of pile head or temporary casing after driving Use of a follower Use of preboring Use of jetting Lengthening Method of placing concrete d Test procedure Mass of kentledge Tension pile ground anchorage or compression pile details Plan of test arrangement showing position and distances of kentledge supports rafts tension or compression pile or ground anchorages and supports to pile movement reference system Jack capacity Method of load measurement Methods of penetration or uplift measurement Calibration certificates Temperature readings e Test results In tabular form In graphical form load plotted against pile head movement load plotted against time Ambient temperature records during test Completion of a test Removal of test equipment On completion of a test all measuring equipment and load application devices shall be dismantled and checked .
All other test equipment including kentledge beams and supporting structures shall be removed from the test pile location .
Measuring and other demountable equipment shall be stored in a safe manner so that it is available for further tests if required or removed from site .
Temporary tension piles and ground anchorages shall be cut off below ground level and offcut materials removed from the Site .
The ground shall be made good to the original commencing surface level .
Preliminary test pile head Unless otherwise specified the head of each preliminary test pile shall be cut off below ground level offcut material shall be removed from the Site and the ground made good to the original commencing surface level .
Proof test pile head On completion of a test on a proof pile the test pile head shall be prepared as specified and left in a state ready for incorporation into the Permanent Works .
Diaphragm Walls Guide walls The design and construction of the guide walls shall be the responsibility of the Contractor and shall take into account the actual site and ground conditions and the equipment to be used on site to ensure stability and avoid undercutting .
Guide walls shall be constructed in reinforced concrete or other suitable materials .
The minimum depth of guide wall shall be .
m. Materials Concrete supply mixing and testing Cement materials aggregates admixtures and water shall be in accordance with Series .
Steel reinforcement supply fixing and welding Steel reinforcement shall be as described in Appendix and in accordance with Series .
Where steel sections are used for reinforcement they shall be in accordance with Series .
Support fluid Bentonite andor alternative fluid support materials admixtures mixing and testing and clean water shall be in accordance with Clause .
Amendment November Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Piling and Embedded Retaining Walls Dimensions of panels The thickness of a panel shall be not less than the specified thickness .
The length of panel may be varied to suit an individual Contractors equipment but any upper limits on length because of geological or other external factors shall be specified in Appendix .
Within these constraints the Contractor shall be responsible for selecting panel dimensions which ensure stability and that movements remain within the criteria set in Appendices and .
Excavation Excavation near recently cast panel Panels shall not be excavated so close to other panels which have recently been cast and which contain workable or unset concrete that a flow of concrete or instability could be induced from or damage caused to any panel .
The Contractors sequence of construction shall be submitted prior to work commencing in accordance with Clause .
Stability of the excavation Support fluid for maintaining the stability of an excavation shall be in accordance with Clause of this Specification .
A suitable guide wall shall be used in conjunction with the method to ensure stability of the strata near ground level until concrete has been placed .
During construction the level of support fluid in the excavation shall be maintained within the guide wall or stable ground so that it is not less than .
m above the level of external standing groundwater at all times .
In the event of a loss of support fluid from an excavation the Contractor shall include a full statement of the reasons in the pile record .
Cleanliness of base Prior to placing steel or concrete the Contractor shall clean the base of the excavation of as much loose disturbed and remoulded materials as practical and in accordance with the method of construction and shall wholly or partly remove and replace support fluid while maintaining the fluid head if it does not comply with the Contractors stated limits for support fluid prior to concreting .
Steel reinforcement The number of joints in longitudinal steel bars shall be kept to a minimum .
Joints in steel reinforcement shall be such that the full strength of each bar is effective across the joint and shall be made so that there is no detrimental displacement of the reinforcement during the construction of the panel .
Reinforcement shall be maintained in its correct position during concreting of the panel .
Where it is made up into cages they shall be sufficiently rigid to enable them to be handled placed and concreted without damage .
If the cage is to be welded together welding shall be carried out to the requirements of BS .
Spacers shall be designed and manufactured using durable materials which shall not lead to corrosion of the reinforcement or spalling of the concrete cover .
Where required in Appendix details of the means by which the Contractor plans to ensure the correct cover to and position of the reinforcement shall be submitted .
The minimum projecting bond lengths required by Appendix shall be observed .
The Contractor shall prepare reinforcement detail construction drawings for each panel and these shall be made available .
Placing concrete General The consistence and method of placing of the concrete shall be such that a continuous monolithic concrete panel of the full crosssection is formed and that the concrete in its final position is dense and homogenous .
Concrete shall be transported from the mixer to the position of the wall in such a manner that segregation of the concrete mix does not occur .
Before commencement of concreting of a panel the Contractor shall satisfy himself that the supplier will have available sufficient quantity of concrete to construct the panel in one continuous operation .
The concrete shall be placed without such interruption as would allow the previously placed batch to have achieved a stiffness which prevents proper amalgamation of the two concrete batches .
No spoil liquid or other foreign matter shall be allowed to contaminate the concrete .
Consistence of concrete The concrete consistence shall be determined using the slump or flow classes in accordance with BS EN and BS EN respectively .
The slump or flow classes for concrete placed through support fluid using a tremie pipe shall be class S or greater or classes F to F respectively or as specified in Appendix .
Compaction Internal vibrators shall not be used to compact concrete within a cast in place panel .
Amendment November Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Piling and Embedded Retaining Walls Placing concrete The concrete shall be placed through a tremie pipe in one continuous operation .
Where two or more pipes are used in the same panel simultaneously care shall be taken to ensure that the concrete level at each pipe position is maintained nearly equal .
The hopper and pipe of the tremie shall be clean and watertight throughout .
The pipe shall extend to the base of the panel and a sliding plug or barrier shall be placed in the pipe to prevent direct contact between the first charge of concrete in the tremie and the support fluid .
The pipe shall at all times penetrate the concrete which has previously been placed with a minimum embedment of m and shall not be withdrawn from the concrete until completion of concreting .
At all times a sufficient quantity of concrete shall be maintained within the pipe to ensure that the pressure from it exceeds that from the support fluid and workable concrete above the tremie base .
The internal diameter of the pipe of the tremie shall be not less than the greater of mm or six times the maximum aggregate size .
It shall be so designed that external projections are minimised allowing the tremie to pass within reinforcing cages without causing damage .
The internal face of the pipe of the tremie shall be free from projections .
The depth of the surface of the concrete shall be measured and the embedded length of the tremie pipe recorded at regular intervals corresponding to each batch of concrete .
The depths measured and volumes placed shall be plotted immediately on a graph and compared with the theoretical relationship of depth against volume .
Tolerances Guide wall The finished face of the guide wall towards the excavation and on the side of the excavation nearest to any subsequent main excavation shall be vertical to within a tolerance of in and the top edge of the wall shall represent the reference line .
There shall be no ridges or abrupt changes on the face and its variation from its specified position shall not exceed mm in m. The minimum clear distance between the guide walls shall be the specified diaphragm wall thickness plus mm and the maximum distance shall be the specified diaphragm wall thickness plus mm .
Diaphragm wall At cutoff level the maximum deviation of the centre line of each panel from the specified position shall be mm and an additional tolerance of mm for each .
m that the cutoff level is below the top of the guide wall shall be permitted unless otherwise stated in Appendix .
The exposed wall face and the ends of panels shall be vertical within a tolerance of for walls constructed using grabs .
A tolerance of may be specified if there is a special need and an expectation of reverse circulation cutters being used .
An additional tolerance of mm will be allowed for concrete protrusions resulting from cavities formed by overbreak in the ground .
Where very soft clay layers or peat layers are anticipated or obstructions are to be removed during trench excavation an additional overbreak tolerance shall be stated in Appendix .
Recesses Where recesses are to be formed by inserts in the wall the vertical tolerance shall be that of subClause and the horizontal tolerance shall be that of sub Clause plus the horizontal tolerance resulting from subClause .
Steel reinforcement The longitudinal tolerance of the cage head at the top of the guide wall measured along the excavation shall be mm .
The vertical tolerance of the cage head measured relative to the guide wall shall be mm .
The reinforcement shall be maintained in position during concreting of a panel .
Temporary stopends in diaphragm panels Temporary stopends shall be of the length thickness and quality of material adequate for the purpose of preventing water and soil from entering the panel excavations .
Each temporary stopend shall be straight and true throughout .
The external surface shall be clean and free from distortions that may affect panel integrity during removal of the temporary stopend .
Stopends shall be rigid and adequately restrained to prevent horizontal movement during concreting .
Concrete level If the cut off level for the panel is less than m below the top level of the guide walls uncontaminated concrete shall be brought to the top of the guide walls .
If the cut off level is greater than m below the top level of the guide walls concrete shall be brought to m above the cut off level specified with a tolerance of mm .
An additional tolerance of mm over the above tolerances shall be permitted for each .
m March Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Piling and Embedded Retaining Walls of depth by which the cut off level is below the top of the guide wall .
Where more than one tremie pipe is used the concrete shall be brought up to mm above the cut off level specified with a tolerance of mm .
Temporary backfilling above panel casting level After each panel has been cast it shall be protected and shall be carefully backfilled as soon as possible with material in accordance with Appendix .
All panels shall be clearly marked and fenced off so as not to cause a safety hazard .
Water retention The complete retaining wall shall be considered to have satisfactory water retaining properties if overall the leakage of water per square metre of exposed wall does not exceed the volume stated in Appendix .
The Contractor shall be responsible for the repair of any joint defect or panel where on exposure of the wall visible water leaks are found .
Any leak which results in water flow emanating from the surface of the retaining wall shall be sealed .
Instrumentation Movement of the wall the surrounding ground and existing structures shall be monitored in accordance with Appendix and Clause .
Preparation of wall surfaces All surfaces buried or constructed as buried during execution of the Works but which subsequently are to be partially or totally uncovered as part of the construction shall be cleaned trimmed of all detritus and obstructions to the appropriate line and level as described in Appendix or as appropriate .
HardHard Secant Pile Walls Guide walls The design and construction of guide walls if the use of guide walls is specified in Appendix or is required by the Contractor shall be the responsibility of the Contractor and shall take into account the actual site and ground conditions and the equipment to be used on site to ensure stability and avoid undercutting as appropriate .
Guide walls shall be constructed in reinforced concrete or other suitable materials .
The minimum depth of guide wall shall be .
m and the minimum shoulder width shall be .
m for walls in reinforced concrete .
Materials Concrete supply mixing and testing Cement materials aggregates admixtures and water shall be in accordance with Series .
Steel reinforcement supply fixing and welding Steel reinforcement shall be as described in Appendix and in accordance with Series .
Where steel sections are used for reinforcement they shall be in accordance with Series .
Support fluid Where support fluid is used to maintain the stability of the pile bore it shall be in accordance with Clause .
Boring Boring near recently cast piles Piles shall not be bored so close to other piles which have recently been cast and which contain workable or partially set concrete that a flow of concrete or instability could be induced or damage caused to any installed piles .
The Contractors sequence of construction shall be submitted prior to work commencing in accordance with Clause .
Stability of bore Temporary casing shall be used in unstable ground with or without support fluid to maintain the stability of the bore unless continuous flight augers are used .
The casing shall extend to the full depth of each bore or to the depth to which the minimum overlap has to be provided .
The process of advancing the bore and the temporary casing shall be such that soil is not drawn into the bore from outside the area of the pile and cavities are not created outside the temporary casing .
Cleanliness of pile base Prior to placing steel or concrete the Contractor shall remove from the base of the pile as much loose disturbed and remoulded materials as practical and in accordance with the method of construction .
Cleaning of support fluid Prior to placing steel or concrete any support fluid including water shall be wholly or partly removed and replaced while maintaining the fluid head if it does not comply with the Contractors stated limits for support fluid prior to concreting .
Amendment November Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Piling and Embedded Retaining Walls Steel reinforcement The number of joints in longitudinal steel bars shall be kept to a minimum .
Joints in steel reinforcement shall be such that the full strength of each bar is effective across the joint and shall be made so that there is no detrimental displacement during the construction of the pile .
Reinforcement shall be maintained in its correct position during concreting of the pile or wall element .
Where reinforcement is made up into cages they shall be sufficiently rigid to enable them to be handled placed and concreted without damage .
If the cage is to be welded together welding shall be carried out to the requirements of BS .
Spacers shall be designed and manufactured using durable materials which shall not lead to corrosion of the reinforcement or spalling of the concrete cover .
Where required in Appendix details of the means by which the Contractor plans to ensure the correct cover to and position of the reinforcement shall be submitted .
The minimum projecting bond lengths required by Appendix and or as appropriate shall be maintained .
For continuous flight auger piles steel reinforcement cages shall be inserted into the pile shaft immediately after completion of concreting .
The method of insertion of reinforcement cages shall avoid distortion or damage to the steel reinforcement and ensure accurate positioning of the cage within the pile shaft .
Placing and compacting concrete General The consistence and method of placing of the concrete shall be such that a continuous monolithic concrete shaft of the full cross section is formed and that the concrete in its final position is dense and homogenous .
Concrete shall be transported from the mixer to the position of the pile in such a manner that it does not cause segregation of the constituents of the concrete mix .
Before commencement of concreting of a pile the Contractor shall satisfy himself that the Supplier will have available a sufficient quantity of concrete to construct the pile in one continuous operation .
Each batch of concrete in a pile shall be placed before the previous batch has achieved a stiffness which prevents proper amalgamation of the two concrete batches .
Removal of temporary casings when used shall be completed before the concrete within the casing loses its consistence .
For continuous flight auger piles injection of concrete shall continue up to the commencing surface or above so that free discharge from the delivery pipe can be observed to be taking place and reinforcement placed after concreting .
No spoil liquid or other foreign matter shall be allowed to contaminate the concrete .
Consistence of concrete The concrete consistence shall be determined using the slump or flow classes in accordance with BS EN and BS EN respectively .
The slump or flow shall be measured at the time of discharge into the pile boring and shall be in accordance with the limits shown in Table or as specified in Appendix and or as appropriate .
Compaction Internal vibrators shall not be used to compact concrete .
Placing concrete in dry boreholes The concrete shall be placed through a hopper attached to a length of tremie pipe and in such a way that the flow is directed and does not hit reinforcing bars or the side of the bore .
The tremie pipe shall be at least m long .
Placing concrete under water or support fluid Concrete to be placed under water or support fluid shall be placed through a tremie pipe in one continuous operation .
The hopper and pipe of the tremie shall be clean and watertight throughout .
The pipe shall extend to the base of the boring and a sliding plug or barrier shall be placed in the pipe to prevent direct contact between the first charge of concrete in the pipe of the tremie and the water or support fluid .
The pipe shall at all times penetrate the concrete which has previously been placed with a minimum penetration of m and shall not be withdrawn from the concrete until completion of concreting .
At all times a sufficient quantity of concrete shall be maintained within the tremie pipe to ensure that the pressure from it exceeds that from the water or support fluid and workable concrete above the tremie base .
The internal diameter of the pipe of the tremie shall be not less than the greater of mm or six times the maximum aggregate size .
It shall be so designed that external projections are minimised allowing the tremie to pass through reinforcing cages without causing Amendment November Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Piling and Embedded Retaining Walls damage .
The internal face of the pipe of the tremie shall be free from projections .
The depths to the surface of the concrete shall be measured and the embedded length of the tremie pipe recorded at regular intervals corresponding to the placing of each load of concrete .
The depth measured and volumes of concrete placed shall be plotted immediately on a graph and compared with the theoretical relationship of depth against volume .
The foregoing is not applicable to piles constructed using continuous flight augers .
For such piles the full monitoring requirements of Clause shall be met .
Time period for excavation and placing concrete The time period after a pile is excavated and before the concrete is placed shall not exceed hours unless otherwise specified in Appendix and or as appropriate .
If temporary casing is used this period shall start when excavation below the temporary casing commences .
Tolerances Guide wall The finished face of each guide wall towards the excavation shall be vertical to a tolerance of in and shall represent the reference line .
There shall be no ridges on the face and the centre line of the guide wall shall not deviate from its specified position by more than mm in m. The minimum clear distance between the guide walls shall be the pile diameter plus mm and the maximum distance shall be the pile diameter plus mm .
Secant piles At cutoff level the maximum permitted deviation of the pile centre from the centre point shown on the setting out drawings shall be mm in any direction except that an additional tolerance of mm shall be permitted for each .
m that the cutoff level is below the top of the guide wall unless otherwise specified in Appendix .
In the case of construction by continuous flight augers the additional tolerance shall be mm for each .
m below top of guide wall .
The exposed face of the pile shall be vertical within a tolerance of for secant walls constructed with temporary casings and for secant walls constructed with continuous flight augers in any direction .
An additional tolerance of mm will be allowed for concrete protrusions resulting from cavities formed by overbreak in the ground .
Where very soft clay layers or peat layers are anticipated or obstructions are to be removed prior to or during boring an additional overbreak tolerance shall be stated in Appendix .
Recesses If recesses in the form of box outs are to be formed within a pile shaft the vertical tolerance shall be in accordance with subClause and rotational tolerance shall be degrees .
Steel reinforcement A vertical tolerance of mm mm shall generally be permitted on the level of steel projecting from a pile cut off except where a pile is constructed to a higher level for reasons associated with ground conditions or technique continuous flight auger where additional steel projection may be necessary .
Concrete level No pile shall be cast with its final cut off level below standing water level unless the Contractors method of construction includes measures to prevent inflow of water that may cause segregation of the concrete as temporary casing is withdrawn .
The standing water level will be treated as the cut off level for the purpose of calculating casting level .
For piles cast in dry bores using temporary casing and for piles cast under water the casting level shall be above the cut off level and within the tolerances shown in Table except for continuous flight auger piles which shall be cast to ground level .
Backfilling of empty bore Where concrete is not brought to the top of the guide wall the empty pile bore shall be backfilled as soon as possible with material in accordance with Appendix and or as appropriate .
Prior to backfilling the bore shall be clearly marked and fenced off so as not to cause a safety hazard .
Water retention The completed retaining wall shall be considered to have satisfactory water retaining properties if the leakage of water per square metre of exposed wall does not exceed the volume specified in Appendix or .
The Contractor shall be responsible for the repair of any joint defect or pile where on exposure of the wall visible water leaks are found .
Any leak which results in water flow emanating from the surface of the retaining wall shall be sealed .
March Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Piling and Embedded Retaining Walls Trial concrete mixes shall be prepared for each mix unless there are existing data showing that the concrete mix proportions and method of manufacture will produce hardened material of the strength permeability shrinkage properties and durability required having adequate consistence for compaction by the method to be used in placing .
The performance requirements are set out in Appendix .
Limits on consistence and time for placement are included .
The requirements for testing will be set out in Appendix .
Where a trial concrete mix is required after commencement of the works the above procedure shall be adopted .
The consistence of each batch of a trial concrete mix shall be determined by the method as specified in Appendix .
Trial concrete mix proportions shall be regarded as satisfactory if the compliance requirements set out in Appendix are met .
No variations outside the limits set out in the proportions shall be made nor in the original source of the materials without demonstrating compliance with this Specification .
Self hardening concrete mixes shall be checked for compliance with the mix proportions .
Cylindrical samples shall be made at the rate of four samples for each m of self hardening slurry or part thereof in each days work .
Testing will be made in accordance with the requirements of Appendix .
The results shall comply with Appendix .
The Contractor shall keep a detailed record of the results of all tests on self hardening mixes and their ingredients .
Each test shall be clearly identified with the pile to which it relates and the date it was carried out .
Boring General Boring near recently cast piles cleanliness of pile base and cleaning of support fluid shall be in accordance with subClauses .
and .
Stability of bore Temporary casing shall be used in unstable ground with or without support fluid to maintain the stability of the bore unless continuous flight augers are used .
The process of advancing the bore and the temporary casing shall be such that soil is not drawn into the bore from outside the area of the pile and cavities are not created outside the temporary casing .
TABLE Casting Tolerance Above Cut Off Levels for Specified Conditions Cut off Level Below Casting Tolerance Condition Commencing Above Cut off Surface H m Level m . to any depth .
H Permanent casing and dry bore .
. . H C Piles cast in dry bore using temporary casing .
. . H C Pile cast under water or Where C length support fluid of temporary casing below the commencing surface Beyond H m the casting tolerance applying to H m shall apply .
Instrumentation Movement of the wall the surrounding ground and existing structures shall be monitored in accordance with Appendix and or as appropriate and Clause .
Preparation of wall surfaces Preparation of wall surfaces shall be in accordance with subClause .. HardSoft Secant Pile Walls Guide walls The design and construction of guide walls shall be in accordance with Appendix and subClause .. Materials General Concrete steel reinforcement and support fluid shall be in accordance with subClauses .
and and as described in Appendix .
Self hardening slurry mixes The Contractor shall submit details for the self hardening slurry mix soft pile proportions to be used as required by Clause .
Cement materials aggregates if used admixtures and water shall be in accordance with Series .
Amendment November Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Piling and Embedded Retaining Walls Steel reinforcement Steel reinforcement shall be in accordance with subClause .
and as described in Appendix .
Placing and compacting concrete Placing and compacting concrete shall be in accordance with subClauses .
to inclusive .
Placing and compacting self hardening slurry mixes General The method of placing and the workability of a self hardening slurry mix shall be such that a continuous monolithic shaft of the full cross section is formed and that it shall be homogeneous in its final position .
Before commencing the filling of the pile the Contractor shall plan and reasonably demonstrate that a sufficient quantity of self hardening mix is available to construct the pile in one continuous operation .
Removal of temporary casing when used shall be completed before the self hardening mix within the casing loses its workability .
For continuous flight auger piles injection of self hardening mix shall continue up to the commencing surface or above so that free discharge from the delivery pipe can be observed to be taking place .
No spoil liquid or other foreign matter shall be allowed to contaminate the mix .
Consistence of self hardening concrete mix Self hardening concretes shall be coherent and of a consistence such that when in its final position and after all constructional procedures in forming the pile have been completed it shall remain sufficient consistence .
Placing self hardening concrete The self hardening concrete mix shall be placed using methods appropriate to the composition of the concrete mix .
These may include placing through a hopper attached to a length of tremie pipe and tremie methods in which case placement shall be in accordance with subClauses .
and .
Other self hardening concrete mixes use proprietary methods which shall be set out by the Contractor in his method of construction .
Continuous flight auger piles shall use an appropriate pump which shall be kept charged continuously throughout pile construction .
Time period for excavation and placing self hardening mix The time period after a pile is excavated and before the self hardening concrete mix is placed shall not exceed hours unless otherwise specified in Appendix .
If temporary casing is used this period shall start when excavation below the temporary casing commences .
Tolerances General Guide wall recesses and steel reinforcement tolerances shall be in accordance with subClauses .
and .
Secant piles At cutoff level the maximum permitted deviation of the pile centre from the centre point shown on the setting out drawings shall be mm in any direction except that an additional tolerance of mm shall be permitted for each .
m that the cutoff level is below the top of the guide wall unless otherwise specified in Appendix .
The exposed face of the pile shall be vertical within a tolerance of in any direction .
An additional tolerance of mm will be allowed for concrete protrusions resulting from cavities formed by overbreak in the ground .
Where very soft clay layers or peat layers are anticipated or obstructions are to be removed prior to or during boring an additional overbreak tolerance will be stated in Appendix .
General Concrete level backfilling of empty bore water retention instrumentation and preparation of wall surfaces shall be in accordance with subClauses .
and .
Contiguous Bored Pile Walls Guide walls The design and construction of guide walls shall be in accordance with Appendix and subClause .. Materials Concrete steel reinforcement and support fluid shall be in accordance with subClauses and and as described in Appendix .
Amendment November Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Piling and Embedded Retaining Walls Boring General Boring near recently cast piles cleanliness of pile base and cleaning of support fluid shall be in accordance with subClauses .
and .
Stability of bore Temporary casings shall be used in unstable ground with or without support fluid to maintain the stability of the bore unless continuous flight augers are used .
The process of advancing the bore and the temporary casing shall be such that soil is not drawn into the bore from outside the area of the pile and cavities are not created outside the temporary casing .
Temporary casings shall be extracted immediately on completion of concreting .
Steel reinforcement Steel reinforcement shall be in accordance with subClause ..
Placing and compacting concrete Placing and compacting concrete shall be in accordance with subClauses .
to inclusive .
Tolerances General Guide wall recesses and steel reinforcement tolerances shall be in accordance with subClauses .
and .
Contiguous piles At cutoff level the maximum permitted deviation of the pile centre from the centre point shown on the setting out drawings shall be mm in any direction except that an additional tolerance of mm shall be permitted for each .
m that the cutoff level is below working level or top of the guide wall unless otherwise specified in Appendix .
The exposed face of the pile shall be vertical within a tolerance of in any direction for contiguous walls .
An additional tolerance of mm will be allowed for concrete protrusions resulting from cavities formed by overbreak in the ground .
Where very soft clay layers or peat layers are anticipated or obstructions are to be removed prior to or during boring an additional overbreak tolerance shall be stated in Appendix .
General Concrete level backfilling of empty bore instrumentation and preparation of wall surfaces shall be in accordance with subClauses .
and .
King Post Walls Materials General Concrete steel reinforcement and support fluid shall be in accordance with subClauses .
and and as described in Appendix .
Structural steelwork Structural steelwork shall be in accordance with Series .
Boring General Boring near recently cast piles cleanliness of pile base and cleaning of support fluid shall be in accordance with subClauses .
and .
Stability of bore Temporary casings shall be used in unstable soils with or without support fluid to maintain the stability of the bore unless continuous flight augers are used .
Care shall be taken not to undermine or destabilise ground by boring too far ahead of the temporary casing .
Temporary casings shall be extracted immediately on completion of concreting .
The method of construction shall be submitted in accordance with Clause .
Placement of King Post members The method of handling and placing King Post members shall be set out in the Contractors method of construction submitted in accordance with Clause .
In appropriate conditions the member may be plunged into concrete already placed in the pile bore immediately after the concrete placement and before the concrete has achieved its initial set .
Guides or hole spacers shall be used so that the specified tolerances of the King Post member are achieved .
Where the King Post member is installed prior to concreting the Contractor shall ensure that it is not disturbed displaced or disoriented during concreting .
Amendment November Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Piling and Embedded Retaining Walls Steel reinforcement Steel reinforcement shall be in accordance with subClause .
and as described in Appendix .
Placing and compacting concrete General Placing and compacting concrete shall be in accordance with subClauses .
to inclusive .
The method of placing concrete shall avoid disturbance of King Post members .
Tolerances The required tolerances depend on the application and are set out in Appendix .
Concrete level No pile shall be cast with its final concreted level below standing water level unless the Contractors method of construction includes measures to prevent inflow of water that may cause segregation of the concrete as the temporary casing is withdrawn .
The standing water level will be treated as the cut off level for the purpose of calculating tolerance .
For piles cast in dry bores using temporary casing and for piles cast under water or support fluid the casting level above cut off level shall be within the casing tolerance above the cut off level shown in Table .
Backfilling The concrete will usually be below the working level and the pile bore containing the King Post member shall be backfilled once the concrete has sufficient strength or after such time as specified in Appendix .
The backfill material in accordance with Appendix shall be evenly placed on either side of the King Post member to avoid uneven loading .
Prior to backfilling bores shall be clearly marked and fenced off so as not to cause a safety hazard .
Instrumentation Movement of the wall the surrounding ground and existing structures shall be monitored in accordance with Appendix and Clause .
Steel Sheet Piles General Only new piles shall be used for permanent works .
Piles shall be carefully examined by the Contractor at the time of delivery and damaged piles repaired or replaced .
The records of testing of the steel used in the piles shall be made available .
Materials Standard sheet piles Unless specified otherwise all steel for sheet piles shall be manufactured to BS EN Grade SGP or SGP .
Fabricated sheet piles All fabricated piles eg .
corners junctions box sections high modulus sections shall be fabricated and supplied to the sheet pile manufacturers recommendations .
Storage If sheet piles of different grade steel are stored on site each pile shall be clearly marked as to its grade and piles of different grade shall be stored separately .
Clutch sealant If specified in Appendix the Contractor shall apply a clutch sealant to the piles prior to pitching in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
Pile handling and driving Pile handling When assembling piles before pitching the Contractor shall ensure that the interlocks are clean and free from distortion .
All storage handling transporting and pitching of piles shall be carried out in such a way that no significant damage occurs to piles and their coatings .
Pile installation and extraction In the event of a Contractors design he shall demonstrate that the sheet piles can be installed adequately to the correct depths through the reported or anticipated soil conditions .
The Contractor shall give at least hours notice before the commencement of driving .
The piles shall be guided and held in position by temporary gates with each pile properly interlocked Amendment November Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Piling and Embedded Retaining Walls with its neighbour .
Piles shall not bypass one another in place of interlocking .
Where sheet piles are driven in panels the end piles to each panel shall be driven in advance of the general run of piles .
After allowing for initial penetration no pile in the panel shall be driven to an excessive lead in comparison with the toe level of the panel in general and where hard driving is encountered this lead shall not exceed m. At all stages during driving the free length of the sheet pile shall be adequately supported and restrained .
The Contractor shall ensure that the sheet panels are driven without significant damage or declutching where possible .
The selection of driving and extracting plant shall be made having due regard to the ground conditions and pile type .
The sheet piles shall be driven to the specified level andor resistance or if hard driving is experienced to practical refusal which shall be defined as when the rate of penetration is below mm per minute when hammering continuously or blows per mm movement when using the appropriate equipment or when visible damage to the pile occurs .
Practical refusal for pile extraction shall be defined generally as when the rate of extraction of a pile is below mm per minute when backhammering or pulling with equipment normally capable of withdrawing a pile continuously after an initial effort of minutes or when damage to the pile head occurs .
If the piles have not penetrated to the levels specified in Appendix or have encountered obstructions a full statement of the reasons shall be recorded by the Contractor and included in the pile record .
If required in Appendix the Contractor shall install the sheet piles using a vibrationless jacking system .
Pile driving hammers shall be correctly positioned on the pile so that the hammer will be aligned as near to the axis of the pile as is practically possible .
Freely suspended piling hammers shall be equipped with correctly adjusted leg guides and inserts .
Where a hammer is mounted in a rigid leader the leader shall be stable .
The anvil block or driving plate shall be of sufficient size to cover as much as possible of the cross section of the pile .
Piles previously driven shall not be used until the Contractor can demonstrate that they can meet all the requirements of the Specification .
The Contractor may provide each pile in more than one length .
Spliced joints shall be designed to cater for the combined effects of bearing shear and bending stresses imposed upon the sheet piles .
Splices shall be located to avoid maximum stress positions .
If splices are to be welded then these shall be designed in accordance with the guidelines given in BS EN and BS EN and the manufacturers recommendations .
Weld metal shall not encroach within the interlock areas so as to interfere with the interlocking of the piles .
Piling records The following records shall be kept where appropriate a pile reference number or location b pile type and grade of steel c pile length d type of hammer e date of driving f commencing surface level g depth driven h length of offcuts i length of pile extensions j if required the measurement of driving resistance at appropriate depths .
k all information regarding interruptions unexpected changes in driving characteristics obstructions and times taken in overcoming them .
Positional and alignment tolerance Unless deflected by obstructions sheet piles shall be installed within the following tolerances In plan mm of the given sheet pile line at commencing surface .
Vertical in Level mm of required top level Pile line dimensions shall be based on the nominal size of piles .
Creep or shrinkage of the pile lines shall not exceed the manufacturers rolling tolerances .
Welding Welders qualification Only welders who are qualified to BS EN or who have attained a similar standard shall be employed on the Works .
Proof of welders proficiency shall be made available on request .
Welding standard For manual metal arc and semiautomatic welding of carbon and carbon manganese steels Amendment November Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Piling and Embedded Retaining Walls welding of piles and steel framework shall be carried out in accordance with BS EN and BS EN .
Defective welds shall be cut out and replaced .
Where steel piles are to be spliced by butt welding the interlocks shall not be welded unless a sealing weld is required .
Durability and protection Protective coating shall be applied if specified following the procedures set out in Clause .
Preparation of pile heads If a steel structure is to be welded to piles the piles shall be cut square and to within mm of the levels specified .
If pile heads are to be encased in concrete they shall be cut to within mm of the levels specified and protective coatings shall be removed from the surfaces of the pile heads down to a level mm above the soffit of the concrete .
Integrity Testing of Wall Elements Method of testing Where integritytesting of wall elements is specified the sonic logging method normally shall be used .
Other methods may be considered subject to satisfactory evidence of performance .
Age of wall elements at time of testing Integrity tests shall not be carried out until the number of days specified in Appendix have elapsed since casting of the wall element .
Preparation of heads or tops of wall elements Where the method of testing requires the positioning of sensing equipment on the wall element head or top it shall be broken down to expose sound concrete and shall be clean free from water laitence loose concrete overspilled concrete and blinding concrete and shall be readily accessible for the purpose of testing .
Specialist Subcontractor The requirements of subClause .
shall apply .
Interpretation of tests The interpretation of tests shall be carried out by competent and experienced persons .
The Contractor shall give all available details of the ground conditions element dimensions and construction method to the specialist firm before the commencement of testing in order to facilitate interpretation of the tests .
Report The requirements of subClause .
shall apply .
Anomalous results In the event that any anomaly in the acoustic signal is found in the results indicating a possible defect in the wall element the Contractor shall demonstrate that the wall element is satisfactory for its intended use or shall carry out remedial works to make it so .
Sonic logging tubes shall be grouted up after the Contractor has demonstrated that the wall element is satisfactory .
Instrumentation for Piles and Embedded Walls General All materials and work shall be in accordance with this Clause and Appendix .
Type of instrumentation Where the installation of instrumentation is called for the type of instrumentation shall be one of the following as specified in Appendix .
a extensometer rod or magnetic b inclinometer c load cell d pressure cell e strain gauge to be attached to steel or precast concrete or embedded in cast in situ concrete .
Other methods may be considered subject to satisfactory evidence of performance .
All equipment used shall be suitable for its specified purpose .
The instrumentation shall be robust and shall be a proprietary system supplied by a reputable supplier .
Where required in Appendix the Contractor shall submit details of the Supplier the instrumentation and curricula vitae for the staff who will install the instrumentation on site monitor it and analyse the readings .
The Contractor shall also submit details of projects where the Specialist Instrumentation Contractor has successfully installed and monitored the specified type of instrumentation .
Amendment November Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Piling and Embedded Retaining Walls Extensometers The instrumentation shall be securely attached to the reinforcement cage so that no component is displaced during placing of the reinforcement cage or concreting .
During concreting the tubing shall be adequately covered at both ends to prevent the ingress of concrete .
Compression or extension couplings shall be installed as necessary for the movement range specified in Appendix .
The system will be such that the anchor and reference blocks shall be securely cast into the pile concrete .
The rod shall be made of fibreglass or similar material so that it will not corrode or distort nor change its length due to heat or water changes .
The top of the rod shall incorporate a range adjuster with a travel of mm .
If direct measurements are specified the displacement measuring device shall consist of a rechargeable digital dial gauge with V. mains battery charger or analogue dial gauge .
The orientation of the dial gauge relative to the top of the tube shall be constant for every reading .
If remote reading is specified the readings shall be made by a linear potentiometer or other suitable device securely held in place .
Inclinometers The access tubing shall be securely attached to the reinforcement cage so that no component is displaced during placing of the reinforcement cage or concreting .
During concreting the tubing shall be adequately covered at both ends to prevent the ingress of concrete .
Alternatively a nominal mm steel duct sealed at the lower end and fitted with a removable screw cap at the upper end shall be attached to the reinforcement cage .
The inclinometer access tube can then be installed afterwards using a cementitious grout containing a nonshrink admixture .
The system shall consist of mm nominal diameter corrosionproof access tubing which shall have four longitudinal internal keyways on two orthogonal axes .
The keyways shall be continuous over the length of the access tubing so that the wheels of the torpedoes can pass freely along it .
For embedded walls the keyways shall be oriented so that one set are parallel to the face of the wall .
The coupling between sections of the access tube shall ensure that the correct alignment of keyways is maintained through a joint .
Jointing rivets to connect the tube sections shall be located midway between keyways .
Sealing mastic shall be applied to each rivet head and to the points where the tubing enters a coupling .
All joints shall be sealed by liberally wrapping with a fabric tape impregnated with a waterproofing compound .
This procedure shall also be carried out for the endcaps .
The inclinometer readout equipment shall comprise a uniaxial or biaxial torpedo complete with operating cable cable reel grip carrying case cartridge readout unit and battery charger .
The torpedo shall be fully waterproof stainless steel and incorporate two robust force servo accelerators aligned at right angles to each other .
The torpedo shall be fitted with two orthogonal pairs of centre sprung wheels and shall have a gauge length of .
m and be capable of negotiating a tube curvature of m. The cable shall be of an appropriate length .
The readout unit shall have an alphanumeric LCD and rechargeable battery with sufficient power for hours continuous use .
The Contractor shall supply a calibration frame for checking the readout equipment .
Alternatively a string of electrolevels may be used .
Sufficient electrolevels shall be incorporated to provide an accurate deformation profile .
The azimuth deviation shall be recorded for each inclinometer access tube and shall be taken into account when processing the data .
Where azimuth correction is necessary the Contractor shall make available details of the method used .
Readings shall be taken for the full length of each inclinometer access tube for faces A B C and D. The top wheel of the torpedo will travel up face A first followed by faces B C and D when using a uniaxial torpedo .
With a biaxial torpedo only faces A and B are travelled .
If a full set of readings can not be obtained due to accumulation of debris in the access tubes the Contractor shall flush the tubes with water to remove the debris until readings can be taken .
The readings shall be taken in increments of .
m starting from the base of the access tube .
All readings shall be recorded and reported to the nearest .
mm .
The readings are considered to be sufficiently accurate only if the face errors in the AB plane and the CD plane are less than .
mm .
The datum readings to be used in the calculations for each inclinometer shall be made available .
The data shall be processed assuming a fixed base .
The surveyed cumulative horizontal movement of the top of the access tube shall be reported to an accuracy of .
mm .
When required the data shall also be processed assuming a specified offset at the top of the access tube .
The processed data for faces A B C and D shall be tabulated to show the following a deviations and face errors b mean deviation c change in mean deviation Amendment November Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Piling and Embedded Retaining Walls d cumulative mean deviation e displacement profiles .
Items c and e shall also be presented graphically to show the deviation or displacement plotted against depth .
Load cells The loads to be measured may be either compressive or tensile as specified in Appendix .
The load cells shall have a response time of two seconds or less in response to monotonically increasing or decreasing loading .
The monitoring system shall provide a stable signal and any temperature or cable length or other effects on the load signal shall be included in the permissible tolerance .
If a hydraulic or pneumatic system is used it shall be rated for and have been tested to twice the anticipated maximum pressure .
The load cells and cabling shall be compatible with their intended position within a pile and shall be unaffected by the presence of water or fluid concrete .
They shall be sufficiently strong to withstand additional loading due to placing of the reinforcement cage and concreting .
As the cell will give a direct reading of load it shall be positioned so that all the load passes through it without any eccentricity .
The loading system shall be safe and stable .
Pressure cells The pressure cells shall have a response time of seconds or less in response to monotonically increasing or decreasing loading .
The monitoring system shall provide a stable signal and any temperature or cable length or other effects on the pressure signal shall be included in the permissible tolerance .
If a hydraulic oil pneumatic or mercury based system is used it shall be rated for and have been tested to twice the anticipated maximum pressure .
The pressure cells and cabling shall be compatible with their intended position within a pile and shall be unaffected by the presence of water or fluid concrete .
They shall be sufficiently strong to withstand additional loading due to placing of the reinforcement cage and concreting .
If the pressure cell is to be placed against concrete on one or both sides it shall be provided with a mercury filled repressurising tube to ensure that no gap occurs between the hardened concrete and the pressure cell .
Strain gauges General The strain gauges shall have a response time of seconds or less .
The monitoring systems shall provide a stable signal and any temperature or cable length or other effects on the signal shall be included in the permissible tolerance .
The strain gauges and cabling shall be compatible with their intended position within a pile and shall be unaffected by the presence of water or fluid concrete .
They shall be sufficiently strong to withstand additional loading due to placing of the reinforcing cage and concreting or pile driving .
Strain gauges attached to steel or precast concrete piles The strain gauges shall be securely attached to a mounting plate welded to the steel for steel piles or securely attached to the reinforced concrete for precast concrete piles .
The welding procedures of Clause shall be followed .
The method of attachment shall be sufficiently strong so the gauge is not displaced nor the wires or cables damaged by driving .
Strain gauges embedded in concrete Strain gauges for cast in situ piles shall be either the embedment variety or shall be securely attached to reinforcement bars or to sister bars which shall be attached to the reinforcement cage .
The methods of attachment shall be such that the gauge is not displaced nor the wires or cables damaged by placing of the reinforcement concreting driving or other processes .
Readings General Readings shall be reported in terms of the basic property measured eg .
volts hertz mm of Mercury and shall be converted to SI or derivative units by means of a calibration constant .
The calibration constant and the range over which it is applicable shall be clearly stated .
Readings shall be taken at the times or time intervals specified in Appendix .
Calibration and data checking The instrumentation shall be calibrated prior to incorporation into the works and a certificate of calibration shall be made available .
For strain gauges a calibration constant can be provided if evidence is available showing that the variation in calibration constant will not vary maximum readings outside the specified tolerance .
Amendment November Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Piling and Embedded Retaining Walls The instrumentation shall be calibrated so that its behaviour has been monitored over the range specified in Appendix .
The Contractor shall demonstrate that the type of instrumentation can provide a stable reproducible and repeatable calibration .
All data shall be checked by the Contractor for errors prior to submission .
If erroneous data are discovered eg .
face errors for inclinometer readings greater than .
mm the Contractor shall take a second set of readings immediately .
If the errors are repeated the Contractor shall determine the cause of the error .
Both sets of readings shall be processed and submitted together with the reasons for the errors and details of remedial works .
The Contractor shall rectify any faults found in the instrumentation system for the duration of the specified monitoring period .
All computer data files and calculation sheets used in processing the data shall be preserved until the end of the contract .
They shall be made available for inspection on request .
Tolerances For load or pressure a tolerance of of the range specified in Appendix is permissible .
For strain a tolerance of x is permissible .
For displacement a tolerance of .
mm is permissible .
Except where explicitly specified in Appendix no instrumentation device tubing or cable shall be placed in the concrete cover zone .
Report The results shall be made available within five working days of the completion of each phase of testing .
The report shall contain the following a the date and time of each reading b the weather c the name of the person who made the reading on site and the name of the person who analysed the readings together with their company affiliations d the pile or wall element reference number and the depth and identity number of the instrumentation e any damage to the instrumentation or difficulties in reading f the condition of the pile eg .
if the reading is being made during a load test the stage of the test if a wall is being excavated alongside the depth of the excavation etc g the calibration constants or equations that are being applied and the dates they were determined h a table comparing the specified results with any previous readings and with the base readings i a graph showing variation of load or pressure or vertical movement or strain with time or horizontal movement with depth .
Key dates shall be marked with a brief explanation of their significance .
Columns of numbers shall be clearly labelled together with units .
Numbers shall not be reported to a greater accuracy than is appropriate .
Graph axes shall be linear and clearly labelled together with units .
Specialist Instrumentation Contractor The installation monitoring and analysis shall be carried out by a specialist Contractor subject to demonstration of satisfactory performance before the commencement of monitoring .
The staff carrying out the monitoring and interpretation of the results shall be competent and experienced with the type of instrumentation used .
Monitoring equipment The monitoring equipment shall become the property of the Overseeing Organisation if so specified in Appendix .
Monitoring shall be carried out either directly at the pile head or remotely from a monitoring cabin as specified in Appendix .
The monitoring equipment shall be appropriate for the situation in which it is to be used .
The manufacturers guidelines for its use shall be followed .
Where it has not been possible to follow the manufacturers guidelines the fact shall be reported together with the reason and details of the alternative procedure .
The monitoring equipment shall remain on site for the duration of the monitoring programme except when necessary for it to be calibrated after which it shall be returned to site .
The same monitoring equipment shall be used at each position .
Where this is not possible the fact shall be reported together with the reason .
Protection Terminal boxes at the head of the pile shall be protected by a lockable robust steel cap .
The pile head shall then be fenced off with clearly visible barriers which shall be maintained for the duration of the monitoring programme .
Any cable running along the ground shall be clearly marked and adequately protected to prevent the cable posing a safety hazard or becoming damaged .
Amendment November Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Piling and Embedded Retaining Walls Surveying The pile or element head terminal top of access tubing or as specified in Appendix shall be surveyed if specified in Appendix .
The level will be determined to an accuracy of mm relative to the datum specified in Appendix .
The grid coordinates will be determined to an accuracy of mm relative to the grid specified in Appendix .
Other measurements shall be to the specified accuracy .
Support Fluid General requirements Where a support fluid is used for maintaining the stability of an excavation the properties and use of the fluid shall be such that the following requirements are achieved i continuous support of the excavation ii solid particles are kept in suspension iii the fluid can be easily displaced during concreting iv the fluid does not coat the reinforcement to such an extent that the bond between the concrete and reinforcement is impaired v the fluid shall not cause pollution of the ground and groundwater before during or after use .
Where required in Appendix details of the type of support fluid manufacturers certificates for the constituents and mix proportions shall be submitted .
Support fluids shall be in accordance with Appendix and this Clause except where there may be a conflict of requirements in which case those in Appendix shall take precedence .
Evidence of suitability of support fluid The Contractor shall make available details of the properties and use of the support fluid to demonstrate it will meet the specified requirements .
These details shall be prepared at least days prior to the commencement of work and shall include i evidence from previous work with this support fluid and justification for its suitability for these ground conditions and method of construction .
Particular issues which shall be addressed are the types and sources of the support fluid constituents time of construction of the piles ambient temperature soil and groundwater chemistry .
ii results of representative laboratory or field mixing trials with the support fluid to demonstrate compliance with the Specification .
iii details of the tests to be used for monitoring the support fluid during the works and the compliance values for these tests presented in the form of Table .
Materials Water If water for the Works is not available from a water companys supply the Contractor shall ensure that the water complies with the guidance given in BS EN .
Water from the sea or tidal rivers shall not be used .
When required in Appendix the Contractor shall arrange for tests of the water for the Works to be carried out in accordance with the specified schedule before and during the progress of the work .
The frequency of testing shall be as stated in Appendix .
Additives to the water All solid additives shall be stored in separate waterproof stores with a raised floor or in waterproof silos which shall not allow the material to become contaminated .
Additives shall generally be used in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations unless demonstrated otherwise .
Bentonite shall be of a quality that shall accord with Publication Drilling Fluid Materials of the Engineering Equipment and Material Users Association .
Mixing of support fluid The constituents of the fluid shall be mixed thoroughly to produce a homogeneous mix .
The temperature of the water used in mixing and of the support fluid at the time of commencing concrete placement shall not be less than C. Compliance testing of support fluid The Contractor shall carry out testing of the support fluid in accordance with his regime and this Specification to demonstrate compliance with his limits for each test .
The Contractor shall establish a suitably equipped and properly maintained site laboratory for this sole purpose and provide skilled staff and all necessary apparatus to undertake the sampling and testing .
Amendment November Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Piling and Embedded Retaining Walls Each batch of freshly prepared or reconditioned slurry shall be proven by sampling and testing to be within the compliance values before the batch is used in excavations .
Details of the method frequency and locations for sampling and testing slurry from the excavations shall be prepared at least days prior to the commencement of work .
At least one sample immediately prior to placing steel and concrete shall be taken and tested from the base of the excavation and one from the top .
If tests show the support fluid does not comply with the Specification it shall be replaced .
Spillage and disposal of support fluid All reasonable steps shall be taken to prevent the spillage of support fluid on the site in areas outside the immediate vicinity of boring .
Discarded fluid shall be removed from the site without undue delay .
Any disposal of fluid shall comply with the requirements of current legislation and all relevant authorities .
F March TABLE Test and Compliance Values for Support Fluid Compliance Values Measured at C Property to be Test Method and Specification for test Freshly Mixed Fluid Sample from bore Measured Apparatus prior to placing steel and concrete Density Mud balance Rheological properties over appropriate range of shear rates and temperature aPlastic viscosity Fann viscometer bYield stress Fann viscometer cConsistency index K Fann viscometer dFlow index n Fann viscometer eMarsh cone viscosity Marsh cone f Gel strength for Fann viscometer appropriate range of times Sand Content Sand Screen Set Fluid loss for Fluid loss test appropriate range of temperatures times and pressures Filtercake thickness Fluid loss test pH Electrical pH meter to BS range pH to MANUAL OF CONTRACT DOCUMENTS FOR HIGHWAY WORKS VOLUME SPECIFICATION FOR HIGHWAY WORKS Amendment December SERIES STRUCTURAL CONCRETE Contents Clause Title Page Concrete General Concrete Constituent Materials Concrete Exposure Classes Concrete General Requirements Concrete Requirements for Designed Concrete Concrete Production Concrete Conformity and Identity Testing Concrete Surface Finish Not Used Concrete Construction General Concrete Grouting and Duct Systems For Posttensioned Tendons Reinforcement Materials Carbon Steel Reinforcement and Stainless Steel Reinforcement Bar Schedule Dimensions Cutting and Bending Reinforcement Fixing Reinforcement Surface Condition Reinforcement Laps and Joints Reinforcement Welding Prestressing Tendons Materials Prestressing Tendons Handling and Storage Prestressing Tendons Surface Condition Prestressing Tendons Straightness Prestressing Tendons Cutting Prestressing Tendons Positioning of Tendons Sheaths and Duct Formers Prestressing Tendons Tensioning Prestressing Tendons Protection and Bond Stainless Steel Dowels Materials Inspection and Testing of Structures and Components Geometrical Tolerances Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Structural Concrete Amendment December STRUCTURAL CONCRETE Concrete General Specification of Concrete This Series is part of the Specification for Highway Works .
Whilst this Series is particularly relevant to the subject matter in its title it must be read in conjunction with the general requirements in Series and and with all other Series relevant to the Specification for the particular works to be undertaken .
Concrete shall conform to the requirements of BS Parts and .
Unless otherwise described in contract specific Appendix concrete shall be specified as designed concrete .
The contract specific requirements for the structural concrete in the permanent works are given in contract specific Appendix .
Designed Concrete The specification for designed concrete defined in BS shall be as described in this Specification and contract specific Appendix and shall contain a the basic requirements given in .. of BS b the additional requirements given in .. of BS where described in this Specification and contract specific Appendix .
Implementation of BS EN .
The execution of concrete structures shall be in accordance with BS EN as complemented by this Specification .
The provisions of this Specification apply to both in situ and precast concrete unless noted otherwise .
Execution Class .
The works shall be built in accordance with Execution Class as defined in BS EN unless otherwise described in contract specific Appendix .
Inspection Requirements .
Inspection for materials and products and inspection for execution of works as well as documentation of inspection shall be in accordance with BS EN as complemented by this Specification .
Requirements for the inspection and testing of structures are given in contract specific Appendix .
Where described in Appendix inspection of concrete works shall be executed by an organisation independent of the Contractor .
Concrete Constituent Materials Cement and combinations Cement types as defined in BS see Table A. of BS or Table of BS shall comprise one of the following unless otherwise described in contract specific Appendix CEM I CEM IIAS CEM IIAL CEM IIALL CEM IIAD CEM IIBS CEM IIAV CEM IIBV CEM IIIA CEM IIIB CEM IVB and sulfateresisting Portland cements CEM ISR and CEM ISR conforming to BS EN .
Combinations as defined in BS shall comprise one of the following unless otherwise described in contract specific Appendix CIIAS CIIBS CIIAL CIIALL CIIAV CIIBV CIIIA CIIIB and CIVBV .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Structural Concrete Amendment December Cements shall conform to BS EN .
Evidence of compliance with the harmonised part of BS EN with respect to product performance shall be demonstrated by CE marking and a Declaration of Performance where the declared performance for the essential characteristics given in Annex ZA of that Standard is equal or greater than the performance level required for the intended use of the cement .
Ground granulated blastfurnace slag fly ash and silica fume shall conform to BS EN BS EN and BS EN respectively .
Evidence of compliance with the harmonised part of those Standards with respect to product performance shall be demonstrated by CE marking and a Declaration of Performance where the declared performance for the essential characteristics given in Annex ZA of those Standards is equal or greater than the performance level required for the intended use of the constituent .
Limestone fines shall conform to BS .
Aggregates Unless otherwise specified in contract specific Appendix aggregates shall conform to BS EN for normal and heavy weight aggregates and BS EN for lightweight aggregates and to the requirements of .
of BS except that recycled concrete aggregate RCA and recycled aggregate RA shall not be used .
Where the use of RCA or RA is proposed it shall be subject to the approval of the Overseeing Organisation through its Departure from Standard processes .
Evidence of compliance with the harmonised part of BS EN and BS EN with respect to product performance shall be demonstrated by CE marking and a Declaration of Performance where the declared performance for the essential characteristics given in Annex ZA of that Standard is equal or greater than the performance level required for the intended use of the aggregate with the System of Assessment and Verification of Consistency of Performance AVCP as defined in PD and PD for aggregates conforming to BS EN and BS EN respectively .
The flakiness index of the coarse aggregate when determined by the method described in BS EN shall not exceed FI except when natural uncrushed aggregates are used for concrete of strength classes lower than C when the flakiness index shall not exceed FI .
No flakiness index limit is required for strength class C concrete or below .
When required the resistance to fragmentation of the coarse aggregate determined in terms of the Los Angeles coefficient as specified in BS EN and declared in accordance with the relevant category specified in Table of BS EN shall meet the requirements for LA .
Aggregates with LA coefficient values above may also perform satisfactorily in normal concrete but their strength performance shall be established in concrete trials before use .
Chloride levels of aggregate shall be established from testing using the Volhard reference method in BS EN or other method calibrated against this reference method .
Where the aggregate chloride level has been established as minimal that is less than the detection level of .
typical for land based materials then this value may be used .
Where there is a significant chloride level the value shall be established as set out in .. of BS EN .
Aggregates shall be selected as to satisfy the requirements in subClause .
for the control of alkalisilica reaction .
Admixtures and Pigments Admixtures shall conform to BS EN and shall comply with .
of BS and the requirements of Clause of BS EN unless otherwise described in contract specific Appendix .
Evidence of compliance with the harmonised part of BS EN with respect to product performance shall be demonstrated by CE marking and a Declaration of Performance where the declared performance for the essential characteristics given in Annex ZA of that Standard is equal or greater than the performance level required for the intended use of the admixture .
Where a specified coloured concrete requires a pigment the pigment shall conform to BS EN .
In all cases the Contractor shall record the following information which shall be subsequently supplied to the Overseeing Organisation in accordance with the requirements of BD As built Operational and Maintenance Records for Highway Structures DMRB .. Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Structural Concrete Amendment December a the detrimental effects caused by adding a greater or lesser quantity of admixture or pigment b the chemical names of the main active ingredients c whether or not the admixture leads to the entrainment of air .
Fibres for concrete The use of fibres for concrete is not covered by this Specification .
Where their use is proposed it shall be subject to the approval of the Overseeing Organisation through its Departure from Standard processes .
Concrete Exposure Classes Selection of Exposure Classes The exposure classes shall be as described in contract specific Appendix .
Concrete General Requirements Compressive Strength Class of Concrete The compressive strength classes of concrete shall be as described in contract specific Appendix .
Minimum Cement Content and Maximum WaterCement Ratio The cement content shall be not less than and the watercement ratio shall be not greater than the values described in contract specific Appendix .
Maximum Cement Content The cement content shall not exceed kgm unless otherwise described in contract specific Appendix .
Maximum Chloride Content The chloride content class shall conform to the following requirements TABLE Chloride content classes Type or use of concrete Chloride content class Maximum total chloride content expressed as of chloride ion by mass of cement inclusive of ggbs or fly ash when these are used as cement Prestressed concrete heatcured concrete containing embedded metal Cl .
Concrete containing embedded metal and made with sulfateresisting Portland cements CEM ISR and CEM ISR conforming to BS EN Cl .
Concrete containing embedded metal and made with other permitted cements Cl .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Structural Concrete Amendment December Control of AlkaliSilica Reaction The provisions given in .
of BS shall be applied to minimize damaging alkalisilica reaction .
Extremely reactive aggregates comprising those aggregates containing detectable quantities of opal glass and calcined flint shall not be used alone or in combination with other aggregates .
The definition of rock types shall be as in BS EN .
Buried Concrete Exposed to Sulfates Choice of concrete and additional protective measures APMs shall comply with the requirements of BS for the design chemical DC class described in contract specific Appendix .
Early Thermal Cracking The execution of concrete structures shall conform to the assumptions made in the design to control early thermal cracking and described in contract specific Appendix unless otherwise agreed with the Overseeing Organisation .
Cover to Reinforcement The Contractor shall provide certificates of compliance with respect to cover to reinforcement and detailed records of measured covers to the Overseeing Organisation before concrete is placed .
Concrete Requirements for Designed Concrete Conformity Criteria The conformity criteria for a concrete shall be in accordance with BS EN and BS .
Suitability of Proposed Constituent Material Proportions The Contractor shall record prior to the supply of any designed concrete the following information which shall be subsequently supplied to the Overseeing Organisation in accordance with the requirements of BD i the nature and source of each material ii either a appropriate existing data as evidence of satisfactory previous performance for target mean strength current margin consistence and watercement ratio or b full details of initial tests carried out in accordance with Annex A of BS EN iii the quantities of each constituent material per cubic metre of fully compacted concrete .
Assessment of the concrete in accordance with this subClause shall be carried out for each different source of material and for any change in the quantities of each constituent material except for changes in cement content of not more than kgm and prorata changes in aggregate contents where a single assessment is required .
Concrete Production Production Control All concrete produced shall be subject to production control as specified in Clause of BS EN and Clause of BS and in accordance with the requirements of Clause .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Structural Concrete Amendment December Consistence At Delivery In general water or admixtures shall not be added to concrete delivered to site following initial mixing in accordance with the mix design .
Water or admixtures may only be added in special circumstances under the direction of the concrete producer and used to bring the consistence to the specified value provided that the limiting values permitted by the Specification are not exceeded .
The quantity of any additional water or admixture added to the mix shall be recorded on the delivery ticket in all cases along with name of the organisation and person authorising the additions and the record of subClause .
shall be amended accordingly .
SelfCompacting Concrete SCC The use of SCC is not covered by this Specification .
Where the use of SCC is proposed it shall be subject to the approval of the Overseeing Organisation through its Departure from Standards processes .
Concrete Conformity and Identity Testing General Sampling and testing of fresh and of hardened concrete shall comply with BS EN unless otherwise described in contract specific Appendix and shall be as scheduled in contract specific Appendices andor as appropriate in accordance with Clause .
Identity Testing Where identity testing for compressive strength is required as described in contract specific Appendix it shall be in accordance with the requirements given in Annex B of BS EN and Annex B of BS .
Where identity testing for slump flow air content and density on individual batches of concrete is required as described in contract specific Appendix it shall be in accordance with Annex B of BS .
Identity testing shall be as scheduled in contract specific Appendix andor .
Concrete Surface Finish Trial Panels When required in contract specific Appendix and before commencing concrete works the Contractor shall prepare a trial panel of a suitable size that will demonstrate that the required surface finish can be achieved by the methods proposed .
The panel of concrete shall contain reinforcement representative of the reinforcement sizes and spacings in the sections of the permanent works the panel represents and shall be filled with the concrete proposed for the works the trial panel relates to compacted by the method to be used in the works .
As soon as practicable after compaction the formwork shall be removed to check that the required surface finish and compaction has been achieved .
Reference panels have also been produced showing typical Class F and F surface finishes made with local materials in each region of the UK and they can be viewed at various sites throughout the UK .
Control of Colour When stated in contract specific Appendix each constituent material shall be obtained from a single consistent source .
The aggregates shall be free of any impurities that may cause staining .
The mix proportions and the grading particularly of the sand i.e .
fine aggregate shall be maintained constant .
The same type of formwork facing material surface finish and surface treatments shall be used in formwork throughout similar exposed areas .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Structural Concrete Amendment December Release Agents Release agents for the formwork shall enable the formwork to be removed without damage to the concrete surface .
Where a concrete surface is to be permanently exposed only one agent shall be used throughout the entire area .
Release agents shall be applied evenly and shall not be permitted to come into contact with reinforcement prestressing tendons and anchorages contamination from release agents shall be removed from such areas .
Where the concrete is to receive an applied finish or surface impregnation release agents shall be compatible with the particular material and any associated process .
Surface Finishes for Concrete i Formed Surfaces Classes of Finish Formwork as described in subClause .
shall be capable of producing the following finishes where required in the works Class F. A dense finish with no grout or mortar loss with the specified cover to embedded metal and achieving the specified dimensional tolerances .
Class F. As the requirements of F and the irregularities in the finish shall be no greater than those obtained from the use of wrought thicknessed square edged boards arranged in a uniform pattern .
The finish is intended to be left as struck but imperfections such as fins and surface discolouration shall be made good .
Class F. As the requirements of F and the resulting finish shall be smooth and of uniform texture and appearance .
The formwork lining shall leave no stain on the concrete and shall be so joined and fixed to its backing that it imparts no blemishes .
It shall be of the same type and obtained from only one source throughout any one structure .
The Contractor shall make good any imperfections in the finish .
Internal ties and embedded metal parts shall not be used .
Class F. The requirements for Class F are as for Class F except that internal ties and embedded metal parts shall be permitted .
The ties shall be positioned only in rebates or in other positions as described in contract specific Appendix .
Class F. The resulting finish shall be smooth and of uniform texture .
Any blemishes and imperfections such as discolouration and fins shall be made good .
Provision for the embedment of metal parts in the permanent works on a regular spacing shall be allowed .
Other Classes .
The finishes shall comply with the specific requirements described in contract specific Appendix .
Permanently exposed concrete surfaces to all Classes of finish other than F shall be protected from rust marks and stains of all kinds .
Unless otherwise described in contract specific Appendix all formwork joints for all classes of finish other than F shall form a regular pattern with horizontal and vertical lines continuous throughout each structure and all construction joints shall coincide with these horizontal or vertical lines .
ii Unformed Surfaces Classes of Finish Class U finish .
The concrete shall be levelled and screeded to produce a uniform surface to the profile shown on the drawings .
No further work shall be applied to the surface unless it is used as a first stage for another class of finish .
Class U finish .
After the concrete has hardened sufficiently the Class U finish shall be floated by hand or machine sufficiently only to produce a uniform surface free from screed marks .
Class U finish .
When the moisture has disappeared and the concrete has hardened sufficiently to prevent laitance from being worked to the surface a Class U finish shall be steeltrowelled under firm pressure to produce a dense smooth uniform surface free from trowel marks .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Structural Concrete Amendment December Class U finish .
The concrete shall be levelled and screeded to produce a uniform surface .
When the concrete has sufficiently hardened and the bleed water evaporated the surface shall be trowelled to produce a hard dense surface free from screed marks and exposed aggregate .
Finally the surface shall be lightly textured with a wooden float or equivalent .
Alternatively the concrete shall be levelled screeded and floated to produce a uniform surface and immediately before the waterproofing operation this surface shall receive surface preparation by water jetting or grit blasting to provide a lightly textured finish .
The finished surface shall not deviate from the required profile by more than mm over a m gauge length or have any abrupt irregularities more than mm .
Class U finish .
The concrete shall be levelled and screeded to produce a uniform finish .
When the concrete has sufficiently hardened to prevent laitance being worked to the surface it shall be floated to produce a surface free from screed marks and exposed aggregate .
Finally the surface shall be textured to suit the requirements of the particular waterproofing and surfacing system .
The accuracy of the finished surface shall be such that it does not deviate from the required profile by more than mm over a m gauge length or have any abrupt irregularities .
Other Classes .
The finishes shall comply with the specific requirements described in contract specific Appendix .
Not Used Concrete Construction General Construction Joints The position of construction joints shall be as shown on the drawings and at additional positions determined by the Contractor in accordance with the requirements of contract specific Appendix .
When concrete is placed in vertical members walls columns and the like the lifts of concrete shall finish level or in sloping members at right angles to the axis of the members and the joint lines shall match features of the finished work if possible or be formed by grout checks .
Kickers shall be constructed integrally with the lift of concrete below .
Concreting shall be carried out continuously up to construction joints .
Unless interface shear calculations in accordance with BS EN Clause .. of BS EN show that a nonprepared surface between concrete cast at different times is sufficient for structural purposes construction joints shall be prepared in either of the following ways i When the concrete is selfsupporting but still sufficiently green the formwork shall be removed as necessary to expose the construction joint subject to the requirements of subClause of this Clause .
The concrete surface shall be sprayed with a fine spray of water or brushed with a stiff brush just sufficiently to remove the outer mortar skin and expose the larger aggregate without disturbing it .
Alternatively where this preparation proves impracticable the hardened surface skin and laitance shall be removed by grit blasting or a needle gun .
Hardened surfaces shall not be hacked .
ii By the use of proprietary steel openmesh permanent formwork intended for use in construction joints .
Retarding agents shall not be used unless permitted in contract specific Appendix .
The joint surface shall be clean and damp but free of standing water immediately before any fresh concrete is placed against it .
Falsework and Formwork i Design and construction .
The formwork shall be sufficiently rigid and tight to prevent loss of grout or mortar from the concrete at all stages and for the appropriate method of placing and compacting .
The falsework and formwork shall be so arranged as to be readily dismantled and removed from the cast concrete without shock disturbance or damage .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Structural Concrete Amendment December Where necessary the falsework and formwork shall be so arranged that the soffit form properly supported on props only can be retained in position for such period as may be required by maturing conditions as described in subClause .ii .
If the component is to be prestressed whilst still resting on the soffit form provision shall be made to allow for elastic deformation and any variation in weight distribution .
Where it is intended to reuse formwork it shall be thoroughly cleaned and made good .
Internal metal ties which require being withdrawn through hardened concrete shall not be used where either face is permanently exposed .
Where internal ties are left in they shall be provided with a mortar cover of at least mm .
The jointing faces of the pocket shall be prepared with an exposed aggregate finish and dampened immediately prior to mortar filling .
ii Cleaning and treatment of forms .
The faces of the forms in contact with the concrete shall be clean and treated with a suitable release agent where applicable as described in subClause ..
Immediately before concreting all forms shall be thoroughly cleaned out .
The source of any compressed air used for the clearing of foreign matter from formwork shall be free from oil and other contaminant .
iii Projecting reinforcement and fixing devices .
Where holes are needed in forms to accommodate projecting reinforcement or fixing devices care shall be taken to prevent loss of grout when concreting or damage when striking forms .
iv Permanent formwork or special formwork shall comply with contract specific Appendix .
Transporting Placing and Compacting Concrete shall be transported and placed so that contamination segregation or loss of the constituent materials does not occur in accordance with Clause of BS .
Concrete when deposited shall have a temperature of not less than C. Where the concrete is made using CEM I or a CEM IIA cement the concrete temperature shall not be more than C. Where the concrete is made using a CEM IIB or a CEM III cement or equivalent combination the concrete temperature shall not be more than C. The temperature of fresh concrete shall be measured in accordance with BS .
Fresh concrete shall not be placed against in situ concrete that has been in position for more than minutes unless a construction joint is formed as described in subClause of this Clause .
Where lightweight aggregate concrete is to be pumped the Contractor shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Overseeing Organisation that pumping will have no significant effect on the strength of the hardened concrete .
No concrete shall be placed in flowing water .
Underwater concrete shall be placed in position by tremies or by pipelines using methods to ensure the requirements of this Specification are met .
When concreting bridge decks of substantial thickness to avoid layering of concrete the whole thickness shall be placed in one pass .
In deck slabs where void formers are used adequate means to prevent flotation shall be employed and care taken to ensure adequate compaction of the concrete placed beneath the void formers .
Where the minimum dimension of a concrete section to be placed at a single time is greater than mm measures shall be taken to reduce the adverse affects of high temperatures in the concrete or to reduce the temperature of concrete to prevent high temperatures having an adverse effect on the finished concrete .
Concreting operations shall not displace reinforcement tendon ducts tendon anchorages or formwork or damage the faces of formwork .
Concrete shall be thoroughly compacted by vibration during the operation of placing and thoroughly worked around the reinforcement tendons or duct formers around embedded fixtures and into corners of the formwork to form a solid mass free from voids .
When vibrators are used to compact the concrete vibration shall be applied continuously during the placing of each batch of concrete until the expulsion of air has practically ceased .
A sufficient number of vibrators in serviceable condition shall be on site to ensure that spare equipment is always available in the event of breakdowns .
Vibration shall not be applied by way of the reinforcement .
Where vibrators of the immersion type are used contact with reinforcement and inserts shall be avoided as far as is practicable .
The use of selfcompacting concrete is not covered by this Specification .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Structural Concrete Amendment December Concrete shall not be subjected to disturbance between hours and hours after compaction except that re compaction of the upper layers of deep lifts to prevent or anneal settlement cracking may be carried out .
Whenever vibration has to be applied externally the design of formwork and disposition and operation of vibrators shall ensure efficient compaction and the avoidance of surface blemishes .
There shall be no excess water on the top surface on completion of compaction .
Slipforming shall be performed with appropriate equipment using methods to ensure that the requirements of this Specification are met .
Removal of Formwork and Falsework i General .
Falsework and formwork shall be removed in a manner that does not damage the concrete and at times to suit the requirements for its curing and to prevent restraint that may arise from elastic shortening shrinkage or creep .
ii Timing of removal for cast in situ concrete .
Where the concrete compressive strength is confirmed by tests on concrete cubes stored under conditions that simulate the field conditions formwork supporting concrete in bending may be removed when the cylindercube strength is Nmm or the strength needed by the design whichever is the greater .
For ordinary structural concrete made with Portland cement CEM I or sulfateresisting Portland cements CEM ISR or CEM ISR of strength class .
or above in the absence of control cubes the period before removal shall be in accordance with the minimum periods given in Table .
TABLE Minimum Period Before Removing Falsework and Formwork CEM I or SRPC Concrete Minimum Period Before Removal Surface temperature of concrete C C tC any temperature between C and C Vertical formwork to columns walls and large beams hours hours t hours Soffit formwork to slabs days days t days Props to slabs days days t days Soffit formwork to Beams days days t days Props to beams days days t days Where surface temperatures of concrete fall outside or are likely to fall outside the above temperature ranges agreement shall be reached between the Contractor and Overseeing Organisation on appropriate removal times .
Curing of Concrete i General .
Curing Class in accordance with Clause .
of BS EN shall be used unless otherwise specified in contract specific Appendix .
Additional special curing requirements may be given in contract specific Appendix .
Immediately after compaction and thereafter for the duration of applied curing except where elevated temperature curing is used concrete shall be protected against harmful effects of weather including rain rapid temperature changes frost and from drying out .
The method of curing shall provide a suitable environment for the concrete to mature and prevent loss of moisture harmful to the quality of the concrete .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Structural Concrete Amendment December Where the Contractor proposes to use a curing liquid compound or membrane on surfaces on which a waterproofing system is to be laid it shall be completely removable .
The Contractor shall keep records of all curing liquids compounds and membranes and the areas of subsequent removal such records shall be subsequently supplied to the Overseeing Organisation in accordance with the requirements of BD .
ii Accelerated curing .
Elevatedtemperature curing as described below may be used only for concrete made with Portland cement CEM I or sulfateresisting Portland cements CEM ISR or CEM ISR .
a The formwork may be generally heated to no more than C prior to the placing of concrete .
b Once placing is complete the concrete shall be left for hours without additional heating .
The concrete temperature can then be raised at a maximum rate of C per hour .
c The concrete temperature shall at no time exceed C. d The rate of subsequent cooling shall not exceed the rate of heating .
e Cubes shall be manufactured and cured under identical conditions to those to which the concrete is subjected .
The use of accelerated curing methods for concrete containing other types of cement or any admixture shall not be used .
Cold Weather Work When concrete is placed at air temperatures below C the following requirements shall be met i The aggregates and water used in the mix shall be free from snow ice and frost .
ii The surface temperature of the concrete at the time of placing shall be at least C. Where the concrete is made using CEM I or a CEM IIA cement the concrete temperature shall not be more than C. Where the concrete is made using a CEM IIB or a CEM III cement or equivalent combination the concrete temperature shall not be more than C. iii The surface temperature of the concrete shall be maintained at not less than C until the concrete reaches a strength of Nmm as determined by tests on cubes that were cured under identical conditions to the structural concrete .
iv Before placing concrete the formwork reinforcement prestressing steel and any surface with which the fresh concrete will be in contact shall be free from snow ice and frost .
v Cement shall not be allowed to come into contact with water at a temperature greater than C. Hot Weather Work During hot weather the Contractor shall ensure that the constituent materials of the concrete are sufficiently cool to prevent the concrete from stiffening in the interval between its discharge from the mixer and compaction in its final position .
Cement shall not be allowed to come into contact with water at a temperature greater than C. Precast Concrete Construction i General Precast concrete elements to be used in the works shall comply with the following Product Standards as appropriate which are relevant for highway structures a Bridge deck elements shall comply with BS EN .
b Foundation piles shall comply with BS EN .
c Box culverts shall comply with BS EN .
d Retaining wall elements shall comply with BS EN .
e Masts and poles shall comply with BS EN .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Structural Concrete Amendment December All precast concrete elements to be used in the works that fall within the scope of a Product Standard shall be supplied in accordance with that Standard .
Precast elements that are outside the scope of a Product Standard shall conform to BS EN Common rules for precast concrete products unless otherwise described in contract specific Appendix .
Where minor site manufactured precast elements do not conform to any product standard or BS EN manufacture and construction operations shall comply with the provisions of BS EN and with this Specification .
For precast products the manufacturing requirements as detailed in their relevant Product Standard or in BS EN shall be complied with the construction operations from the reception at the site or if site manufactured from removal from the forms shall comply with the provisions of BS EN and with this Specification .
Where precast products are manufactured in temporary plants on site the production shall be protected against adverse weather conditions and production control shall satisfy the requirements of Clause of BS EN .
ii Manufacture of precast products Precast products shall be suitable for their intended use and place of installation in the works .
The relevant Product Standard for each precast product to be used shall be as identified in contract specific Appendix .
Where there is no relevant Product Standard reference to manufacture in accordance with BS EN shall be as quoted in contract specific Appendix .
Where a precast product is to be manufactured in accordance with a Product Standard evidence of compliance with the harmonised part of the Product Standard with respect to product performance shall be demonstrated by CE marking and a Declaration of Performance where the declared performance for the essential characteristics given in Annex ZA of that Standard is equal to or greater than the performance level required for the intended use of the precast product .
The minimum set of information to be included with the CE marking and labelling in accordance with Annex ZA of the Product Standard shall be as required in contract specific Appendix .
iii Manufacture of precast concrete elements not conforming to any Product Standard or to BS EN The Contractor shall give reasonable notice to the Overseeing Organisation in advance of the date of commencement of manufacture and casting of each type of element .
A copy of all day cube test results relating to the work as scheduled in contract specific Appendix shall be made available by the Contractor to the Overseeing Organisation in accordance with Clause .
For all prestressed elements the Contractor shall provide to the Overseeing Organisation not more than days after the transfer of stress a certificate showing the force and extension in the tendons after they were anchored the strength and age of test cubes cast as described in subClauses .
and .
and the minimum age in hours of the concrete at the time the stress was applied to the element .
For all prestressed pretensioned elements the length crosssection dimensions and straightness of precast concrete shall be measured as far as practicable at days after casting .
If earlier measurement is required the manufacturer should allow for further shrinkage and creep between the time of measurement and days based on recorded experience .
All elements shall be indelibly marked to show the element mark as shown on the drawings the weight of the element the production line on which they were manufactured the date on which the concrete was cast and if they are of symmetrical section the face that will be uppermost when the element is in its correct position in the works .
The markings shall be so located that they are not exposed to view when the element is in its permanent position .
iv Requirements for all precast elements including precast products a General .
Where tests are to be carried out no elements to which the tests relate shall be dispatched to the site until the tests have been satisfactorily completed .
In the case where elements are manufactured in temporary plants on site they shall not leave the designated production area until the tests have been satisfactorily completed .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Structural Concrete Amendment December Unless interface shear calculations in accordance with BS EN Clause .. of BS EN show that a nonprepared surface between concrete cast at different times is sufficient for structural purposes the vibrated top surface of precast concrete elements which will subsequently receive in situ concrete shall be further prepared using one of the following methods and therefore considered as Rough in accordance to Clause .. of BS EN Class surface preparation .
The surface finish shall be in accordance with subClause .. Class surface preparation .
The hardened surface shall be jetted with air or water to remove laitance and all loose material and no further roughening shall then be carried out rough as cast .
The surface classification and the method of preparation shall be shown on the drawings .
b Handling .
Elements shall be lifted or supported at points described in contract specific Appendix and shall be handled and placed without impact .
Additional constraints on the support restraint and dynamic loading during handling or transport are described in contract specific Appendix .
The Contractor shall incorporate in the erection specification in accordance with BS EN the requirements of the lifting scheme for the precast concrete elements .
c Storage .
When elements are stored they shall be firmly supported only at the points described in contract specific Appendix .
Where elements are stacked several units high packings shall be vertically above each other to prevent additional bending stresses in the elements and the maximum height of the stack and any provision required to maintain stability shall be as described in contract specific Appendix .
The accumulation of trapped water and deleterious matter in the units shall be prevented .
Care shall be taken to avoid rust staining and efflorescence .
Where disfigurement would be detrimental packing pieces shall not discolour or otherwise permanently damage the elements .
d Protection .
At all stages of construction precast concrete elements and other concrete associated therewith shall be properly protected to prevent damage to permanently exposed concrete surfaces especially arrises and decorative features .
e Placing and adjustment .
An erection specification shall be prepared by the Contractor in accordance with BS EN and it shall be submitted for acceptance of the Overseeing Organisation at least weeks prior to the delivery of the elements .
The method of assembly and erection shall comply with any particular requirements in contract specific Appendix and form part of the erection specification .
f Requirements for placing and adjustment of composite slab bridges .
In a composite slab bridge where precast beams are laid side by side with minimal gaps to form a deck the difference in soffit level between adjacent units before the in situ concrete is placed shall nowhere exceed mm for units up to m in length or mm for longer units and the width of the deck soffit shall be within mm of that shown on the drawings furthermore the width of the gap between individual beams shall not exceed twice the nominal gap shown on the drawings .
The alignment of transverse holes shall permit the reinforcement or prestressing tendons to be placed without distortion .
In adjacent spans the continuity of line of the outside beams shall be maintained .
The in situ concrete in composite slab bridges shall be placed in such a sequence that the advancing edge of the freshly deposited concrete over the full width of the deck between longitudinal construction joints is approximately parallel to the deck supports .
Precast beams shall be prevented from moving laterally during the placing of the in situ concrete .
g Jointing and completion works .
The composition and watercement ratio of the in situ concrete or mortar used in any connection and in the packing of joints shall be in accordance with the erection specification .
Levelling devices shall only be released or removed in accordance with the erection specification when the structural connection is complete and has achieved sufficient strength .
Care shall be taken to ensure that the in situ material is thoroughly compacted .
When using proprietary jointing materials the manufacturers recommendations and any particular requirement in contract specific Appendix for the application and methods shall be strictly followed to ensure full compatibility between the joint type and size and the sealing method .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Structural Concrete Amendment December Concrete Grouting and Duct Systems for Posttensioned Tendons Planning Trials and Basic Requirements Site operations including duct installation stressing and grouting shall be carried out by organisations certificated in accordance with the requirements of the CARES product acceptance scheme for the Supply and Installation of Posttensioning Systems in Concrete Structures PT or an equivalent scheme .
Posttensioning systems shall be in accordance with Clause .
of BS EN .
The system shall have the intended use category and shall meet any performance requirement stated in contract specific Appendix .
The performance characteristics of the posttensioning system shall be demonstrated by CE marking and a Declaration of Performance where the declared performance for the product characteristics is equal or greater than the performance level required for the intended use of the product .
Precast segmental construction using internal grouted tendon system is not permitted .
Grouts for protection of prestressing tendons shall be as required in contract specific Appendix and defined in subClause ..
Grease and wax for posttensioned unbonded tendons shall be as required in Clause .
Unless otherwise agreed with the Overseeing Organisation the Contractor shall undertake fullscale trials of the grouting operations as required in the Contract for duct installation testing concreting grouting and any other associated requirements in accordance with the details described in contract specific Appendix .
The trials are required to demonstrate that the grouting methods and procedures proposed by the Contractor shall ensure that grout fills the ducts and surrounds the prestressing steel .
The Contractor shall submit for acceptance of the Overseeing Organisation a detailed method statement at least weeks prior to use in any trials or in the works covering proposed materials ducts anchorage and vent arrangements personnel equipment grouting procedures and quality control .
The method statement shall also describe arrangements for storage and protection of materials tendons etc .
on site in the time between delivery and grouting .
Where full scale trials are required these shall be carried out at least days before the planned commencement of fixing ducts for prestressing for the permanent works unless specified otherwise in contract specific Appendix .
The trials shall incorporate all relevant details of ducts vents duct supports prestressing anchorages and couplers prestressing strands grout inlets and outlets .
The tendons shall be sufficiently tensioned such that the strands within the duct take up a representative alignment .
All systems methods and materials are to be those proposed for the permanent works and shall have been submitted to the Overseeing Organisation as part of the detailed method statement required .
After three days the Contractor shall carefully cut or core the trial section to expose cross sections and longitudinal sections of the duct anchorages and any other locations where required or as further directed by the Overseeing Organisation to demonstrate that the duct is satisfactorily grouted .
A report shall be prepared by the Contractor giving full details of the trial testing results and photographs of the exposed sections and submitted to the Overseeing Organisation .
Grouting of the ducts shall be shown to leave no void which has either a dimension greater than of the duct diameter measured in the radial direction of the duct or which poses a risk to the protective system .
The location of any voids with respect to grout vents and their adequate grouting and subsequent sealing and the disposition of the steel tendons within the body of the grout shall be reported in writing by the Contractor to the Overseeing Organisation within days .
Prestressing for the permanent works shall not be permitted without the prior written acceptance of the grouting procedures by the Overseeing Organisation and formal acceptance of the results of the grouting trial .
Irrespective of whether the Contract requires fullscale grouting trials the Contractor shall carry out a materials suitability assessment in accordance with subClause ..
Inspection and conformity of grouting works including requirements prior during and after grouting shall be in accordance with Section of BS EN for Execution Class .
Grout Materials Batching and Mixing Grouts shall comply with BS EN and with the requirements in this subClause and subClause .. Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Structural Concrete Amendment December The properties of the grout made with the materials and using the plant and personnel proposed for use on site shall be assessed for suitability for the intended purpose by the Contractor in accordance with .
of BS EN .
This assessment shall be carried out sufficiently in advance of grouting operations to enable adjustments to be made in use of materials or plant or personnel .
The assessment shall consist of the preparation of the grout made with the materials and using the plant and personnel proposed for use on site and the testing of it in accordance with subClause ..
The preparation shall be carried out under representative conditions of temperature expected on site .
If grouting operations are likely to cover different seasons the assessment shall be carried out for the expected range of temperatures .
No departures from the sources of the materials and procedures approved as a result of satisfactory trials will be permitted without the written approval of the Overseeing Organisation .
When prebagged grouts are used they shall be obtained from companies holding a valid CARES product acceptance scheme certificate for the production of prebagged grouts complying with the requirements of BS EN BS EN and BS EN PT or an equivalent scheme .
All bagged materials shall be weighed before use unless clearly weight marked with stated tolerance .
Admixtures Admixtures shall be used where required to achieve a low watercement ratio and impart good fluidity minimum bleed and volume stability or expansion to the grout to comply with subClause .. For site batched grout admixtures shall be added on site during the mixing process and used in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
For prebagged grout the admixtures shall form a preblended component .
Admixtures are divided into two types expanding and nonexpanding and they may be used to obtain the required grout performance .
Admixtures used in combination shall be checked for compatibility by the Contractor and reported to the Overseeing Organisation for acceptance .
Admixtures shall not contain substances in quantities that will adversely affect the grout or cause the grout to promote corrosion of the prestressing steel by rusting pitting stress corrosion or hydrogen embrittlement .
The admixture shall not segregate shall be uniform in colour and the composition shall not change .
Admixtures shall comply with BS EN evidence of compliance with the harmonised part of BS EN with respect to product performance shall be demonstrated by CE marking and a Declaration of Performance where the declared performance for the essential characteristics given in Annex ZA of that Standard is equal or greater than the performance level required for the intended use of the admixture .
The optimum dosage of any admixture shall be determined by trial mixes with the cement to be used in the grout .
This dosage shall be expressed as percent by mass of the cement .
It shall be within the range recommended by the supplier and shall not exceed by mass of the cement .
The method of measuring dosage and checking weights shall comply with this subClause or as otherwise agreed with the Overseeing Organisation .
Batching and Mixing All materials shall be batched by mass except the mixing water and liquid admixtures which may be batched by mass or by volume .
Bagged materials shall be weighed before use unless clearly weight marked with stated tolerance .
The accuracy of batching shall be or have been in case of prebagged materials for dry materials cement and admixtures for mixing water of the quantities specified .
The total amount of mixing water shall include the water content of liquid admixtures .
Where proprietary prebagged grouts are used they shall be mixed in accordance with the manufacturers instructions .
Depending upon environmental or material influence e.g .
temperature configuration of the tendon and properties of the materials used the watercement ratio shall be kept as low as possible having regard to the required plastic properties of the grout see subClause .. Actual watercement ratios shall be recorded .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Structural Concrete Amendment December The material shall be mixed to produce a homogeneous grout and kept in slow continuous agitation until pumped into the duct .
Unless manufacturers specify otherwise water shall be added to the mixer first followed by the dry materials which may be added as a whole or in part in sequence until the total quantities are added .
The minimum mixing time determined from grouting trials shall be adhered to .
The temperature of freshly mixed grout shall be between C and C. The maximum temperature may be increased provided trials demonstrate that the grout meets the requirements of subClause .. Properties Performance and Testing of Grout The properties and performance requirements for grout shall be in accordance with Section of BS EN .
The requirements for suitability testing shall be in accordance with Section of BS EN .
Test methods are described in BS EN .
Test requirements for grout during grouting shall be in accordance with Section of BS EN for Execution Class .
Duct Systems The system of ducts duct connectors grouting connections vents vent connections drains transitions to anchorages and caps for anchors shall form a complete encapsulation for the tendons which is resistant to the ingress of air and water .
Ducts shall be of plastic and shall not degrade during the expected life of the structure .
The system shall be fully compatible with the prestressing anchorages couplers and other details .
Where ducts are nonconductive metal parts of anchorages shall be electrically bonded to the adjacent reinforcement at each end of the tendon and electrical continuity of the structure over the length of the tendon shall be confirmed by testing .
All ducts shall be kept free from standing water at all times and be thoroughly clean before grouting .
The following air pressure tests shall be carried out on site unless specified otherwise in contract specific Appendix .
Duct Assembly Verification Tests Each complete duct system including vents anchorages anchorage caps and where appropriate couplers and their connections shall be airpressure tested before concreting .
Testing to a pressure of .
Nmm unless otherwise specified in contract specific Appendix shall demonstrate that the system is undamaged and has been correctly assembled .
The testing shall demonstrate that a loss of pressure no greater than occurs after minutes .
The minimum manufactured wall thickness of ducting for internal tendons shall be mm .
The duct rigidity and type and spacing of fixings and supports shall be such as to maintain line position and cross section shape during concreting .
Local deformation of the duct at supports shall be avoided .
For external tendons the minimum wall thickness shall be mm for durability or such thicker wall as required to withstand grouting pressures of the particular duct configuration .
The Contractor shall provide evidence of testing to demonstrate the following requirements i Wall thickness of ducts for tendons after tensioning of the tendons shall be not less than .
mm unless specified otherwise in contract specific Appendix .
ii For internal tendons the duct shall transmit full bond strength from the tendons to the surrounding concrete over a length no greater than duct diameters or other such requirement as given in contract specific Appendix .
Vents Vents providing an air passage of at least mm internal diameter shall be provided at the anchorages and in the troughs and crests and beyond each intermediate crest in the direction of flow of the grout at the point where the duct is one half diameter lower than the crest but no further than m from the crest unless otherwise described in contract specific Appendix .
The maximum spacing of vents shall be m unless specified otherwise in contract specific Appendix .
The vent diameter and spacing may be varied in fullscale trials demonstrating the suitability of alternatives .
The vents shall be rigidly connected to the ducts and shall be capable of being closed and reopened .
Holes in the ducts shall be at least the internal diameter of the vents and shall be formed before pressure testing .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Structural Concrete Amendment December For external tendons the arrangement and detailing of the vents at positions within deflectorsdiaphragms shall be proven by detailed testing .
Vents on each duct shall be identified by labelling and shall be protected against damage at all times .
Vents at high points shall extend to a minimum of mm above the highest point on the duct profile unless described otherwise in contract specific Appendix .
Grouting Equipment Grouting equipment shall comply with the requirements of Section of BS EN .
The equipment shall be capable of maintaining pressure on completely grouted ducts and shall be fitted with a valve that can be locked off without loss of pressure in the duct .
During the grouting operation the Contractor shall provide adequate flushingout plant to facilitate complete removal of the grout in the event of a breakdown of the grouting equipment or other disruption before the grouting operation has been completed .
Standby and emergency equipment shall be provided .
All equipment shall be kept free from buildup of adhering materials .
Grouting Procedures Grouting procedures shall comply with the requirements of Section of BS EN .
Grouting of the ducts shall be carried out within days of installation of the tendon or as soon as is practicable thereafter in which case additional measures shall be taken to avoid corrosion of the prestressing steel .
The Overseeing Organisations written agreement to commence grouting operations shall be obtained .
During grouting operations once the fluidity of the grout flowing from the vents is the same as the grout being injected to within the limits specified in BS EN as per .
of BS EN litres of grout at each vent or such other requirement of contract specific Appendix shall be vented into a clean receptacle and then discarded .
The volume of all grout that is expelled shall be measured .
The opening shall be firmly closed .
All vents shall be closed in a similar manner one after another in the direction of the flow except that at intermediate crests the vents immediately downstream shall be closed before their associated crest vent .
The injection tubes shall then be sealed off under pressure with a pressure of .
Nmm being maintained for at least one minute .
Grout vents at high points shall be reopened immediately after minute while the grout is still fluid .
Any escape of air water or grout shall be recorded and reported immediately to the Overseeing Organisation .
A further pumping of grout shall then be carried out to expel bleed water andor entrapped air .
This shall be carried out with the vents open one at a time sequentially in the direction of grouting with a further litres being released at each vent .
In the event of disagreement over the quality of the vented grout testing shall be undertaken immediately by the Contractor .
Finally when all outlets are closed the grout pressure shall be maintained for at least one minute to confirm there is no unintended loss due to leakage .
The filled ducts shall not be subjected to shock or vibration for at least hours from the time of grouting .
When the grout has set the grout vents shall be temporarily reopened .
If voids are apparent on inspecting vents at end caps the Overseeing Organisation may require all or some of the end caps to be removed to demonstrate that they are satisfactorily filled with grout .
End caps which have been removed shall then be replaced and permanently sealed against ingress of contaminants such sealing to be proved to the Overseeing Organisation .
If the method of demonstrating filling of the anchorage caps involves their removal a photographic record shall be made by the Contractor .
The record shall clearly identify the individual anchorages and shall be included in the report to the Overseeing Organisation .
If in the opinion of the Overseeing Organisation there is doubt that the ducts or any part of the system are not satisfactorily filled with grout the Overseeing Organisation may require investigations to be carried out .
The Contractor shall keep full records of grouting for each duct in accordance with the acceptance scheme requirements for the installation of posttensioning systems .
Copies of these records shall be supplied to the Overseeing Organisation within hours of completing grouting to each duct .
On completion of grouting grout vents shall be positively sealed and waterproofed by a means additional to but separate from the concrete waterproofing .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Structural Concrete Amendment December Grouting During Cold or Hot Weather Requirements for grouting in cold or hot weather are given in .
of BS EN .
When the ambient temperature is expected to fall below C accurate records shall be kept by the Contractor of the maximum and minimum air temperatures and the temperatures of the structural elements adjacent to the ducts to be grouted .
When heating is considered appropriate methods of heating shall be to the acceptance of the Overseeing Organisation .
Ducts shall not be warmed with steam .
Void Grouting Void grouting is the injection of grout into voids left in tendon ducts after the original grout has hardened and shall not be confused with regrouting which means the reinjection of grout into ducts while the original grout is still fluid .
Where the use of void grouting is proposed it shall be subject to the approval of the Overseeing Organisation through its Departure from Standard processes .
Reinforcement Materials Hot Rolled and Cold Worked Carbon Steel Bars All hot rolled and cold worked steel bars shall conform to BS EN and BS Grades BB or BC .
Reinforcement shall be cut and bent in accordance with BS .
The bars shall be obtained from and cut and bent by organisations holding a valid CARES product acceptance scheme or equivalent scheme certificate of approval for the production and supply of steel for the reinforcement of concrete see also subClause ..
Hot rolled and cold worked carbon steel bars shall conform to BS EN and BS except that no bar shall contain a flash weld .
Steel Wire Steel wire shall only be used in precast concrete elements and shall be ribbed Grade conforming to BS EN and BS .
Steel wire shall have a minimum nominal diameter of mm and shall be obtained from organisations holding a valid CARES product acceptance scheme or equivalent scheme certificate of approval for the production and supply of steel wire see also subClause .. Steel Fabric Steel fabric reinforcement shall be Grades BA BB or BC conforming to BS EN and BS .
Steel fabric reinforcement shall be cut and bent in accordance with BS .
Steel fabric reinforcement shall have a minimum nominal bar size of mm mm for Grade BA and shall be obtained from organisations holding a valid CARES product acceptance scheme or equivalent scheme certificate of approval for the production and supply of steel fabric reinforcement see also subClause .. Steel fabric reinforcement shall be delivered to site in flat mats or prebent .
Stainless Steel Reinforcement All stainless steel reinforcement shall conform to BS and shall be cut and bent in accordance with BS and shall be obtained from organisations holding valid CARES product acceptance scheme or equivalent scheme certificates of approval for the production and supply of stainless steel reinforcement see also subClause ..
Stainless steel reinforcement shall be ribbed Grade conforming to BS and the additional properties described in contract specific Appendix .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Structural Concrete Amendment December Bond Strength For hot rolled and cold worked carbon steel bars and for steel fabric reinforcement the bond property requirements of BS shall be complied with based on the surface geometry requirements of that standard .
For steel wire the bond property requirements of BS shall be complied with based on the surface geometry requirements of that standard .
Traceability and Identification of Reinforcement Any product acceptance scheme shall ensure that materials used in reinforcing bars are traceable from their initial production casts through rolling and other treatments to delivery on site of straight bar or cut and bent steel .
The marking system on reinforcement shall be secure clear and unambiguous .
Marking must also identify the grade of a reinforcement bar both in terms of strength and ductility .
Materials complying with the requirements given in subClauses .
to and supplied in accordance with the CARES product acceptance scheme or equivalent scheme shall be deemed to meet the requirements for traceability and identification of materials described above .
Carbon Steel Reinforcement and Stainless Steel Reinforcement Bar Schedule Dimensions Cutting and Bending The bar schedules are based on the dimensions of the concrete and the nominal cover to the reinforcement shown on the drawings .
The reinforcement shall be cut and bent within the tolerances given in BS but this shall not relieve the Contractor of his responsibility for the correct fit of the reinforcement and the achievement of the required cover as described in Clause .
The mandrel diameter for bending bars shall comply with Clause .
of BS EN .
Bending of reinforcement at temperatures below C or in excess of C shall not be carried out .
Rebending of carbon steel bars and fabric reinforcement shall not to be permitted .
Rebending of stainless steel reinforcement bars shall not be permitted .
Site storage of reinforcement shall ensure that it is clear of the ground and covered with a waterproof sheeting or fixed cover in order to reduce contamination and excess corrosion prior to placement .
Reinforcement Fixing Reinforcement shall be secured against displacement and tied together in accordance with BS .
The positioning of reinforcement shall be within the tolerances given in subClause ..
Bars in inner layers shall be located as shown on the drawings .
Welding of carbon steel reinforcing bars for fixing purposes shall be in accordance with Clause .
Welding of stainless steel reinforcement bars shall not be permitted .
Cover shall be achieved by using spacers and chairs which meet the performance requirements of BS .
They shall be designed so that they will not overturn or be displaced when the concrete is placed .
Reinforcement spacers and chairs shall be fixed in accordance with BS .
Spacer blocks shall be factory produced proprietary products .
Site produced or other nonproprietary spacers shall not be used .
Wire cast in spacer block for the purpose of tying it to the reinforcement shall be as described below .
Projecting ends of ties or clips shall not encroach into the concrete cover .
Tying wires shall be .
mm diameter stainless steel wire for bridge decks and exposed surfaces and any other locations as described in contract specific Appendix .
In other areas .
mm soft annealed iron wire may be used .
Stainless steel tying wire shall be used when tying stainless steel reinforcement .
The Contractor shall provide access and carry out a cover measurement survey of all reinforced concrete surfaces within the hour period following the removal of formwork .
The cover measurement survey shall be carried out on a mm grid over the whole structure .
A record of the survey shall be kept and subsequently supplied to the Overseeing Organisation in accordance with the requirements of BD .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Structural Concrete Amendment December Reinforcement Surface Condition Immediately before concrete is placed around it reinforcement shall be free from mud oil paint retarder release agent loose rust loose mill scale snow ice grease or any other substance that can be shown to have an adverse chemical effect on the steel or concrete or to reduce the bond between the steel and the concrete .
Reinforcement Laps and Joints Laps and joints shall be made only where shown on the drawings except in the case where additional laps or splice bars are required and the Overseeing Organisations approval has been obtained .
Where reinforcing bars are required to be coupled the coupling system shall have a current British Board of Agrment Roads and Bridges Certificate or CARES product acceptance scheme Certificate of Product Assessment TAA for use with Highway Structures or equivalent scheme and shall be sourced applied and processed from organisations holding relevant valid CARES product acceptance scheme or equivalent scheme certificate of approval .
Couplers shall comply with cover requirements of subClause .. Reinforcement Welding General Welded reinforcement other than steel fabric reinforcement shall not be incorporated in the permanent works unless permitted in contract specific Appendix .
When required welding of reinforcing bars shall comply with the requirements of Clause .. of BS EN shall be carried out in accordance with BS EN ISO and be subject to the demonstration of the satisfactory performance of trial joints .
The Contractor shall demonstrate that at each location the fatigue life durability and other properties of the member are not adversely affected by the proposal .
Site welding of stainless steel reinforcement bars shall not be permitted .
Strength of Structural Welded Joints The strength of all structural welded joints shall be assessed following tests on trial joints to establish the minimum specified mechanical properties of the joint .
Tests shall be carried out by an independent testing body appropriately accredited as described in Clause .
Prestressing Tendons Materials Steel Wires and Strands Steel wires and strands shall comply with BS and shall be obtained from an organisation holding a valid CARES product acceptance scheme certificate of approval for the production of prestressing steel wires and strands PTPT or equivalent scheme .
Cold Worked High Tensile Alloy Bar Cold worked high tensile alloy steel bars for prestressed concrete shall comply with BS and shall be obtained from an organisation holding a valid CARES product acceptance scheme certificate of approval for the production of prestressing steel bars PT or equivalent scheme .
Sampling and Testing When it is proposed to use other than the lowest strength diameter wire or strand complying with BS the following shall apply i A sample shall be taken from each reel of material proposed for use in the works .
ii A reel shall only be accepted if both the breaking load and the .
proof load of the sample exceeds the specified characteristic loads given in BS .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Structural Concrete Amendment December Where scheduled in contract specific Appendix the Contractor shall arrange for samples of the steel intended for use in the permanent works to be tested at a testing laboratory appropriately accredited as described in Clause .
Testing of prestressing steel bar wire and strand shall be performed in accordance with BS EN ISO .
Prestressing Tendons Handling and Storage Prestressing tendons shall not be mechanically damaged work hardened or heated during handling .
All prestressing tendons shall be stored clear of the ground and protected from the weather from splashes from any other materials and from splashes from the cutting operation of an oxyacetylene torch or arcwelding processes in the vicinity .
In no circumstances shall prestressing tendons after manufacture be subjected to any welding operation or heat treatment or metallic coating such as galvanizing .
This does not preclude cutting as described in Clause .
Prestressing Tendons Surface Condition Prestressing tendons and internal and external surfaces of sheaths or ducts shall be clean and free from pitting at the time of incorporation in the works .
Slight surface rusting is generally acceptable unless in environmentally severe sites marine or industrial .
Prestressing Tendons Straightness Wire Low relaxation and normal relaxation wire shall be in coils of sufficiently large diameter to ensure that the wire pays off straight except that in cases where straight asdrawn wire is not essential wire in smalldiameter coils corresponding to the diameter of the blocks in the drawing machine may be used .
Strand Prestressing strand however manufactured shall be in coils of sufficiently large diameter to ensure that the strand pays off straight .
Bars Prestressing bars as delivered shall be straight .
Any small adjustments for straightness that are necessary on site shall be made by hand .
Bars bent in the threaded portion shall be rejected .
Any straightening of bars shall be carried out cold but at a temperature of not less than C. Any necessary warming shall be by means of steam or hot water .
Prestressing Tendons Cutting All cutting of wire strand or bar shall be carried out after gradual release of the tension in the tendons to be cut .
Cutting shall be executed using either i a highspeed abrasive cutting wheel friction saw or equivalent mechanical method at not less than one tendon diameter from the anchor or ii an oxyacetylene cutting flame using excess oxygen to ensure a cutting rather than a melting action not less than mm from the anchor .
The temperature of the tendon adjacent to the anchor shall not be greater than C. Neither the flame nor splashes from the cutting operations shall come into contact with the anchorages or uncut tendons .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Structural Concrete Amendment December Prestressing Tendons Positioning of Tendons Sheaths and Duct Formers Tendons sheaths and duct formers shall be accurately located and maintained in position both vertically and horizontally as shown on the drawings .
The position shall be within the tolerances given in subClause .. Where tendons are described in the contract as debonded from the concrete they shall be covered with suitable sleeves .
The ends of the sleeves shall be taped to the tendon to prevent the ingress of grout .
Joints in sheaths shall be securely taped to prevent penetration of the duct by concrete or laitance and ends of ducts shall be sealed and protected after the stressing and grouting operations .
Joints in adjacent sheaths shall be spaced at least mm apart .
Prestressing Tendons Tensioning General All wires strands or bars stressed in one operation shall be taken where possible from the same parcel .
Each cable shall be tagged with its number from which the coil numbers of the steel used can be identified .
Cables shall not be kinked or twisted .
Individual wires and strands for which extensions are to be measured shall be readily identifiable at each end of the member .
No strand that has become unravelled shall be used .
Strands of the same diameter but with different strength grades must not be used in the same beam .
Tensioning Apparatus The tensioning apparatus shall meet the following general requirements i The means of attachment of the tendon to the jack or tensioning device shall be safe and secure .
ii Where two or more wires or strands are stressed simultaneously they shall be approximately of equal length between anchorage points at the datum of load and extension measurement .
The degree of variation shall be small compared with the expected extension .
iii The tensioning apparatus shall be such that a controlled total force is imposed gradually and no dangerous secondary stresses are induced in the tendons anchorage or concrete .
iv The force in the tendons during tensioning shall be measured by directreading load cells or obtained indirectly from gauges fitted in the hydraulic system to determine the pressure in the jacks .
Facilities shall be provided for the measurement of the extension of the tendon and of any movement of the tendon in the gripping devices .
The load measuring device shall be calibrated to an accuracy within and checked at frequent intervals .
The valid calibration records shall be available on site before tensioning starts .
Elongation of the tendon shall be measured to an accuracy within or mm whichever is the greater .
v The tensioning equipment shall be calibrated before the tensioning operation and subsequently at frequent intervals .
Pretensioning Where pretensioning methods are used the tension shall be fully maintained by some positive means during the period between tensioning and transfer .
The transfer of stress shall take place slowly to minimize shock .
i Straight tendons .
In the longline method of pretensioning sufficient locator plates shall be distributed throughout the length of the bed to ensure that the wires or strands are maintained in their proper position during concreting .
Where a number of units are made in line they shall be free to slide in the direction of their length and thus permit transfer of the prestressing force to the concrete along the whole line .
In the individual mould system the moulds shall be sufficiently rigid to provide the reaction to the prestressing force without distortion .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Structural Concrete Amendment December ii Deflected tendons .
Where possible the mechanisms for holding down or holding up tendons shall ensure that the part in contact with the tendon is free to move in the line of the tendon so that frictional losses are nullified .
If however a system is used that develops a frictional force this force shall be determined by test and due allowance made .
For single tendons the deflector in contact with the tendon shall have a radius of not less than times the tendon diameter for wire or times the tendon diameter for strand and the total angle of deflection shall not exceed .
The transfer of the prestressing force to the concrete shall be effected in conjunction with the release of holddown and holdup forces .
Unless otherwise described in contract specific Appendix concrete shall not be stressed until it has reached at least the age at which test results from specimens taken from it each obtained from the average of two test cubes made from one concrete sample attain the specified characteristic compressive strength at the time when the concrete is subjected to the prestressing force .
Testing shall be as described in Annex B. of BS and Annex B of BS EN .
The samples shall be taken as described in BS EN and the test cubes shall be made and tested as described in BS EN and BS EN respectively .
They shall be cured in similar conditions to the concrete to which they relate .
The Contractor shall cast and test sufficient cubes to demonstrate that the required strength of the concrete at transfer has been reached .
Posttensioning In addition to the present Clause the installation of posttensioning systems shall comply with the requirements of Clause .
i Arrangement of tendons .
Where wires strands or bars in a tendon are not stressed simultaneously the use of spacers shall be in accordance with the recommendations of the system manufacturer .
ii Anchorages .
Prestressing anchorages for posttensioning systems shall be in accordance with Clause .
of BS EN and shall be supplied by organisation certificated with the CARES product acceptance scheme for the Production and Supply of Prestressing Anchorages for Posttensioning Systems PT or an equivalent scheme .
Anchorages shall comply with the minimum performance requirements of BS EN .
For each anchorage system used in the works the characteristic value for anchorage efficiency shall be not less than .
Proprietary anchorages shall be handled and used strictly in accordance with the manufacturers instructions and recommendations .
iii Deflected tendons .
The deflector in contact with the tendon shall have a radius of not less than times the diameter of the tendon and the total angle of deflection shall not exceed .
iv Tensioning procedure .
Before tensioning the Contractor shall demonstrate that all tendons are free to move in the ducts unless the geometry of the ducts makes this impracticable .
Tensioning shall be carried out in such a manner that the stress in the tendons increases at a gradual and steady rate .
Tensioning shall not be carried out at a temperature below C. Unless otherwise described in contract specific Appendix concrete shall not be stressed until it has reached at least the age at which test results from specimens taken from it each obtained from the average of two test cubes made from one concrete sample attain the specified characteristic compressive strength at the time when the concrete is subjected to the prestressing force .
Testing shall be as described in Annex B. of BS and Annex B of BS EN .
The samples shall be taken as described in BS EN and the test cubes shall be made and tested as described in BS EN and BS EN respectively .
They shall be cured in similar conditions to the concrete to which they relate .
The Contractor shall cast and test sufficient cubes to demonstrate that the required strength of the concrete at transfer has been reached .
The Contractor shall ensure that those carrying out the stressing are provided with particulars of the required tendon loads order of stressing and extensions .
Allowance shall be made during stressing for the friction in the jack and in the anchorage although the former is not necessary when using load cells and for drawin of the tendon during anchoring .
Stressing shall continue until the required extension and tendon load are reached .
The extension shall allow for any drawin of the tendon occurring at a nonjacking end but measurement shall not commence until any slack in the tendon has been taken up .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Structural Concrete Amendment December Immediately after anchoring the forces in the prestressing tendons shall not exceed of their characteristic strength .
During stressing the value may exceed of their characteristic strength but shall not exceed .
After the tendons have been anchored the force exerted by the tensioning apparatus shall be decreased gradually and steadily so as to avoid shock to the tendon or the anchorage .
Full records shall be kept of all tensioning operations including the measured extensions pressuregauge or loadcell readings and the amount of drawin at each anchorage .
When requested by the Overseeing Organisation copies of these records shall be provided within hours of each tensioning operation .
Tendons shall not be cut within days of their being grouted however in the case of deviation from the planned performance during tensioning cutting of the tendons grouting and work which can impair the retensioning shall not take place until the causes have been investigated and revised tensioning report has been approved .
Prestressing Tendons Protection and Bond The prestressing tendons shall be protected in their permanent positions from both mechanical damage and corrosion as described in contract specific Appendix .
Grout and grouting operations for filling ducts and anchorages of posttensioned bonded tendons internal or external shall be in accordance with Clause .
Grease and wax for the protection of sheaths and anchorages of unbonded tendons shall be in accordance with Clauses .
and .
of BS EN .
Vents grout inlets and outlets and anchorages shall be sealed to assure corrosion protection equivalent to that provided along the tendon .
Anchorage zones shall be protected from drainage water .
Unbonded tendons shall be sealed throughout their length against penetration of moisture .
Stainless Steel Dowels Materials Dowels shall be made from Steel Designation .
or .
and Grade or steel bars complying with BS .
Inspection and Testing of Structures and Components General Inspection and testing of structures and components shall be in accordance with BS EN for the designated Execution Class see Clause and carried out as described in contract specific Appendix and as scheduled in contract specific Appendices andor .
The documentation of inspection shall be in accordance with BS EN and this Specification .
Geometrical Tolerances General The tolerances given in Clauses .
to .
of BS EN and in its Annex have been derived specifically for buildings and shall not be applied to highway works .
Instead the requirements of this Clause apply .
The tolerances given in this Clause are not cumulative .
Further project specific tolerances shall be as described in contract specific Appendix and on the drawings .
Reference System The location of the reference grids or primary lines and levels for the overall positioning of the works shall be agreed between the Overseeing Organisation and the Contractor before the works are set out .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Structural Concrete Amendment December Sections The dimensions of crosssection the cover and position of reinforcement and prestressing tendons shall not deviate more than the values given in Figure .
With the exception of case d in Figure these values do not apply to precast concrete elements which shall conform to the provisions for geometrical tolerances in BS EN andor to the relevant Product Standard as appropriate see subClause .. No .
Type of deviation Description Permitted deviation  a Crosssectional dimensions li Length of cross sectional dimension Applicable to beams slabs and columns For li mm li mm li mm with linear interpolation for intermediate values mm mm mm b Location of ordinary reinforcement Cross Section cmin required minimum cover cn nominal cover cmin minus c actual cover permitted deviation from cn h height of crosssection h mm h mm h mm with linear interpolation for intermediate values plus mm plus mm plus mm All values of h minus cdev a Requirement cn plus c cn minus a cdev can be taken equal to mm as recommended in the UK National Annex to BS EN and BS EN .
See NG .
and Table NG for guidance on cover .
NOTE Permitted plusdeviations for cover to reinforcement for foundations and concrete members in foundations may be increased by mm .
The given minusdeviations apply .
MANUAL OF CONTRACT DOCUMENTS FOR HIGHWAY WORKS AUGUST No .
Type of deviation Description Permitted deviation  a Crosssectional dimensions li Length of crosssectional dimension Applicable to beams slabs and columns For li mm li mm li mm with linear interpolation for intermediate values mm mm mm h mm h mm h mm with linear interpolation for intermediate values plus mm plus mm plus mm Location of ordinary reinforcement Cross Section cmin required minimum cover cn nominal cover cmin minus c actual cover  permitted deviation from cn h height of crosssection All values of h minus cdev a b Requirement cn plus c cn minus a cdev can be taken equal to mm as recommended in the UK National Annex to BS EN and BS EN .
See NG .
and Table NG for guidance on cover .
NOTE Permitted plusdeviations for cover to reinforcement for foundations and concrete members in foundations may be increased by mm .
The given minusdeviations apply .
MANUAL OF CONTRACT DOCUMENTS FOR HIGHWAY WORKS AUGUST No .
Type of deviation Description Permitted deviation  a Crosssectional dimensions li Length of crosssectional dimension Applicable to beams slabs and columns For li mm li mm li mm with linear interpolation for intermediate values mm mm mm h mm h mm h mm with linear interpolation for intermediate values plus mm plus mm plus mm Location of ordinary reinforcement Cross Section cmin required minimum cover cn nominal cover cmin minus c actual cover  permitted deviation from cn h height of crosssection All values of h minus cdev a b Requirement cn plus c cn minus a cdev can be taken equal to mm as recommended in the UK National Annex to BS EN and BS EN .
See NG .
and Table NG for guidance on cover .
NOTE Permitted plusdeviations for cover to reinforcement for foundations and concrete members in foundations may be increased by mm .
The given minusdeviations apply .
Figure Permitted Sectional Deviations Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Structural Concrete Amendment December c Lapjoints l Lap length l d Location of prestressing duct Longitudinal section y Intended distance to centreline of duct in plan or elevation mm Figure Permitted Sectional Deviations Continued Permitted Deviations at Support Bearings The position of bearings at supports shall not deviate more than the values given in Figure .
No .
Type of deviation Description Permitted deviation  a Position of bearing axis of support when structural bearings are used l Intended distance from all edges The larger value taken with the negative sign between l and mm and not greater than mm but for columns not greater than the larger value taken with the negative sign between mm and h where h free height of column Figure Permitted Deviations at Support Bearings MANUAL OF CONTRACT DOCUMENTS FOR HIGHWAY WORKS AUGUST c Lapjoints l Lap length l d Location of prestressing duct Longitudinal section y Intended distance to centreline of duct in plan or elevation mm Figure Permitted Sectional Deviations Permitted Deviations at Support Bearings The position of bearings at supports shall not deviate more than the values given in Figure .
No .
Type of deviation Description Permitted deviation  a Position of bearing axis of support when structural bearings are used l Intended distance from all edges The larger value taken with the negative sign between l and mm and not greater than mm but for columns not greater than the larger value taken with the negative sign between mm and h where h free height of column Figure Permitted deviations at support bearings MANUAL OF CONTRACT DOCUMENTS FOR HIGHWAY WORKS AUGUST c Lapjoints l Lap length l d Location of prestressing duct Longitudinal section y Intended distance to centreline of duct in plan or elevation mm Figure Permitted Sectional Deviations Permitted Deviations at Support Bearings The position of bearings at supports shall not deviate more than the values given in Figure .
No .
Type of deviation Description Permitted deviation  a Position of bearing axis of support when structural bearings are used l Intended distance from all edges The larger value taken with the negative sign between l and mm and not greater than mm but for columns not greater than the larger value taken with the negative sign between mm and h where h free height of column Figure Permitted deviations at support bearings MANUAL OF CONTRACT DOCUMENTS FOR HIGHWAY WORKS AUGUST c Lapjoints l Lap length l d Location of prestressing duct Longitudinal section y Intended distance to centreline of duct in plan or elevation mm Figure Permitted Sectional Deviations Permitted Deviations at Support Bearings The position of bearings at supports shall not deviate more than the values given in Figure .
No .
Type of deviation Description Permitted deviation  a Position of bearing axis of support when structural bearings are used l Intended distance from all edges The larger value taken with the negative sign between l and mm and not greater than mm but for columns not greater than the larger value taken with the negative sign between mm and h where h free height of column Figure Permitted deviations at support bearings Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Structural Concrete Amendment December F Permitted Deviations for Columns and Walls The dimensions of columns and walls shall not deviate more than the values given in Figure .
No .
Type of deviation Description Permitted deviation  a Inclination of a column or wall h free height The larger of h or mm b Curvature of a column or wall h free height The larger of h or mm Figure Permitted Deviations for Columns and Walls MANUAL OF CONTRACT DOCUMENTS FOR HIGHWAY WORKS AUGUST Permitted Deviations for Columns and Walls The dimensions of columns and walls shall not deviate more than the values given in Figure .
No .
Type of deviation Description Permitted deviation  a Inclination of a column or wall h free height The larger of h or mm b Curvature of a column or wall h free height The larger of h or mm Figure Permitted deviations for columns and walls MANUAL OF CONTRACT DOCUMENTS FOR HIGHWAY WORKS AUGUST Permitted Deviations for Columns and Walls The dimensions of columns and walls shall not deviate more than the values given in Figure .
No .
Type of deviation Description Permitted deviation  a Inclination of a column or wall h free height The larger of h or mm b Curvature of a column or wall h free height The larger of h or mm Figure Permitted deviations for columns and walls SERIES STRUCTURAL STEELWORK Contents Clause Title Page General Scope Normative References Terms and Definitions Specifications and Documentation Constituent Products Preparation and Assembly Welding Mechanical Fastening Erection Surface Treatment Geometrical Tolerances Inspection Testing and Correction MANUAL OF CONTRACT DOCUMENTS FOR HIGHWAY WORKS VOLUME SPECIFICATION FOR HIGHWAYS WORKS Amendment August Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Structural Steelwork STRUCTURAL STEELWORK General .
Introduction and Basis of Execution This Series is part of the Specification for Highway Works .
Whilst this Series is particularly relevant to the subject matter in its title it must be read in conjunction with the general requirements in Series and and with all other Series relevant to the specification for the particular Works to be undertaken .
The Contractor shall supply and install all structural steelwork in accordance with this Series .
Any requirement to be fulfilled by the constructor in this Series and Appendix is a requirement on the Contractor .
The terms execution and constructor have been used throughout this Series to be compatible with the terms used in BS EN A .
The basis for the execution of structural steelwork in this Series shall be BS EN A with options and requirements described in this Series see .. .
Clause Numbering The clause and subclause numbering and headings in Clauses to in this Series adopt those in BS EN A Clauses to respectively except that the clause numbers are prefixed by for Clauses to and for Clauses and .
The numbering of paragraphs in this Series bears no specific relationship to the order of paragraphs presented in BS EN A .
Cross reference to a specific paragraph within this Series is by subclause number followed by the paragraph number in brackets where appropriate. . Options and Requirements Where the requirements specified in BS EN A are to apply to this Series without amendment the heading of the related subclause in this Series is followed by the abbreviation AEN i.e .
as in BS EN A .
Where there is a choice between two or more different requirements in a sub clause in BS EN A the selected requirements shall be as described in this Series .
All other requirements in that subclause in BS EN A shall apply to this Series unless otherwise described in this Series .
Where requirements are described in this Series the requirements in the related subclause in BS EN A shall also apply to this Series unless otherwise described in this Series .
Where Appendix shall be referred to for any contract specific requirements the heading of the subclause in this Series is followed by the abbreviation .
Where a requirement in BS EN A is qualified in that standard by the words unless otherwise specified the requirement shall not be amended unless it is described otherwise in this Series or in Appendix . . Qualification of Constructors In order to satisfy the general assumptions stated in BS EN A . relating to the execution of structures designed to the Eurocodes all structural steelwork executed in accordance with this Series shall be undertaken by a constructor which has the necessary technical capability and competence for the type and value of work to be undertaken .
These requirements will be satisfied by registration and audit through a registration scheme such as the Register of Qualified Steelwork Contractors Scheme for Bridgeworks RQSC see www .
steelconstruction.org to the levels appropriate for the value and technical complexity of the structural steelwork .
Amendment August Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Structural Steelwork The constructor shall undertake a review to confirm that their technical capability and competence is sufficient for the execution of the works described in Appendix .
The review shall be documented and shall be submitted for the approval of the Overseeing Organisation in advance of execution .
The documented review shall be treated as an execution record and shall form part of the execution documentation see .. and The review shall include supporting evidence that shall include but not be limited to details demonstrating compliance with .
and .. type and size of construction works product forms and thicknesses material grades execution processes level of welding control in accordance with the relevant part of BS EN ISO and quantified service categories. . Quality management schemes ..
Execution of steelwork In order to satisfy the requirements stated in BS EN A . relating to quality management measures in the execution of structures designed to the Eurocodes the constructor shall have an independently certified quality management system complying with EN ISO in place for all structural steelwork executed in accordance with this Series .
This requirement will be satisfied by the constructor being registered to National Highway Sector Scheme The Execution of Steelwork in Transportation Infrastructure Assets as described in Appendix A .
.. Supply of mechanical fasteners The requirements described in .. for the verification of mechanical fasteners will be satisfied through mechanical fasteners being supplied by an Organisation registered to National Highway Sector Scheme Stocking and Distribution Activities for Mechanical Fasteners as described in Appendix A. . CE Marking .. General Conformity assessment of structural steel components shall be undertaken in accordance with BS EN A .
A declaration of performance under a CE mark in accordance with the Construction Products Regulations shall be provided for all structural steel components .
The declaration of performance shall include a declaration of Structural Characteristics in accordance with .. . ..
Declaration of structural characteristics In the property declaration for Structural Characteristics of a structural steel component the entry for Manufacturing shall read as follows According to component specification X which specifies the relevant EN requirements and execution classes .
where X is the component specification reference defined in ..
Component specification reference The component specification reference to be adopted for the conformity assessment of a structural steel component shall be as identified in Appendix .
Amendment August Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Structural Steelwork ..
Component specification The component specification for a structural steel component shall comprise the following this Series Appendix .
Scope This Series shall apply to the execution of all permanent structural steelwork and to all temporary structural steelwork required for the execution of the permanent structural steelwork .
Normative References .
General For normative references not given in BS EN A see Appendix F. .
Constituent products .. Steels AEN .. Steel castings AEN .. Welding consumables AEN ..
Mechanical fasteners For normative references not given in BS EN A see Appendix F. .. High strength cables AEN ..
Structural bearings For normative references not given in BS EN A see Appendix F. .
Preparation AEN .
Welding For normative references not given in BS EN A see Appendix F. .
Testing For normative references not given in BS EN A see Appendix F. . Erection AEN .
Corrosion protection AEN .
Tolerances AEN .
Miscellaneous AEN Amendment August Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Structural Steelwork Terms and Definitions Quantified service category Category that characterises a component or structure or part thereof in terms of the circumstances of its use within specified limits of static and cyclic stressing .
Quantified service category is designated by one of the symbols F F F F F or F. See also .. and ..
Factory production control Abbreviated to FPC in this Series The documented permanent and internal control of production in a factory in accordance with BS EN A ..
Inspection lot for mechanical fasteners As defined in BS EN ISO Specifications and Documentation .
Execution specification .. General The execution specification for structural steelwork shall comprise the following this Series Appendix .
Certain requirements in this Series are differentiated on the basis of quantified service category see .
These are given in the following subclauses ..
Surface conditions of steel products .. Special properties of steel products .
Identification marks .. Free edge hardness ..
Execution of holing .
Cut outs Qualification of welding procedures ..
Temporary attachments Single side weld permanent backing ..
Execution of welding .
Acceptance criteria for FPC Scope of specific weld inspection Final visual acceptance criteria for welds Final MT PT UT and RT acceptance criteria for welds .. Production tests on welding Where requirements are differentiated on the basis of quantified service category the quantified service category for a component or structure or part thereof is identified in Appendix .
..
Execution classes Certain technical requirements in BS EN A are differentiated on the basis of execution class .
Where this Series including Appendix specifies a requirement which is common to more than one execution class all relevant execution classes are indicated .
For example if the specified requirement is the same for EXC EXC and EXC this is designated EXC .
Amendment August Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Structural Steelwork Amendment August ..
Preparation grades AEN .. Geometrical tolerances AEN .
Constructors documentation .. Quality documentation Quality documentation shall conform to the requirements for EXC .
.. Quality plan A quality plan for the execution of the works is required and shall include the items recommended in BS EN A Annex C and The execution records shall include the constructors drawings including electronic files for the execution of all components .
The constructors drawings including electronic files shall include the quantified service category and unique component mark information .
Constructors drawings in this Series shall be treated as fabrication drawings in accordance with Series .
Execution records described in this Series shall be treated as quality records in accordance with Series .
.. Safety of erection works AEN ..
Execution documentation AEN Constituent Products .
General AEN .
Identification inspection documents and traceability Inspection documents for steel grades S JR and JO shall conform to the requirements for EXC in BS EN A Table note a .
Stages of traceability shall conform to the requirements for EXC .
Specialist proprietary andor bespoke products incorporating nonstandardised features components or methods of manufacture eg castings forgings cables and their terminations energy absorbing devices mechanical components such as movement joints and major bearings shall be uniquely traceable .
The identification of different grades andor qualities of constituent products shall conform to the requirements for EXC . .
Structural steel products .. General Option in BS EN allowing Charpy quality to be verified at a temperature above the lowest test temperature shall not be adopted .
.. Thickness tolerances Thickness tolerance Class A shall be used .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Structural Steelwork ..
Surface conditions For plates and wide flats EXC shall apply and more stringent surface conditions shall be required as follows .
Class A and class B to BS EN shall apply in all circumstances except that class A and class B may be adopted where steels are not specified to BS EN the quantified service category is F or less reports on weld repairs are submitted UT and MPI are used for inspection of weld repairs and weld repairs are rechecked on delivery for quantified service categories F and above .
For sections the special restrictions on surface imperfections and repair shall conform to BS EN as follows cracks shells and seams in sections shall be repaired in all circumstances class C and class D require no special restrictions class C and class D shall have the same restrictions in use as for plates to class A and class B in .. class C and class D shall be restricted to quantified service category F. Steel with pitted surfaces ie rust grades C and D according to BS EN ISO shall not be used .
.. Special properties The following requirements shall apply to cross plates in welded cruciform and welded tee joints transmitting primary stresses through the plate thickness on a band of width four times the thickness of the plate each side of the proposed attachment .
for quantified service category F the internal discontinuity quality class shall conform to the requirements for EXC for quantified service category F and above BS EN internal discontinuity class S shall be used Flange or web plates close to bearing diaphragms and or single sided bearing stiffeners where attached by welding shall be checked for conformance to BS EN internal discontinuity quality class S in the areas defined in BS EN A The precautions necessary to avoid lamellar tearing in tee cruciform and corner joints shall be decided by the constructor whether or not improved deformation properties have been specified for the through plates. . Steel castings AEN .
Welding consumables As an alternative to the consumables in BS EN A Table CMn consumables may be used for welding steels supplied to EN but only for single run fillet welds not exceeding mm leg length using processes and butt welds using one run only per side the body of multipass butt welds except for the outer mm thick surface zones of the cap root and ends excluding any overfill .
The surface zones shall be deposited using consumable conforming to options or of BS EN A Table .
See also BS EN A Amendment August Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Structural Steelwork .
Mechanical fasteners .. General AEN .. Terminology The partturn method of tightening of preloaded fasteners is similar to the combined method in BS EN A .
However it is restricted to Grade .
assemblies but class Ko assemblies may also be used .
It has reduced torque values in the first step and higher nut rotations in the second step see ..
Structural bolting assemblies for nonpreloaded applications AEN ..
Structural bolting assemblies for preloading The following products shall be used for preloaded bolt assemblies using all tightening methods except the HRC method bolt assemblies conforming to BS EN HR type nuts lubricated by the manufacturer after the nuts have been tapped and if relevant after any coating passivation process has been completed .
Electroplated property class .
bolt assemblies shall not be used .
Cleaning of property class .
bolts prior to hot dip galvanising shall be by blast cleaning and not by pickling .
Nuts of property class shall be used with bolts of property class .. Bolts of property class .
shall not be used for assemblies tightened by the part turn method see .. and .
..
Direct tension indicators AEN ..
Weather resistant assemblies The chemical composition of weather resistant assemblies shall comply with the requirements for Type fasteners to ASTM standard A Grade A or equivalent .
.. Foundation bolts Reinforcing steels shall not be used for foundation bolts carrying applied tension forces .
.. Locking devices AEN .. Washers AEN Plain washers AEN Taper washers AEN ..
Hot rivets AEN ..
Fasteners for thin gauge components AEN .. Special fasteners AEN ..
Delivery and identification See .. . Amendment August Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Structural Steelwork .
Studs and shear connectors Headed stud connectors shall be Type SD in accordance with BS EN ISO . . Grouting materials Bedding mortars shall conform to the requirements of Series Clause . .
Expansion joints for bridges Expansion joints shall conform to the requirements of Series Clause and contract specific Appendix . . High strength cables rods and terminations AEN .
Structural bearings The guidance given in PD on the execution of bearings shall be followed where relevant .
Preparation and Assembly .
General AEN .
Identification Identification of components shall conform to the requirements for EXC .
Hard stamps punched or drilled marks shall not be used for zones with a quantified service category of F and above .
Soft or low stress stamps may be used for zones with a quantified service category of F and below .
No method of marking involving deformation or removal of metal shall be used for zones with a quantified service category of F and above. . Handling and storage AEN .
Cutting .. General AEN .. Shearing and nibbling AEN ..
Thermal cutting The quality of cut surfaces shall conform to the requirements for EXC .
.. Hardness of free edge surfaces Free edge surfaces with hardnesses exceeding HV values shall be ground linished or machined until sufficient material has been removed such that the HV limit is not exceeded subject to the exceptions in Unless prohibited in Appendix the hardness limit described in .. need not apply to machine plasma cut edges where a the steel grade does not exceed S b plain edge surfaces are not subject to a quantified service category exceeding F subject to c c edge surfaces within mm of stress raising features such as reentrant corners openings weld terminations on the edge that are not subject to a quantified service category exceeding F Amendment August Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Structural Steelwork d edge surfaces are not subject to subsequent cold forming unless fully fused over the full length and width by subsequent welding and e procedure tests have been carried out to verify that the proposed method of surface preparation of the plasma cut edge can readily achieve the cleanliness and profile described in Series where corrosion protection of the edges is required. . Shaping AEN .. General AEN ..
Hot forming AEN .. Flame straightening A suitable procedure shall be developed in accordance with the requirements for EXC and shall include the following the materials being used for procedure approval purposes shall be of a higher grade and subgrade than that used in the component being straightened for destructive tests any reduction in tensile strength shall not exceed of the original value and any reduction in Charpy energy shall not exceed of the original value at the same test temperature .
..
Cold forming AEN .
Holing .. Dimensions of holes AEN .. Tolerances on hole diameter for bolts and pins AEN ..
Execution of holing For material mm thick or less with a quantified service category of less than F round holes for fasteners or pins may be formed by punching without reaming as permitted for EXC .
For material mm thick or less with a quantified service category of F and above round holes for fasteners or pins shall be drilled or be punched at least mm undersize in diameter and reamed after punching .
For material thicker than mm round holes for fasteners or pins shall be drilled or be punched at least mm undersize in diameter and reamed after punching in accordance with the requirements for EXC .
For slotted holes the methods given in Table may be used up to the maximum quantified service categories and thicknesses given in Table .
Table Method for slotted holes Method Maximum quantified service category Maximum thickness mm Punching and hand thermal cutting F Punching in a single operation Thermal cutting by machine F Drilling andor milling F Amendment August Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Structural Steelwork .
Cut outs The minimum radius for reentrant corners and notches in all thicknesses of material shall conform to the requirements for EXC except for quantified service category F and above when the requirement for EXC shall apply when the stress direction is in the plane of the radius subject to a smaller radius not being described in Appendix .
If Form B in BS EN A . is to be used the design shall be verified for the loss of section .
The restriction on the use of punched cut outs required for EXC shall apply where quantified service categories F and above are required materials conforming to BS EN are used. . Full contact bearing surfaces AEN .
Assembly Elongations of holes by drifting shall be limited according to the tolerance class for EXC when applied to nonpreloaded connected parts .
The tolerance class for EXC shall apply to preloaded connected parts .
All connections for temporary components shall be executed in accordance with the requirements of this Series including those described in Appendix according to the quantified service category appropriate to the connection location .
See also ..
Connections for temporary components shall not result in the removal or addition of permanent material or introduce permanent notches unless permitted by Appendix . .
Assembly check Where a full or staged trial assembly is undertaken the correction of hole alignment by reaming of bolted splices selection of pack thicknesses correction of weld preparation fitup and correct positioning of temporary alignment cleats shall be carried out at that time .
The following shall be taken into account support of the assembly parts to minimise dead weight deflections correct reestablishment of the alignment of assembly parts in staged trial assembly control of or allowance for differential temperature distributions throughout the steelwork if exposed to direct sunlight when surveys are made unique marking for identification and orientation of individual members .
Welding .
General The BS EN ISO quality requirements shall conform to the requirements for EXC unless EXC is required by Appendix .
Permanent welds that are not described in Appendix shall not be permitted. . Welding plan ..
Requirements for a welding plan AEN ..
Content of a welding plan AEN .
Welding processes AEN .
Qualification of welding procedures and welding personnel Amendment August Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Structural Steelwork .. Qualification of welding procedures General Where tack welds are used in the root of a preparation a weld procedure specification WPS shall be produced for this specific condition .
The tolerances on size and length of the tack weld and any subsequent profiling requirements shall be specified in the WPS .
The WPS shall state whether the tack weld is intended to be fully remelted by the root run or not .
If the tack weld is to be removed prior to welding of the joint the minimum permitted size of tack weld shall be subject to a welding procedure test in accordance with BS EN ISO .
If the tack weld is to be left in the joint the maximum cross section of tack weld shall be used and the root and subsequent passes shall be deposited until such time as the root pass is fully covered .
The full length of the tack weld location shall be subjected to a welding procedure test in accordance with BS EN ISO see Table footnote A .
The tack weld shall be assumed to be a fillet weld for the purposes of qualification .
Qualification of welding procedures for processes and Methods of qualification shall be in accordance with those permitted for EXC in BS EN A Table .
The weld procedure qualification acceptance levels in BS EN ISO are less stringent in some respects than those required for FPC for EXC see BS EN A .. Also for the highest quantified service categories the acceptance limits for certain imperfection types are more stringent than for EXC see and If either of these criteria are being used for FPC the relevant weld procedure qualification acceptance levels shall be amended .
Existing procedures qualified to BS EN ISO shall be requalified accordingly by reference to the original test results if possible .
If this can not be done or the original results do not conform to the more stringent requirements the relevant qualification tests for evaluation of imperfections shall be repeated .
Joints with restricted access for welding eg slot and plug welds shallow angle branch connections shall be subject to procedure testing in accordance with BS EN ISO .
Qualification of welding procedures for other welding processes processes and Welding procedure qualification for welding process reference numbers and shall conform to the requirements for EXC in BS EN A Table note a. Validity of a welding procedure qualification Welding production tests shall be carried out in accordance with the qualification standard for the process concerned .
.. Welders and welding operators Welders shall be qualified by specific test for welding of joints with restricted access see .
.. Welding coordination Welding coordination shall conform to the requirements for EXC . .
Preparation and execution of welding .. Joint preparation General Amendment August Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Structural Steelwork Where prefabrication primers are to be left on fusion faces the weld procedures shall be tested in accordance with the requirements for EXC .
Hollow sections AEN ..
Storage and handling of welding consumables AEN ..
Weather protection AEN ..
Assembly for welding The guidance on preparation assembly and welding of joints in hollow sections given in BS EN A Annex E shall be applied .
In addition for the assembly of hollow sections the following shall apply In the case of a full penetration butt weld where access is restricted a preproduction welding test conforming to BS EN ISO shall be conducted to demonstrate that the full penetration butt weld can be achieved In the case of fillet welded joints with root gaps compensation shall be made for loss of throat and leg length see BS EN A .. Preheating AEN ..
Temporary attachments Temporary welded attachments shall not be permitted in zones of quantified service categories F and above or within mm of an edge or where described in Appendix .
The use of temporary welded attachments shall be specified as required for EXC .
Restrictions on the removal of temporary welded attachments shall be in accordance with the requirements for EXC for thermal cutting and chipping except that thermal cutting may be used provided that the finished cut surface is at least mm proud of the permanent member surface .
Remnants of temporary materials proud of the permanent member surface shall be removed by grinding parallel to the member axis and the ground surface checked for freedom from cracking using magnetic particle testing .
..
Tack welds Tack welds shall be made using qualified welding procedures as required for EXC see .. Fillet welds AEN General AEN Fillet welds for thin gauge components AEN ..
Butt welds General Runon and runoff pieces shall be used on all butt welds and shall conform to the requirements for EXC where access allows .
Where a weld surface is required to be ground or machined flush this shall be executed prior to non destructive testing .
Amendment August Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Structural Steelwork Single sided welds Permanent steel backing shall only be used if described in Appendix .
The continuity of permanent steel backing shall conform to the requirements for EXC .
The execution of the continuity weld shall depend upon the quantified service category related to stresses parallel to the axis of the backing component as follows F no additional requirements F to F make continuous by full penetration butt weld at any stage followed by surface crack detection F to F make continuous by full penetration butt weld followed by flush grinding and surface crack detection before assembly .
Back gouging AEN .. Welds on steels with improved atmospheric corrosion resistance The requirements for the consumables to be used for welds on steels with improved atmospheric corrosion resistance are given in .. ..
Branch connections AEN .. Stud welding With reference to BS EN ISO Annex B Table B. the comprehensive quality requirements in accordance with ISO shall be adopted .
.. Slot and plug welds The depthtominimum width ratio of the slot or plug hole shall not exceed that used for the weld procedure qualification test .
.. Spot welds for thin gauge components Arc spot welds AEN Resistance spot welds AEN .. Other weld types AEN .. Post weld heat treatment AEN ..
Execution of welding The requirements for removal of weld spatter shall conform to the requirements for EXC except where permitted in Tables and .
The requirements for EXC shall apply to exposed steels to BS EN and BS EN .
The direction of grinding of the surfaces of completed welds shall be parallel to the stress direction for welds with a quantified service category of F and above .
.. Welding of bridge decks AEN .
Acceptance criteria Acceptance criteria for FPC shall not be to a lower standard than that required for specific testing of the work taking into account the method of testing and maximum quantified service category required for the work See and for acceptance levels for specific testing .
Amendment August Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Structural Steelwork .
Welding of stainless steels ..
Amendments to EN requirements AEN ..
Amendments to EN requirements Coloured oxide films shall be removed .
Copper backing shall be nickel or chromium plated and when high heat input is used it shall be water cooled .
.. Welding dissimilar steels AEN Mechanical Fastening .
General AEN .
Use of bolting assemblies .. General Welding of nuts bolts or washers shall not be used on bolt assemblies above property class .. Welding of property class .
nuts bolts and washers shall only be undertaken where described in Appendix and shall be subject to the requirements in .
and BS EN A .
.. Bolts AEN ..
Nuts AEN .. Washers Washers shall be placed under the nut or head of the bolt in nonpreloaded assemblies whichever is rotated . .
Tightening of nonpreloaded bolts AEN .
Preparation of contact surfaces in slip resistant connections All surfaces which overlap each other in the final assembled connection excluding any painted edge strip around the perimeter of the connection described in Series shall be deemed to be contact surfaces .
The specified surface treatment applied to the friction surfaces shall be maintained until the surfaces are brought together and the connection assembled . .
Tightening of preloaded bolts .. General At the snug tight stage the exposed surfaces of the components being connected shall be aligned within mm where they emerge from beneath the cover plates at the joint plane .
This is subject to the tolerances of thickness difference between the two components including any packing plates in BS EN A . also being met .
If this is exceeded steel packing plates shall be used .
In the case of preloaded lap joints subject to axial load only in the plane of the friction surfaces the out of plane bending stiffness of cover plates may need to be limited to achieve adequate contact between friction surfaces .
Measures to limit the outofplane bending stiffness of cover plates shall be as described in Appendix .
Additional contact surfaces shall be treated as contact surfaces in slip resistant connections .
Amendment August Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Structural Steelwork Where a connection is designed to transfer applied tensile forces through a flanged and bolted end plate as a minimum the area of the mating surfaces in direct line with the tension member cross section shall be in contact when all bolts are snug tight .
Any remaining gaps in this zone shall be filled by steel shims prior to the application of the remaining preload .
If necessary bolts can be partially slackened to enable shims to be inserted .
The shims shall not be loose in the final snug tight stage .
In the event of a tapering gap a purpose machined tapered steel shim may be used .
As an alternative flat parallel steel shims of not less than .mm and of not more than .mm thick shall be inserted to refusal in steps until the gap in the contact zone is filled followed by retightening to the snug tight stage .
The part turn method may be used for tightening preloaded bolts if the bolts are property class .
and assemblies conform to .. the required nominal minimum preloading force is not in excess of the values specified in BS EN A Table and the joint fitup conforms to .. or .. above whichever is applicable .
The part turn method is the same as the combined method in BS EN A .. except that Ko bolt assemblies may be used In the first tightening step the nut shall be tightened to a specified torque as given in Table of this Series In the second tightening step the nut shall be tightened to a specified turn as given in Table of this Series .
Table Torque values for the part turn method step one Bolt diameter d mm Torque value M Nm Table Rotation values for the part turn method step two Bolt diameters mm Grip lengthA mm Rotation  to t t  turn  turn to t t  turn  turn A Equal to nominal thickness t in BS EN A Table The torque method shall not be used for the tightening of preloaded bolts unless described in Appendix .
.. Torque reference values AEN .. Torque method The k value shall be checked daily with torque wrenches in accordance with BS EN A Annex H and the torque for both tightening steps adjusted accordingly .
Any assembly lots that fail to conform to this test shall be discarded .
..
Combined method For property classes .
and .
bolt assemblies to BS EN see .. the further rotation values in BS EN A Table shall be amended as follows for the same thickness ranges replace  by   turn replace  by  turn replace  by   turn .
Amendment August Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Structural Steelwork The k value shall be checked daily with the torque wrenches in accordance with BS EN A Annex H and the torque for the first tightening step adjusted accordingly .
Any assembly lots that fail to conform to this test shall be discarded .
The simplified value of Mr .dFpC shall not be used .
.. HRC method The preload shall be checked on sample assemblies for each assembly lot within seven days prior to use in accordance with BS EN A Annex H. Any assembly lots showing values of preload below the minimum specified value shall be discarded .
The pretightening step shall be repeated until the shear wrench outer socket has stopped turning on all assemblies in a joint .
..
Direct tension indicator method AEN .
Fit bolts AEN .
Hot riveting .. Rivets AEN ..
Installation of rivets AEN ..
Acceptance criteria AEN .
Fastening of thin gauge components .. General AEN .. Use of selftapping and selfdrilling screws AEN .. Use of blind rivets AEN .. Fastening sidelaps AEN .
Use of special fasteners and fastening methods AEN .
Galling and seizure of stainless steels AEN Erection .
General AEN .
Site conditions AEN .
Erection method .. Design basis for the erection method AEN .. Constructors erection method AEN .
Survey Amendment August Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Structural Steelwork .. Reference system The reference temperature shall be oC unless otherwise described in Appendix .
The reference temperature shall be recorded in the quality plan .
..
Position points AEN .
Supports anchors and bearings ..
Inspection of supports AEN ..
Setting out and suitability of supports AEN ..
Maintaining suitability of supports AEN ..
Temporary supports Levelling nuts or other devices providing temporary support shall be slackened off before final tensioning of foundation bolts where a posttensioning force is specified to allow the posttensioning force to be transferred to the foundations .
In the case of exposed steelwork and irrespective of bedding material the minimum finished cover to steel packings or other steel temporary support devices left in position shall be mm .
.. Grouting and sealing Unless otherwise described in Appendix the surfaces of steelwork and bearings that are to be in contact with grout or bedding mortar shall be treated in accordance with .. .. Anchoring AEN .
Erection and work at site .. Erection drawings AEN ..
Marking AEN .. Handling and storage on site The defined procedure for restoration of damaged steelwork shall conform to the requirements for EXC and shall be approved by the Overseeing Organisation in advance of implementation .
The processes used for the restoration of damaged steelwork shall be in accordance with the requirements of this Series .
.. Trial erection AEN .. Erection methods General AEN Temporary works AEN Fitup and alignment The use of shims shall be avoided where possible by suitable controls on preparation assembly and weld distortion and if necessary by machining .
If welding is required for securing shims it shall be carried out in accordance with BS EN A as required for EXC .
The requirements of Clause and .
shall also apply .
Amendment August Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Structural Steelwork Where steel shims are needed to correct the fit between members particularly in preloaded tension joints see .. and where gaps are variable across the interface flat parallel steel shims may be used as an alternative to a purpose machined tapered steel shim .
The gap shall be filled by insertion of shims of not less than .mm and not more than .mm thick from the widest gap position until refusal .
The excess material shall be cut off on completion .
Surface Treatment .
General Treatment of surfaces to receive corrosion protection shall be in accordance with Series .
The requirements for the execution of corrosion protection in BS EN A Appendix F shall be supplemented by those in Series .
The performance specification required by BS EN A F .. shall be as given in Appendix .
The prescriptive requirements for corrosion protection required by BS EN A F .. shall be as given in Series .
With reference to BS EN A F. the requirements for friction surfaces and class of treatment or tests required for surfaces in slip resistant connections shall be as described in Appendix .
With reference to BS EN A F. where corrosion protection is specified the requirements for corrosion protection and extent of surfaces to be painted at preloaded connections shall be as given in Series Clause and Appendix .
With reference to BS EN A F. the extent of surfaces affected by preloaded bolts in connections that are not required to be slip resistant shall be as given in Appendix .
The requirements for the protection of the lower embedded part of foundation bolts shall be as described in BS EN A F. unless otherwise described in Appendix .
With reference to BS EN A F. for components that are to be galvanized after manufacture the requirements for procedure qualification of the dipping process shall be as given in Appendix .
With reference to BS EN A F. the requirements for the inspection checking and qualification of the preparation to be carried out before subsequent overcoating of galvanized components shall be as given in Appendix .
With reference to BS EN A F .. reference areas shall be as required by Series Clause . .
Preparation of steel substrates for paints and related products All surfaces shall meet the requirements of BS EN ISO preparation grade P unless otherwise described in Appendix .
All edges requiring preparation grade P shall be rounded to a constant radius of not less than mm the radius being tangential to the original surfaces see BS EN ISO .
and Fig .
D .. .
Weather resistance steels Exposed surfaces of uncoated weather resistant steel shall be blast cleaned to grade Sa to BS EN ISO to achieve a uniform surface .
Any surfaces that are subsequently marked or contaminated shall be cleaned to a similar standard .
Uncoated weather resistant steel shall be kept free of contamination such as oil grease paint concrete and asphalt .
Amendment August Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Structural Steelwork .
Galvanic coupling AEN .
Galvanizing AEN .
Sealing of spaces The internal treatment system to be provided to enclosed spaces that are to be sealed by welding or provided with internal protective treatment shall be as described in Series .
All internal spaces which have been identified as being hermetically sealed in Appendix shall have all joints whether welded mechanically fastened or bonded leak tested prior to application of the external protective coating see BS EN .
The bubble emission technique in accordance with BS EN shall be used . .
Surfaces in contact with concrete When formwork is in contact with the outer surfaces of the steelwork the embedded length shall be measured from the junction between the concrete the formwork and the steelwork. . Inaccessible surfaces Faying surfaces and surfaces beneath washers in connections other than slip resistant connections that are to be painted shall be treated in accordance with Series .
In uncoated weather resisting steels faying surfaces and surfaces beneath washers in connections other than slip resistant connections shall be cleaned to grade St to BS EN ISO immediately prior to the connection being made . .
Repairs after cutting or welding Protective treatment on edges and adjacent surfaces which have been damaged by cutting shall be restored in accordance with the original specification .
Coatings on precoated constituent products that have been damaged by welding shall be restored in accordance with Appendix .
Cleaning after erection ..
Cleaning of thin gauge components AEN ..
Cleaning of stainless steel components AEN Geometrical Tolerances .
Tolerance types Where full contact end bearing is specified see BS EN A D .. special tolerances are required .
The maximum gap between the two surfaces shall be limited to .mm .
In the case of fitted web stiffeners the gap shall also be limited to a maximum of .mm over of the fitted area . .
Essential tolerances .. General AEN .. Manufacturing tolerances Rolled sections AEN Amendment August Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Structural Steelwork Welded sectionsAEN Cold formed sections AEN Stiffened plating AEN Profiled sheets AEN Shells AEN .. Erection tolerances Reference system AEN Foundation bolts and other supports AEN Column bases AEN Columns AEN Full contact bearing AEN .
Functional tolerances .. General AEN .. Tabulated values Functional tolerance class shall be adopted except in the following cases from BS EN A where class shall be adopted D .. to at bearing and bearing stiffener locations D .. D .. and .
..
Alternative criteria AEN Inspection Testing and Correction .
General AEN .
Constituent products and components ..
Constituent products Specific testing of products not covered by the European or International standards references in BS EN A shall be as described in Appendix .
The Constructor shall verify that mechanical fasteners conform to the requirements of the product standard to which the mechanical fasteners have been manufactured see Reports of the verification undertaken shall be prepared .
The reports shall be treated as execution records and shall form part of the execution documentation see .. and The verification shall include Obtaining evidence of certification of the quality of the mechanical fasteners such as the manufacturers declaration of performance under a CE mark manufacturers certificates and test reports from manufacturers or suppliers .
Amendment August Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Structural Steelwork Review of the mechanical fastener documentation to confirm authenticity relevance accuracy and completeness .
Inspection and sample testing of the mechanical fasteners to be used in the works in accordance with BS EN ISO to confirm that the dimensional and mechanical properties comply with the product standard to which the mechanical fasteners have been manufactured .
The inspection and sample testing shall use an AQL of .
for nondestructive tests an AQL of .
for destructive tests and an Ac Level of zero .
In addition to the requirements of .. or .. as appropriate the Constructor shall undertake suitability testing of mechanical fasteners supplied for use in the works in accordance with a relevant standard .
For each inspection lot of mechanical fasteners three fasteners shall be drawn at random and tested in accordance with the suitability test related to the product standard to which the mechanical fasteners have been manufactured .
The mechanical fasteners that are subjected to the suitability testing shall be discarded following testing .
In the event of a mechanical fastener not meeting the requirements of the suitability test all mechanical fasteners in the associated inspection lot shall be discarded .
The suitability testing shall be reported in accordance with the relevant standard .
The reports shall be treated as execution records and shall form part of the execution documentation see .. and ..
Components AEN .. Nonconforming products Records of testing undertaken to prove product conformity shall be treated as execution records and shall form part of the execution documentation see .. and .
Manufacturing geometrical dimensions of manufactured components The inspection plan shall identify all dimensions which could be at risk of nonconformity .
Checks shall be made during execution and action taken to ensure that any nonconformity is corrected at the earliest opportunity .
All such dimensions shall be checked before the steelwork is dispatched to site .
Components in the neighbourhood of site connections shall be rechecked once the connections are complete .
If the correction of a nonconformity is not practicable proposed modifications to the steel structure to compensate for the nonconformity shall be approved by the Overseeing Organisation in advance of implementation .
Repair of local dents in hollow sections by means of welded cover plates shall only be undertaken if approved by the Overseeing Organisation in advance of implementation. . Welding ..
Inspection before and during welding AEN ..
Inspection after welding AEN Timing AEN Scope of inspection All welded joints shall be subject to specific inspection .
The scope of specific inspection for each joint shall be visual and in accordance with the extent and methods of supplementary non destructive testing NDT given in Table Table and Table of this Series .
Table specifies the minimum proportions of welded joints subjected to specific supplementary NDT for shop welds in steel grades up to and including S and quantified service category F which represent the most common conditions .
The percentages in Table shall be applied to the number of joints tested up to weld lengths of one metre in any joint .
For joints with weld lengths exceeding one metre the percentage shall be applied to the proportion of weld in every joint .
Amendment August Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Structural Steelwork Where other conditions than those assumed in Table apply the minimum proportion of welded joints to be subjected to specific supplementary NDT shall be increased or decreased by one or more levels in accordance with Table .
This shall be done by applying the next highest or lowest proportion using the following sequence of seven increasing levels of proportion .
NOTE For example if the proportion in Table is an increase of one level changes the requirement to and a decrease of one level to .
If adjustments are made according to more than one condition in Table the net number of levels shall be used after adding andor subtracting the number of levels given in each note .
NOTE For example if the proportion in Table is and the adjustments according to Table are and level respectively the net adjustment would be level which would result in a proportion of .
For quantified service category F and above for shop welds in steel grades up to and including S the minimum proportions of welded joints which shall be subjected to supplementary NDT are specified in Table .
For other conditions the proportion tested in Table shall be adjusted in accordance with Table as described in and for Table .
The selection of EXC in BS EN A Table for scope of routine FPC inspection shall be determined by the manufacturer according to the nature of the work in normal production .
It shall be not less than the specific inspections required in to whichever is the greater .
NOTE Any FPC inspections undertaken on a specific structure which conform to Table in this Series providing that the acceptance criteria in and are fully met can be regarded and documented as part of the specific inspection required in to .
Visual inspection of welds The criteria for final acceptance without the need for repair shall be in accordance with Table and Table in this Series .
These criteria shall apply irrespective of those adopted for FPC .
The selection of EXC in BS EN A . for the purposes of routine FPC of visual weld quality shall be determined by the manufacturer according to the nature of the work in normal production .
Additional NDT methods The criteria for final acceptance without the need for repair shall be in accordance with Table for magnetic particle and penetrant testing and Table for ultrasonic and radiographic testing .
These criteria shall apply irrespective of those used for FPC .
The selection of the EXC in BS EN A . for the purposes of routine FPC of NDT based weld quality shall be determined by the manufacturer according to the nature of the work in normal production .
NOTE The capability of proving that some of the criteria are met can depend on the method of testing .
Correction of welds Repairs shall be carried out as required for EXC .
..
Inspection and testing of welded shear studs for composite steel and concrete structures Production tests in accordance with BS EN ISO .
shall be performed before the beginning of welding operations and repeated after every welds for each combination of stud diameter parent material and type of equipment that is used .
Every stud on a production piece of steelwork shall be tested by striking the side of the head of the stud with a kg hammer .
The weld shall be considered acceptable if there is a clear ring tone due to the striking .
Any stud considered to be unacceptable as a result of this test shall be tested as part of the testing described in .. . Amendment August Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Structural Steelwork Simplified production tests shall be carried out as required by BS EN ISO .
and at a minimum rate of test comprising studs after every welds on each piece of steelwork with a minimum of test comprising studs per piece .
The bend test shall be carried out in accordance with BS EN ISO .
a .
The direction of the bend test shall be such that the bent stud shall not interfere with other elements of the works .
Studs shall not be bent back after testing .
The documented results of the production and simplified production tests shall be treated as execution records and shall form part of the execution documentation see .. and .. Production tests on welding Production tests conforming to the requirements for EXC are required .
Specific production testing shall be conducted on runoff coupon plates in accordance with Table and shall apply to all parts of the structure . .
Mechanical fastening ..
Inspection of nonpreloaded bolted connections AEN ..
Inspection and testing of preloaded bolted connections Inspection of friction surfaces AEN Inspection before tightening The tightening procedure shall be checked as required for EXC .
Inspection during and after tightening Inspection during and after tightening shall be as required for EXC .
In BS EN A c the number of bolt assemblies inspected overall in a structure shall conform to the requirements for EXC .
The part turn method shall conform to the requirements of BS EN A ci .
In BS EN A d the sampling plan shall conform to the requirements for EXC .
For the final tightening inspection the bolt assembly shall be checked for overtightening .
For the part turn method the inspection and testing requirements of BS EN A shall apply except as follows the first step shall be checked as required for EXC but using the same torque conditions as given in Table of this Series .
for inspection after the second step rotation angle values given for the combined method shall be replaced with a  in lieu of  b  in lieu of . Torque method Inspection of tightening by the torque method shall conform to the requirements for EXC in BS EN A Table .
Combined method For the combined method checking of the first step shall conform to the requirements for EXC .
HRC method AEN Amendment August Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Structural Steelwork Direction tension indicator method AEN ..
Inspection testing and repairs of hot rivets Inspection The sampling plan shall conform to the requirements for EXC .
Repairs AEN ..
Inspection of cold formed components and sheeting fastening Selftapping and selfdrilling screws AEN Blind rivets AEN .. Special fasteners and fastening methods General AEN Cartridge fired and air driven pins AEN Other mechanical fasteners AEN .
Surface treatment and corrosion protection AEN .
Erection ..
Inspection of trial erection The following checks shall be carried out during trial erection where applicable in addition to those that may be described in Appendix dimensions critical to assembly to other parts of the structure overall horizontal and vertical alignment and twist evidence of correct reestablishment of alignment of units in staged trial erection temperature differentials in box girders fitup of bolted joints and site welding preparations alignment of bolt holes identification marks of members and their orientation including packer plates .
..
Inspection of the erected structure AEN .. Survey of geometrical position of connection nodes Survey methods and accuracy The survey of the completed structure shall conform to the requirements for EXC .
This shall include recording of dimensional checks at acceptance of the structure .
System of measurement AEN Reference points and levels AEN Location and frequency Amendment August Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Structural Steelwork Account shall be taken of the deflection effects due to temporary equipment supported by or supporting the erected structure and any nonsteelwork dead weight which is in place at the time of measurement of the positional accuracy of the steelwork .
Acceptance criteria AEN Definition of nonconformity AEN Action on nonconformity AEN .. Other acceptance tests AEN Amendment August Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Structural Steelwork Table Minimum extent of supplementary NDT of shop welds in steel grades up to and including S and quantified service category F Weld type Orientation A Thickness t or throat a B mm Proportion of joints tested Magnetic particle MT or penetrant testing PT Ultrasonic testing UT C Butt Transverse t t t Not applicable D Longitudinal t t t Not applicable Fillet Transverse t No requirement t a No requirement t a t a Longitudinal As per transverse fillet but reduced by levels E A Transverse applies to all welds orientated within of the longitudinal axis of members except for connection zones where all orientations are deemed to be transverse .
Connection zones are all locations within mm of a main structural connection loading point or support position .
B t the nominal maximum parent metal thickness in the joint a the nominal fillet weld throat dimension including any specified penetration .
C Testing conditions to BS EN ISO shall be as follows Level B evaluation level DAC dB .
D for single sided butt where there is no access to root side .
E See for definition of change in level .
Table Adjustments in proportions of supplementary NDT for conditions other than those covered by Table and Table Condition Change in level A Site welded joints Automatic and robotic welded joints B Standard proprietary products manufactured on a mass production basis B Steel grades above S and below S Steel grades S and above Quantified service category F relative to F After a nonconformance with acceptance criteria in Table or Table applicable to all joints of similar type tested in the same production batch to be maintained until the cause has been identified and rectified and defects eliminated .
minimum depending on degree of severity of non conformance A See B Not applicable to transverse butt welds of F and above .
Amendment August Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Structural Steelwork Table Minimum extent of supplementary NDT of shop welds in steel grades up to and including S and quantified service categories F to F Weld type Orientation A Thickness t B or throat a mm Proportion of joints tested Magnetic particle MT or penetrant testing PT Ultrasonic testing UT C Radiographic testing RT D F F F and F F F F and F F F F Butt Transverse t Not applicable Not applicable Not applicable E t E t E Longitudinal t Not applicable Not applicable Not applicable t t Fillet Transverse t No requirement No requirement No requirement No requirement t a t a t a Longitudinal As per longitudinal butt weld A and B As per Table footnotes A and B .
C Testing conditions to BS EN ISO shall be as follows quantifiedservicecategoriesFandFtestinglevelBevaluationlevelDACdB quantifiedservicecategoryFtestinglevelCevaluationlevelDACdB quantifiedservicecategoriesFtestinglevelCevaluationlevelDACdB transverse indication scans required for longitudinal welds .
D Applies to inline butt welds only .
BS EN test class B shall be used .
E Not relevant for designs based on Table .
in BS EN Amendment August Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Structural Steelwork Amendment August Table Weld acceptance criteria for visual inspection all dimensions in mm Main criterion Imperfection type A Dimensional parameter B Joint type Weld type Acceptance limits B C to quantified service category applies to longitudinal welds only D Remedial action in event of non conformance E Description BS EN ISO ref no .
Symbol BS EN ISO ref no .
F For F see F F to F Overall joint geometry Weld location error Dr All Fillet Dr As per F Refer to welding co ordinator for remedial action Incorrect weld type Dr All All NP NP As per F Refer to welding co ordinator for remedial action Inadequate weld length Dr All All Dr As per F Add extra weld length Linear misalignment h . In line butt Butt h .t h .t See Table Remove existing weld realign joint remake preparations and check with MT or PT reweld to AWPS check with UT h Cruciform All h .t h .t See Table Angular misalignment  In line butt Butt  See Table Correct using approved procedure check with MT or PT Root gap G h . Lap tee cruciform Fillet h See Table Refer to welding co ordinator for remedial action Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Structural Steelwork Amendment August Main criterion Imperfection type A Dimensional parameter B Joint type Weld type Acceptance limits B C to quantified service category applies to longitudinal welds only D Remedial action in event of non conformance E Description BS EN ISO ref no .
Symbol BS EN ISO ref no .
F For F see F F to F Surface notches Crack to . . All All NP NP As per F Remove imperfections by grinding to approved excavation shape check with PT reweld to AWPS refer to welding coordinator for establishment of cause Lack of fusion . . All All NP NP As per F Lack of penetration unspecified h . All Single sided butt NP h .t h As per F NP Large cavities .
. . All Butt NP NP As per F Undercut under fill etc .
h . . . . . All All h . See Table Remove by grinding repair to AWPS Pore d . All All d See Table Remove to depth of mm repair to AWPS Toe angle  .
All All  See Table Correct with high speed rotary burr or reweld to AWPS Damage to .
All All NP NP As per F Grind out to smooth profile repair by AWPS if h Loss of cross section Insufficient weld throat a H h . Tee lap cruciform Fillet NP G h .a G h G As per F Increase size using same AWPS Insufficient leg length z H h Tee lap cruciform Fillet NP G h .z G h G As per F Multiple conforming surface imperfections h l d lp . . All All See I See I As per F Increase cross sectional area using methods above depending on imperfection type Table Weld acceptance criteria for visual inspection all dimensions in mm continued Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Structural Steelwork Amendment August Main criterion Imperfection type A Dimensional parameter B Joint type Weld type Acceptance limits B C to quantified service category applies to longitudinal welds only D Remedial action in event of non conformance E Description BS EN ISO ref no .
Symbol BS EN ISO ref no .
F For F see F F to F Surface condition Deposits .
All All Not permitted if surface to receive corrosion protection See Table Remove by grinding or blast cleaning A The three digit BS EN ISO designation is deemed to include all four digit subcategories .
B Symbols are as defined by BS EN ISO or BS EN ISO .
Dr the dimension or weld type specified on the drawings .
NP not permitted .
C Where more than one limit is given for an imperfection for a given quantified service category and weld orientation all limits shall apply .
D Longitudinal welds are those not deemed to be transverse see Table footnote A. E AWPS approved welding procedure specification for repair qualified in accordance with .. F For joints in any orientation to F the imperfection limits given for longitudinal welds for F are applicable .
G Where a root gap h has been observed in a tee cruciform or corner joint the nominal required fillet weld dimensions as measured with a weld gauge shall be increased as follows unless compensating penetration beyond the root has been proven minimum required throat size a .h minimum required leg length z h on affected leg only .
See also H. H Both a and z measurements shall be checked irrespective of which has been specified on the drawings .
They are related as follows Angle between fusion faces See also G za .
. . . . . .
I All permitted imperfections resulting in loss of crosssection shall be summed and assessed as follows hl dt t or t. hl shall include subsurface imperfections assuming h see Table footnote K. Measurement length lp mm .
For fillet welds a shall be substituted for t. Table Weld acceptance criteria for visual inspection all dimensions in mm continued Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Structural Steelwork Table Weld acceptance criteria for visual inspection for quantified service categories F to F where limits differ from those for F in Table all dimensions in mm Imperfection type A Acceptance limits according to quantified service category B C applies to longitudinal welds only D Remedial action in event of non conformance F F F F Linear misalignment Inline butt h .t h .t h .t h .t h .t h .t h .t h . t As per Table Cruc iform h .t h .t h .t h .t h .t h .t h .t h .t Angular misalignment   .   .
As per Table Root gap E h h h h . . As per Table Undercut underfill h . h NP h NP h . NP h . As per Table Porosity d . . d NP NP NP NP As per Table Toe angle     As per Table Deposits Not permitted if surface to receive corrosion protection NP NP NP NP NP NP See F Variation in root or cap longitudinal profile B h G h h G h h G h h . G h . See H A Imperfection types as designated in Table footnote A .
B Symbols are as defined by BS EN ISO or BS EN ISO .
NP not permitted .
h the maximum variation in cap or root profile measured along weld axis over any length of mm .
C Where more than one limit is given for an imperfection for a given quantified service category and weld orientation all limits shall apply .
D Longitudinal welds are those not deemed to be transverse see Table footnote A. E Correct fillet weld sizes as per Table footnote G. F For F and above remove with high speed rotary burr .
G Transverse welds outside connection zones are exempt from this restriction see Table footnote A. H Correct by tapering slope to shallower angle or repair to AWPS .
Amendment August Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Structural Steelwork Table Weld acceptance criteria for magnetic particle and penetrant testing Imperfection type Acceptance standards Indication pattern Acceptance limits according to quantified service category A applies to longitudinal welds with longitudinal linear indications only B Remedial actions in event of nonconformance C F For F see D F F to F Surface notches identified in Table and Table BS EN ISO and BS EN ISO Isolated Level Level Level Level NP NP Remove by high speed burr machining with machining marks in longitudinal direction .
Repair to AWPS if non conformance with Table and Table depth requirements h. Grouped E NP NP NP NP NP NP A NP not permitted .
B Longitudinal welds are those not deemed to be transverse see Table footnote A .
C Approved welding procedure specification AWPS for repair qualified in accordance with D For joints in any orientation to F the imperfection limits given for longitudinal welds for F are applicable .
E Grouped shall be deemed to apply to any indications separated by less than .
mm .
Amendment August Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Structural Steelwork Table Weld acceptance criteria for ultrasonic testing with limited optional radiographic testing all dimensions in mm Imperfection type A Dimensional parameter B Location in cross section or throat Acceptance limits according to quantified service category B C applies to longitudinal welds only D Remedial action in event of non conformance E Description BS EN ISO ref no .
Symbol BS EN ISO ref no .
F For F see F F F F F Cracks to . . Full depth NP H NP H NP H NP H NP H NP H NP I NP I NP J NP J Refer to welding coordinator to determine cause .
Remove by grinding to approved excavation shape .
Check with MT or PT .
Reweld to AWPS .
Pores G inclusions G cavities G lack of fusion lack of penetration to h l . . . to .
Within mm of any surface h h NP H h NP I NP I NP J NP J l l NP H l NP I NP I NP J NP J Deeper than mm from any surface h h h NP H h NP I NP I l .t t l .t l NP H l NP I NP I h l lp H L . Full depth l .t J t J l .tJ t K l .t K t K NP l .t K NP NP lp lp lp NP lp NP NP H H H NP H NP NP L L L NP L NP NP Uniformly distributed or clustered porosity . . Full depth Not permitted if obstructs detection or evaluation of imperfections above NPL NP L A Imperfection types as designated in Table footnote A .
B Symbols are as defined by BS EN ISO .
NP not permitted .
H the clear gap between adjacent imperfections measured in through thickness direction .
L the gap between ends of adjacent imperfections measured along weld axis .
C Where more than one limit is given for an imperfection for a given quantified service category and weld orientation all limits shall apply .
If surface breaking imperfections are detected by UT the criteria given in Table Table and Table apply .
D Longitudinal welds are those not deemed to be transverse see Table footnote A. E Approved welding procedure specification AWPS for repair qualified in accordance with F For joints in any orientation to F the imperfection limits given for longitudinal welds for F are applicable .
G Radiographic testing may be used to assist in interpretation of these imperfections .
H RejectionlevelDACdB .
I RejectionlevelDACdB .
J RejectionlevelDACdB .
K If permitted surface imperfections resulting in loss of crosssection also exist the criteria in Table footnote I also apply .
L Also not permitted when checked by radiographic testing .
Amendment August Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Structural Steelwork Table Production tests on run off coupon plates Weld type Quantified service categories Material grades Test type Testing rate Inline transverse butt weld in tension F and above All UT macros in F and above S to S ML NL Charpys in S to S Q Tensile in S to S QL QL Tensile and Charpys in Longitudinal butt or fillet F All UT macrosA in F and above All UT macrosA in A A tack weld shall be included in the coupon plate if used in production and at least one macro shall be taken at each end of the tack weld .
Amendment August F MANUAL OF CONTRACT DOCUMENTS FOR HIGHWAY WORKS VOLUME SPECIFICATION FOR HIGHWAY WORKS Amendment August SERIES PROTECTION OF STEELWORK AGAINST CORROSION Contents Clause Title Page Introduction Surface Preparation General Requirements Surface Preparation Materials and Methods Workmanship Standards for the Surface Preparation of Steel by Blast Cleaning Abrading Grinding and Cleaning Workmanship Standards for the Surface Preparation of Coated Steelwork by Blast Cleaning Abrading Grinding and Cleaning Procedures for Treatment at Joints Procedures for Treatment at Areas of Mechanical Damage or Other Surface Defects Procedures for Treatment of Local Failure in Protective Coatings Metal Coatings Testing of Thermally Sprayed Aluminium Metal Coatings Paint and Similar Protective Coatings Testing of Paints Storage Requirements and Keeping Periods for Paints Application of Paint Procedure Trials Storage and Transport of Steel and Fabricated Steelwork Surfaces in Contact with Concrete Form HAP New Works Paint System Sheet Appendix Form HAP Paint Data Sheet Appendix Access and Lighting Clause Title Page Additional Requirements for the Protection of Steel in Bridge Bearings Additional Requirements for F the Protection of CCTV Masts Cantilever Masts Steel Lighting Columns and Bracket Arms NATIONAL ALTERATIONS OF THE OVERSEEING ORGANISATIONS OF SCOTLAND WALES AND NORTHERN IRELAND Clause Title Page Scotland SE Paint and Similar Protective S Coatings SE Testing of Paints S SE Additional Requirements for SF the Protection of Steel in Bridge Bearings denotes a Clause which has a substitute National Clause for one or more of the Overseeing Organisations of Scotland Wales or Northern Ireland .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Protection of Steelwork Against Corrosion PROTECTION OF STEELWORK AGAINST CORROSION Introduction This Series is part of the Specification for Highway Works .
Whilst this Series is particularly relevant to the subject matter in its title it must be read in conjunction with the general requirements in Series and and with all other Series relevant to the specification for the particular works to be undertaken .
Surface preparation and protection against corrosion of steelwork shall be carried out in compliance with Clauses to and where applicable Series using systems appropriate to the information given in Appendix Form HAP New Works Paint System Sheet parts and and Appendix if applicable as appropriate to the design and method of execution of the components .
The Manual of Paints for Structural Steelwork which is included in BD DMRB .. provides data on paints and similar materials for use in the Overseeing Organisations contracts .
The Manual contains item numbers and a summary is also given in Table .
Subject and without prejudice to the Conditions of Contract the Contractor shall comply with any measures to contain people plant materials dust and debris described in Appendix .
Compliance with subClause of this Clause does not confer immunity from relevant legal requirements .
Corrosion protection of steelwork shall be undertaken by a Contractor registered to National Highways Sector Scheme A For corrosion protection of ferrous metals by industrial coatings as described in Appendix A. Numbered appendices identified by digits e.g .
contain contract specific information and requirements .
Surface Preparation General Requirements Workshop and Site Work Before blast cleaning or abrading steel surfaces or before overcoating painted or hot dip galvanized surfaces any contamination including by oil or grease shall be removed .
Unless otherwise described in Appendix solvents shall not be used .
Clean water which does not leave harmful residues on the surface shall be used for wet cleaning and rinsing .
Cleaning agents which are not harmful to the surface being cleaned and which do not leave harmful residues on the surface after final rinsing may be used for cleaning .
Surface preparation shall be continued until the required standard has been achieved .
Weld spatter shall be removed in accordance with Series .. if applicable .
After dry surface preparation of internal surfaces and before any wet cleaning all dust and debris shall be removed from accessible areas by sweeping and vacuum cleaning .
Immediately before application of each coat of paint the Contractor shall ensure that the surfaces to be painted i meet the required standard of preparation ii are free from harmful residues and detrimental contamination including water moisture condensation oil grease mortar concrete dust grit paint degradation products chlorides and sulphides .
See sub clause .
Joints plies and fasteners shall be sealed in compliance with subClauses .
and .
Amendment August Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Protection of Steelwork Against Corrosion Coats of paint shall be free from embedded metallic or other foreign particles including metallic dust .
Deposits of adherent matter on metallic coatings or painted surfaces shall be cleaned off immediately they occur .
Coatings damaged in the process shall be restored .
Unless otherwise described in Appendix the final workshop coats on external surfaces shall be wet cleaned on site .
Surface Preparation Materials and Methods Dry Blast Cleaning in the Workshop Unless otherwise described in Appendix metallic blast cleaning abrasives complying with BS EN ISO or nonmetallic blast cleaning abrasives complying with BS EN ISO shall be used .
Grades for metallic abrasives shall comply with the following Profile see subClause .
Grade Fine G or S Medium G or S Coarse G or S The particle size of metallic abrasive in plant or equipment shall not exceed the maximum for the relevant grade as specified above .
Before the start of blast cleaning and during blast cleaning the Contractor shall ensure that the abrasive is free from matter which could leave detrimental contamination as defined in subClause .
on the surfaces to be coated .
Abrading in the Workshop or on Site Any encrusted foreign matter or paint which may be difficult to remove by abrading alone shall be dislodged by scraping aided by hand or power wirebrushing .
This work shall be completed before abrading the areas so affected .
Abrading shall be carried out using abrasive paper or other material or a flexible abrasive disc mounted on a power driven flexible pad or a power driven arbor or spindlemounted flexible abrasive flap wheel .
Abrading tools may be used to remove weld spatter .
Wet abrading may be employed for the preparation of finishes over sound undercoats over unsound systems over hot dip galvanizing or hot dip galvanizing .
Wet abrading shall not be allowed to come into contact with exposed thermally sprayed aluminium metal coatings .
All equipment including tools abrasive sheets abrasive discs and abrasive wheels shall be of a type capacity and in a condition appropriate for the work .
The use of hard grinding wheels for abrading shall not be permitted .
A polished appearance caused by polishing in of paint rust or dirt shall not be acceptable .
Areas of previously corroded steel or unsound metal coatings except hot dip galvanizing which have been prepared by abrading down to bright steel or bright metal coating and blast cleaned where appropriate shall be protected by the primer and next coat of paint before any cleaning down or preparation of adjacent surfaces .
Wet Cleaning in the Workshop or on Site Wet cleaning shall be carried out by scrubbing with a stiffbristled brush using water and a cleaning agent or a pressure washer .
Immediately after cleaning the surfaces shall be thoroughly rinsed .
Dry Cleaning in the Workshop or on Site Surfaces shall be cleaned by scrubbing with a dry stiffbristled brush .
Amendment August Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Protection of Steelwork Against Corrosion Dry Blast Cleaning on Site Using Dry AirAbrasive System Metallic abrasives shall comply with subClauses and of this Clause .
Metallic grit or aluminium oxide abrasive shall be used for dry blast cleaning of relatively small areas on site which are to receive a thermally sprayed aluminium metal coating such as at site welds at areas prepared to clean steel or areas where a thermally sprayed aluminium metal coating is to be restored as indicated in subClause .i .
The Contractor shall ensure that the grade and particle shape of nonmetallic abrasives are adequate for the purpose intended .
Non metallic abrasives shall not be recycled .
Wet Blast Cleaning Using Low Pressure AirWaterAbrasive System on Site Unless otherwise specified in Appendix a lowpressure airwaterabrasive system shall be used .
The airwater pressure at the nozzle shall not exceed .
kgfcm and shall be fully adjustable below this level .
The system shall incorporate a mechanical metering device remote controlled by the operator from the nozzle to enable him to regulate from zero to maximum the quantity of nonmetallic abrasive being fed into the airwater mixture .
During abrasive cleaning the air water and abrasive shall be thoroughly mixed and this mixture shall be projected on to the surface to be cleaned through a single bore nozzle or tube .
The use of an inhibitor during wet blast cleaning or washing shall not be permitted .
Wet Blast Cleaning using High Pressure WaterAbrasive System or Ultra High Pressure Water System on Site Unless otherwise specified in Appendix the water pressure shall not exceed kgfcm for high pressure or between and kgfcm for ultra high pressure .
The system shall incorporate a mechanical metering device controlled by the operator at the nozzle to regulate from zero to maximum the quantity of non metallic abrasive being fed into the water .
Within minutes of wet blast cleaning the whole of the cleaned surface shall be thoroughly washed using the blast cleaning equipment with air and water .
Any further deposits of abrasive on already rinsed surfaces shall be removed in a similar manner also within minutes of being deposited .
All accumulated deposits of abrasive and debris on other parts of the structure shall be removed by the same method before the end of the working day .
After washing the surfaces shall be free from all detrimental contamination .
Tests for freedom from detrimental contamination shall be made after the washing .
Combined WetDry Blast Cleaning on Site Wet blast cleaning using the low pressure airwaterabrasive system in compliance with subClauses and of this Clause shall be followed after a minimal interval by dry blast cleaning in compliance with subClause of this Clause of all the previously wet blast cleaned areas .
The specified standard of surface preparation shall have been achieved in full initially by wet blast cleaning and washing before any later dry blast cleaning of the same areas to remove flash rusting or to restore the required standard of surface preparation .
Other Requirements When surface preparation is to be carried out by dry blast cleaning and on adjacent surfaces by wet cleaning and or abrading then unless otherwise necessary the wet cleaning and any abrading shall be carried out first .
When combined wetdry blast cleaning has been specified instead of dry blast cleaning only the above sequence may be reversed .
On completion of the wet blast cleaning part of the process the areas to be abraded shall be cleaned in compliance with subClause of this Clause except that for rinsing the wet blast cleaning equipment may be used .
The dry blast cleaning part of the process and dry abrading shall be carried out after any wet abrading required and final rinsing .
Any prepared dry metal surface shall be protected from the effects of any further wet method of surface preparation by the application of a minimum microns dry film thickness of paint .
Grinding After Surface Preparation in the Workshop or on Site Grinding wheels and discs shall be of the size shape and grade of coarseness appropriate to the particular operation .
The speed of revolution shall be appropriate for the work .
Amendment August Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Protection of Steelwork Against Corrosion Grinding shall be carried out after surface preparation by other methods including cleaning down has been completed except where it is necessary to achieve a blast profile and this would necessitate blast cleaning after grinding .
Surfaces prepared by grinding to bright steel shall be protected by the application of the primer and the next coat of paint including any stripe coats before cleaning down or other preparation of adjacent surfaces specified in Appendix is undertaken .
Workmanship Standards for the Surface Preparation of Steel by Blast Cleaning Abrading Grinding and Cleaning The surface profile to be achieved by blast cleaning either Fine Medium or Coarse as appropriate shall be within the limits set by the Surface Profile Comparator for the Assessment of Abrasive Blast Cleaned Surfaces conforming to BS EN ISO .
Blast cleaned surfaces shall be virtually free from sharp spikes of parent metal defined as rogue peaks formed by the impact of abrasive particles and which project above the blast cleaning profile .
Any rogue peaks which would be detrimental to the protective system shall be removed .
Hackles and inclusions caused by the rolling process visible after blast cleaning which would be detrimental to the protective system shall be removed .
Affected surfaces shall be prepared by grinding or abrading to bright steel in compliance with subClause .. Sharp edges shall be rounded to a radius of not less than mm in accordance with Series .
if applicable .
If thermally sprayed aluminium metal coating is to be applied the surfaces shall then be blast cleaned .
Steel surfaces to be prepared by any of the methods described in the Contract shall be such that after surface preparation the surfaces are free from detrimental contamination .
Surface preparation by blast cleaning shall be to one or more of the following standards of visual cleanliness i Sa to BS EN ISO ii Sa to BS EN ISO Additionally after surface preparation by blast cleaning to Sa or Sa quality the surface profile shall be virtually free from embedded abrasive particles when viewed through a X illuminated magnifying glass .
Surfaces assessed as unsatisfactory in this respect shall be blast cleaned again with fresh abrasive .
Another abrasive complying with the Specification may be used if necessary .
Harmful residues or detrimental contamination Surfaces shall be deemed to be free from harmful residues or detrimental contamination after surface preparation when any such remaining matter will not be detrimental to the application adhesion curing or reduce the required durability of the specified protective system .
Bright steel Surfaces free from defects or prepared to this standard by grinding or abrading shall have an overall bright appearance .
Workmanship Standards for the Surface Preparation of Coated Steelwork by Blast Cleaning Abrading Grinding and Cleaning Before overcoating surfaces shall be free from i any visible gloss ii any unsound paint down to sound paint iii any unsound paint down to Sa or Sa quality steel iv any unsound paint down to bright steel v any unsound paint down to sound metal coating Amendment August Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Protection of Steelwork Against Corrosion Amendment August vi any unsound paint down to bright metal coating vii any unsound metal coating down to sound metal coating viii any unsound metal coating down to bright metal coating ix any unsound metal coating down to Sa or Sa quality steel x any unsound metal coating down to bright steel xi detrimental contamination .
Definitions of terms used in describing the above standards of workmanship are as follows i Sa or Sa quality as in subClause .
ii bright steel as in subClause .
iii free from detrimental contamination as in subClause .
iv bright metal coating resulting from abrading a metal coating whose surfaces are free from all corrosion products and of bright appearance overall v unsound metal coating a metal coating showing signs of disruption inadequate adhesion or penetration by rust or other corrosion products vi sound metal coating a metal coating which complies with subClause .
including such a metal coating which has been blast cleaned but which has a reduced thickness in accordance with subClause .
vii unsound paint paint showing signs of disruption rusting through having inadequate adhesion or covering rust scale loose rust loose mill scale or other detrimental products viii sound paint paint which is sound down to a metal substrate .
Definitions of terms used in Clauses and are as follows i restored coatings .
Unless otherwise described in Appendix when paint or similar coatings or thermally sprayed aluminium metal coatings are to be restored the standard of surface preparation and coating material shall comply with the original standard .
Damaged or failed paint systems over thermally sprayed aluminium metal coating shall be restored using dry blast cleaning .
The thickness of any underlying thermally sprayed aluminium metal coating or paint coating which may have been reduced in thickness during surface preparation shall be brought up to specification ii restored surface preparation .
Unless otherwise described in Appendix the original standard shall be obtained .
When further thermally sprayed aluminium metal coating is to be applied the surface of the existing thermally sprayed aluminium metal coating shall be restored by dry blast cleaning with metallic grit abrasive or aluminium oxide to metal coating iii local failure .
An isolated breakdown of a protective coating or system due to extraneous causes excluding mechanical damage .
Permitted residual thermally sprayed aluminium .
When clean steel is exposed through a metal coating during remedial surface preparation remnants of sound thermally sprayed aluminium metal coating which can not be removed with a tungsten scraper blade may be retained within the blast clean profile .
Procedures for Treatment at Joints Fasteners Joint Material and Parent Material in Joints Before Assembly or Welding in the Workshop or on Site Fasteners Including Bolts Nuts and Washers Surfaces of uncoated fasteners shall be free from all but traces of oil or grease before assembly .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Protection of Steelwork Against Corrosion Unless otherwise described in Appendix threaded fasteners at joints in hot dip galvanized steelwork or in hot dip galvanized steelwork which is to be painted shall be hot dip galvanized .
Hot dip galvanized fasteners which are to be painted shall be treated with an adhesion promoter as described in Table B .
Metal coatings on surfaces of fasteners which are to be painted shall be i free from all traces of oil or grease and then treated with an adhesion promoter where specified or ii treated at the same time as the parent material where fasteners are already assembled in compliance with subClause of this Clause .
Fasteners excluding those in ii above shall be pressurerinsed with water and allowed to dry before assembly or packing for delivery at least one hour and not more than four hours after satisfactory application of adhesion promoter Item .
Fasteners which have become difficult to tighten because of corrosion shall be replaced .
Joint Material and Parent Material in Joints The standard of blast cleaning of joint material and parent material in joints shall be at least equal to that for the parent material .
The standard of preparation and treatment of the friction surfaces of joint material and parent material in slip resistant connections shall be as described in Series .. Before a slip resistant connection is made friction surfaces shall meet the standard of preparation and treatment described in Series .. At Preloaded Connections In steelwork painted only overall Unless otherwise described in Appendix the blast primer applied to the parent material shall be taken mm to mm inside the perimeter of the joints .
The outer surfaces and edges of site joint material may at the option of the Contractor also be given a coat of the blast primer .
In steelwork with thermally sprayed aluminium metal coating at joints only and painted overall Unless otherwise described in Appendix the thermally sprayed aluminium metal coating shall be applied to the contact surfaces of the joints and to the outer surfaces and edges of joint material .
The thermally sprayed aluminium metal coating on the contact surfaces of the parent material shall be taken mm to mm outside the perimeter of the joints .
The blast primer applied to the parent material shall be taken mm to mm inside the perimeter of the joints .
The thermally sprayed aluminium metal coating on the outer surfaces and edges of site joint material shall be given a coat of aluminium epoxy sealer Item .
In steelwork with thermally sprayed aluminium metal coating overall and sealed only or painted overall Unless otherwise described in Appendix the thermally sprayed aluminium metal coating shall be applied to the contact surfaces of the joints and to the outer surfaces and edges of joint material .
The sealer applied to the parent material shall be taken mm to mm inside the perimeter of the joints .
The thermally sprayed aluminium metal coating on outer surfaces and edges of site joint material shall also be given a coat of aluminium epoxy sealer Item .
In steelwork hot dip galvanized only or hot dip galvanized and painted overall All material at joints shall be hot dip galvanized .
When an adhesion promoter and a first undercoat are applied before a joint is made they shall be taken mm to mm inside the perimeter of the joint these coats shall also be applied to edges and outer surfaces of the joint material .
The thickness of a protective paint coat applied to the outer surfaces of joint material prior to assembly of any preloaded connection shall not exceed microns dry film thickness .
At Non Preloaded Connections At workshop joints in all steelwork other than in hot dip galvanized steelwork the blast primer alone or thermally sprayed aluminium metal coating plus sealer shall be applied initially to parent and joint material .
Immediately before assembly of a joint which is to be painted the first undercoat shall be applied to the contact surfaces and the joint made while the paint is wet .
Amendment August Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Protection of Steelwork Against Corrosion At site joints in all steelwork other than in hot dip galvanized steelwork unless otherwise described in Appendix all surfaces except those of fasteners shall receive in the workshop the workshop protective system which is applied to the parent material .
At all joints in hot dip galvanized steelwork an adhesion promoter and workshop coats may be applied to the joint material before or after workshop joints are made .
When hot dip galvanized steelwork is painted on site an adhesion promoter and paint shall be applied to joint material after the joint has been made .
At Welded Joints At workshop and site joints in all steelwork surfaces to be welded shall be restored to Sa quality or to bright steel and shall be free of any protective or other coating immediately prior to welding .
Parent Material Workshop Treatment Adjacent to Joints Which Are to be Assembled or Welded Later on Site At Preloaded Connections The paint coats with the exception of the primer or first coat of paint shall be stepped back at mm intervals commencing mm from the perimeter of the joints .
At Non Preloaded Connections Unless otherwise described in Appendix workshop paint coats are not required to be stepped back .
At Welded Joints Thermally sprayed aluminium metal coating shall be kept clear of the weld by a distance of at least times the thickness of the steel in the area to be welded with a minimum of mm and maximum of mm from the joint .
The restricted area shall be masked during metal spraying .
Hot dip galvanizing shall be removed a minimum of mm back from the edges of weld areas .
Paint coats shall be stepped back at mm intervals commencing at least mm from the joint or from the edge of the thermally sprayed aluminium metal coating starting with the nd coat of paint .
At Completed Joints Within days of a joint being completed exposed surfaces of parent and joint material shall be prepared in compliance with subClauses to of this Clause and fasteners in compliance with subClauses to of this Clause .
At Bolted Joints In steelwork painted only overall blast cleaned only or primed surfaces shall be prepared by dry blast cleaning to restore or provide the required standard of surface preparation for workshop or site work as appropriate .
In steelwork with thermally sprayed aluminium metal coating at joints only and painted overall primed or sealed thermally sprayed aluminium metal coatings shall be prepared by dry blast cleaning to restore the surfaces to the required standard .
In steelwork with thermally sprayed aluminium metal coating overall and sealed only or painted overall thermally sprayed aluminium metal coatings shall be prepared as described in subClause of this Clause .
In steelwork hot dip galvanized only or hot dip galvanized and painted overall the surfaces shall be free from detrimental contamination by wet cleaning .
At Welded Joints In all steelwork welds shall be prepared by the methods and to the standards described in subClause .
ii . . or Appendix for workshop or site work as appropriate .
Surfaces of areas adjacent to the weld shall be similarly prepared .
For site welds in hot dip galvanized steelwork surfaces shall be treated in accordance with subClause .. Amendment August Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Protection of Steelwork Against Corrosion Surfaces of Fasteners Uncoated and temporarily coated fasteners shall be free from all traces of oil and grease and be blast cleaned to Sa quality medium profile before painting .
Fasteners including those which have been treated with an adhesion promoter shall be dry cleaned after final surface preparation of the joint and then painted .
Fasteners which are to receive thermally sprayed aluminium metal coating after assembly shall be blast cleaned to Sa quality medium profile with chilled iron grit cast steel grit or aluminium oxide .
Sealing at Joints or Plies Bolted joints or builtup sections shall be free from any water which has penetrated the plies .
When drying out has been completed or when surfaces are dry after surface preparation fine gaps around the perimeter of joints or along plies shall be sealed by successive application of undercoat paint .
All wider gaps shall be sealed with a proprietary sealant compatible with the paint system .
Sealing of Gaps at Nibs of Load Indicating Fasteners or Washers Gaps shall be sealed by brush application of primer and successive undercoats of the types used on adjacent areas .
Procedures for Treatment at Areas of Mechanical Damage or Other Surface Defects Score marks other surface defects and indentations in the surface of a steel substrate or of a metal coating shall be treated by abrading or grinding to bright steel or bright metal coating to produce a surface without sharp edges or abrupt change in contour .
Damage to unprepared surfaces shall be treated before blast cleaning .
A blast cleaning profile shall be restored on areas to be thermally aluminium metal sprayed but not necessarily areas to be painted only .
Other surface defects in the steel substrate including fissures caused by the removal of hackles or inclusions described in subClause .
shall be similarly treated .
In the case of damage to paint coatings only surface preparation shall be by blast cleaning or abrading .
The paint coatings shall then be restored .
When a twopack Epoxy paint system is restored over a steel substrate prepared by abrading the adhesion of the first paint coat to the substrate shall be checked in accordance with ASTM D type III before overcoating with the next coat in the system .
The first paint coat over abraded surfaces shall be an aluminium epoxy twopack primer Item .
When an area of a thermally sprayed aluminium metal coating is to be restored after surface preparation by abrading or grinding any affected thermally sprayed aluminium metal coating or exposed steel substrate shall be dry blast cleaned immediately before further application of thermally sprayed aluminium metal coating .
In the workshop a damaged thermally sprayed aluminium metal coating together with any damaged sealer or paint coats shall be restored .
On site with the exception of the small areas relative to the size of the component permitted under subClause of this Clause a damaged thermally sprayed aluminium metal coating together with any damaged sealer or paint coats shall be restored but with a minimum thickness of microns of thermally sprayed aluminium metal coating .
On site small areas of isolated damage in a thermally sprayed aluminium metal coating plus paint system need not be restored after surface preparation in compliance with subClause of this Clause the thermally sprayed aluminium metal coating shall be replaced by microns of the first undercoats omitting the sealer .
Adjacent paint coats excluding the sealer shall then be restored over the repaired area .
Amendment August Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Protection of Steelwork Against Corrosion In the workshop in the case of hot dip galvanizing only small isolated areas of up to mm and not exceeding .
of the total surface area of the component whichever is the lesser may after surface preparation be repaired with low melting point zinc alloy providing that the total area of any damage on a component does not exceed .
of the total surface area of the component .
Components with damaged areas greater than the above limits shall be regalvanized .
Isolated areas of damage larger than mm in hot dip galvanizing which is to be painted later or which has already been painted may be repaired with low melting point zinc alloy after surface preparation .
Alternatively the whole of the affected area including exposed steel substrate shall after surface preparation be overcoated with two coats of Zinc Rich Epoxy Blast Primer Item minimum dry film thickness of microns each .
On site surfaces of hot dip galvanized components found to have minor damage shall be prepared in accordance with subClause of this Clause and coated with two coats of Zinc Rich Epoxy Blast Primer Item minimum dry film thickness of microns each .
Alternatively the components shall be regalvanized .
In all cases where paint coats only are to be restored or thermally sprayed aluminium metal coatings replaced or restored or hot dip galvanizing is to be replaced by paint the edges of paint coatings or metal coating adjacent to the affected area shall be bevelled back into sound paint or metal coating .
This work shall be carried out before any final blast cleaning described in subClause of this Clause .
In the workshop exposure and overcoating times shall not exceed those specified in Clause .
On site overcoating shall be started immediately after surface preparation of the affected area and before any deterioration in the standard of the prepared surface occurs and continued as soon as each coat is dry enough for overcoating .
Procedures for Treatment of Local Failure in Protective Coatings In the workshop failed paint coatings and failed thermally sprayed aluminium metal coating shall be restored .
Abrading down to sound paint only is permissible .
If a thermally sprayed aluminium metal coating is damaged or reduced to less than of the specified minimum thickness during abrading it shall be restored .
On site failed paint coatings and thermally sprayed aluminium metal coatings shall be restored except that i abrading down to sound paint or to bright steel or ii blast cleaning to Sa quality are permissible methods of surface preparation when restoring paint systems over a steel substrate .
In the workshop and on site hot dip galvanized components showing signs of failure eg blisters and rust of the coating shall be regalvanized .
In the workshop and on site failed paint coatings over hot dip galvanizing shall be restored .
Surface preparation of affected areas shall be by abrading .
Areas of sound hot dip galvanizing exposed through a paint system shall be abraded only as necessary to ensure satisfactory application of an adhesion promoter and paint .
If the hot dip galvanizing is damaged or reduced to less than of the specified minimum thickness during abrading the component shall be regalvanized .
SubClauses .
and shall be complied with .
Metal Coatings Hot Dip Galvanized Coatings Hot dip galvanized coatings shall unless otherwise described in Appendix comply with BS EN ISO and with the following i Inhibited hydrochloric acid with a strength not exceeding and within a temperature range of C to C or inhibited sulphuric acid with a strength not exceeding and within a temperature range of C to C shall be used for pickling .
Amendment August Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Protection of Steelwork Against Corrosion ii Components shall not be immersed in the pickling acid longer than is necessary for cleaning the surfaces prior to hot dip galvanizing .
Components shall receive a fresh water rinse between pickling and the galvanising bath .
iii The surfaces of components to be hot dip galvanized shall be dried before immersion in the molten zinc .
iv When an aqueous flux is to be used all traces of acid shall be washed off immediately after pickling .
v Hot dip galvanized coatings shall be relatively smooth continuous and free from flux staining .
vi Detrimental contamination of hot dip galvanized coatings which are to be painted shall be removed by wet cleaning in compliance with subClause ..
Surfaces to be painted shall not receive chromate passivation treatment .
vii Vent holes drilled in hollow sections prior to hot dip galvanizing shall be plugged after hot dip galvanizing and before any painting in accordance with Series .
if applicable .
viii The contractor shall take measures to minimise the potential for liquid metal assisted cracking occurring during the galvanizing process and to identify any cracks that may have occurred in galvanized steelwork .
Thermally Sprayed Aluminium Metal Coating Thermally sprayed aluminium metal coatings shall unless otherwise described in Appendix comply with BS EN ISO and with the following i Aluminium coating material shall have a composition complying with BS EN ISO .. ii The thickness of the coating shall be not less than microns .
iii The strength of adhesion of thermally sprayed aluminium metal coatings shall not be less than the following Aluminium kgfcm iv Thermally sprayed aluminium metal coatings shall be applied continuously over each .
m per gun or the area of the component whichever is the lesser until the specified thickness has been achieved .
v The application of thermally sprayed aluminium metal in separate layers shall not be permitted .
vi All surfaces to be thermally metal sprayed including that of the reference panel having equivalent hardness to that of the parent material shall be blast cleaned with chilled iron grit or high carbon cast steel grit with a hardness value greater than HV or aluminium oxide with a hardness value greater than Mohs and the standard shall be Sa quality medium profile .
vii Thermally sprayed aluminium metal coatings shall be denibbed .
Other Requirements When a metal coating is required on only part of a component it shall be applied before the rest of the component receives paint .
Testing of Thermally Sprayed Aluminium Metal Coatings At the start of the works and subsequently at intervals scheduled in Appendix with the exception of coatings on steel in bearings curved surfaces repairs to mechanical damage local failure of thermally sprayed aluminium metal coating at site joints or areas restored on site the Contractor shall demonstrate by means of a pull off adhesion test in accordance with ASTM DType III that the minimum adhesion requirement is being attained as detailed in subClause .
iii .
In the excepted areas the Contractor shall demonstrate that the adhesion is satisfactory by means of grid tests in accordance with BS EN ISO .
Areas affected by the tests shall be restored in accordance with Clause .
Amendment August Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Protection of Steelwork Against Corrosion The tensile tests shall be carried out initially on flat panels mm x mm x mm which are of the same grade of steel as the parent material and which before blast cleaning had the same surface condition .
The panels shall be blast cleaned and thermally aluminium metal sprayed together with the parent material to the same standard and using the same technique .
The Contractor shall ensure that adhesion tests have been carried out satisfactorily before any further work continues .
If the adhesion requirement on any test panel is not met the Contractor shall carry out a further test on the parent material adjacent to the panel position .
In the case of adhesion failure on the steelwork itself by either method of test unsound thermally sprayed aluminium metal coating shall be restored and the tests repeated .
If more than two local areas of faulty adhesion occur on any one component the whole of the thermally sprayed aluminium metal coating on the component shall be considered as having failed and it shall be restored .
SubClause .
is not applicable in the case of adhesion failure .
Paint and Similar Protective Coatings General The term paint shall be deemed to refer to protective coatings in general .
The paints permitted for use by the Overseeing Organisation in the works are listed in the Manual of Paints for Structural Steelwork which is included in BD DMRB .. and which also contains details of the quality assurance scheme for paints and similar protective coatings .
All paints shall have a current BBA HAPAS Roads and Bridges Certificate or equivalent appropriate to the use of the paint in the proposed paint system .
All paints shall be supplied in sealed containers of a capacity suitable for the volume and method of application .
For sitework all paints shall be supplied in sealed containers of not more than litre capacity .
The capacity of the containers to be used shall be confirmed as being suitable as part of the Procedure Trials described in Clause .
All containers shall be used in order of date of manufacture and batch number the oldest being used first .
Each container shall have a completely removable lid and be clearly marked on the side to show the name of the manufacturer registered description of the material including purpose e.g .
whether primer undercoat or finish colour Item No paint manufacturers reference number batch number and date of manufacture .
Where date of manufacture is coded the Contractor shall provide the code key .
In addition paints may be supplied in sealed containers of litre capacity for testing purposes in accordance with Clause for A samples .
The Contractor shall ensure that the properties of the paints he has selected are suitable for the conditions in the workshop and on site including temperature and humidity and that he is able to apply the paints satisfactorily to all parts of the structure in these conditions .
Unless otherwise described in Appendix all paints forming any one protective system or overlapping systems shall be obtained from the same manufacturer as named by the Contractor in Appendix Form HAP New Works Paint System Sheet .
Surface Preparation and Protective Systems for Steelwork Except Bearings CCTV Masts Cantilever Masts and Steel Lighting Columns and Bracket Arms Protective systems Note mdft minimum dry film thickness B apply by brush AS apply by airless spray HB High Build dft above m per coat NB Normal Build dft between and m per coat LB Low Build dft below m per coat Amendment August Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Protection of Steelwork Against Corrosion i Item numbers in the Protective Systems are listed in the Manual of Paints for Structural Steelwork at Annex A of BD DMRB .. and a summary is shown in Table .
ii Details of Surface Preparation and Protective Systems for Steelwork Except Bearings CCTV Masts Cantilever Masts and Steel Lighting Columns and Bracket Arms are given in Tables A and B .
Surface Preparation and Protective Systems for Steel in Bridge Bearings and Metal Coated Fasteners Details of surface preparation are given in Table A and the protective system Type V is given in Table B .
Amendment August Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Protection of Steelwork Against Corrosion TABLE BD Quality Assurance Scheme for Paints and Similar Protective Coatings Annex A Manual of Paints for Structural Steelwork Current Paint Item Numbers Item Description Coat Type Build Applied by Zinc Rich Epoxy Blast Primer two pack Blast Primer LB or NB B or AS B to small areas only Zinc Phosphate Epoxy two pack Blast PrimerSealer LB B or AS B to small areas only Zinc Phosphate High Build Quick Drying Epoxy two pack Blast Primer HB AS B to small areas only MIO High Build Quick Drying Epoxy twopack UndercoatFinish HB AS Water based epoxy primer for blast cleaned internal surfaces twopack Primer HB B or AS Water based epoxy undercoat sheen finish for internal use twopack UndercoatSheen Finish HB B or AS High Build Aluminium Epoxytwopack Surface tolerant maintenance e.g .
for abraded surfaces HB B or AS High Build Epoxy pack maintenance undercoat Surface tolerant HB B or AS Extended Cure Epoxy MIO twopack Primer Undercoat andor Finish for hot dipped galvanized steel HB AS B to small areas only High Build Glass Flake Epoxy twopack Undercoat for blast cleaned steel new construction HB AS stripe coats and small repairs only by brush T Wash Adhesion promoter for hot dip galvanized steel LB B Adhesion promoting single component To promote substrate adhesion properties of coating systems for hot dip galvanized steel aluminium and stainless steel surfaces LB B or AS Aluminium Epoxy twopack SealerPrimer LB B or AS Red Oxide Moisture Cured Polyurethane single component PrimerBlast Primer for maintenance or new works LB B or AS MIO Moisture Cured Polyurethane UndercoatFinish NB or HB B or AS Moisture Cured Polyurethane singlecomponent Semigloss Finish LB NB B AS Epoxy Acrylic Finish two pack Gloss or Semigloss Finish NB B small areas by brush AS Amendment August Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Protection of Steelwork Against Corrosion TABLE BD Quality Assurance Scheme for Paints and Similar Protective Coatings Annex A Manual of Paints for Structural Steelwork continued Item Description Coat Type Build Applied by Polyurethane twopack Gloss Finish LB NB B AS Polyurethane twopack Semigloss Finish NB HB B small areas by brush AS Organic Modified Polysiloxane twopack Gloss Finish for new works or maintenance NB HB B AS Grease Paint Primer B AS for difficult access areas Grease Paint UndercoatFinish HB B or AS Notes Colour reference shall be as per the manufacturers declared colour given with reference to BS andor BS C where appropriate .
Dry Film Thickness dft range shall be as per the manufacturers data sheet .
The minimum dry film thickness of the paint coats and paint system shall be as per the protective systems detailed in Tables to where given .
All materials to be handled and applied in accordance with the manufacturers Product and Health Safety Data Sheets .
Amendment August Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Protection of Steelwork Against Corrosion TABLE A Requirements For Bridges Parapets and Other Highway Structures Except Bearings CCTV Masts Cantilever Masts and Steel Lighting Columns and Bracket Arms Surface Preparation and Protective Systems Surface preparation Protective systems given in Table B i Bridge steelwork fabrication stage Area Description Method Surface Standard Type Area A Exterior main surfaces including shop welds Blast clean Sa Medium profile I for Inland Ready Access II for Inland Difficult Access Marine Ready or Difficult Access Area B Interior of box girder surfaces except area C but including shop welds Blast clean Sa Medium profile III Area C Friction surfaces of parent material at slip resistant connections As described in Series .
As described in Series .
As described in Series .
Area D Friction and outer surfaces of joint material at slip resistant connections .
Friction surfaces As described in Series .
Outer surfaces Blast clean Friction surfaces As described in Series .
Outer surfaces Sa Medium profile Friction surfaces As described in Series .
Outer surfaces I for Inland Ready Access II for Inland Difficult Access Marine Ready or Difficult Access ii Bridge steelwork erection stage Area E Exterior surfaces of site welds and weld affected areas Remove slag wire brush wet clean and blast clean as Area A Sa Medium profile I for Inland Ready Access II for Inland Difficult Access Marine Ready or Difficult Access Area F Interior surfaces of site welds and weld affected areas Remove slag wire brush wet clean and blast clean as Area B Sa Medium profile III with additional coat of primer iii Parapets .
Area G All surfaces subject to accessibility Pickling for hot dip galvanizing In accordance with Clause IV Amendment August Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Protection of Steelwork Against Corrosion TABLE B Requirements for Bridges Parapets and Other Highway Structures Except Bearings CCTV Masts Cantilever Masts and Steel Lighting Columns and Bracket Arms Protective Systems Type Metal Coating st Coat nd Coat rd Coat th Coat Minimum total dry film thickness of the paint system microns I Item No or if Item finish is specified Min dry film thickness per coatm or Item No or if Item finish is specified Min dry film thickness per coatm or II Item No or if Item finish is specified Min dry film thickness per coatm or Item No or if Item finish is specified Min dry film thickness per coatm or Item No or if Item finish is specified Min dry film thickness per coatm or III Item No Min dry film thickness per coatm Item No Min dry film thickness per coatm Item No Min dry film thickness per coatm IV Item No Hot dip galvanize or sweep blast or or or nd Coat Item if Item finish is specified Min dry film thickness per coatm Item or Items or or nd Coat Items or if Item finish is specified Amendment August Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Protection of Steelwork Against Corrosion TABLE B Requirements for Bridges Parapets and Other Highway Structures Except Bearings CCTV Masts Cantilever Masts and Steel Lighting Columns and Bracket Arms Continued Notes Finish Coats i Items or finish coats min .
dft m .
Item finish coat min .
dft m .
ii Type I Type II and Type IV A finish coat may need to be applied in the workshop to comply with the maximum overcoating times for the preceding epoxy MIO undercoat Item or Item .
In such circumstances an additional finish coat shall be applied on site to meet the requirements of subClause ..
Prior to applying the additional finish coat on site any damage to the paint system shall be restored in accordance with the requirements of Clause and the surface of the workshop applied finish coat shall be prepared by light abrading and wet cleaning .
Area D Type II i A Type II system incorporating a metal coating of thermally sprayed aluminium metal st coat Item mlitre nd coat Item mdft m rd coat Item mdft m th coat Item mdft m or mdft m with a total minimum dft of the paint system of m Items or or m Item may be used for Area D outer surfaces only where aluminium metal spray is identified as the required treatment of Area D friction surfaces in Series .. Parapets i Type IV For parapets to be erected in a Marine environment st nd and rd coats shall be applied in the workshop the th coat may be applied in the workshop or if within the intermediate coat overcoating time on site .
For parapets in an Inland environment all coats of paint may be applied in the workshop or on site .
ii Where sweep blast is the chosen method of adhesion promotion it shall be undertaken in accordance with BS EN ISO to surface roughness fine in accordance with BS EN ISO .
Fasteners i Unless otherwise specified in Appendix fasteners in steelwork shall be supplied with an anti corrosive protective coating comprising hot dip galvanizing in accordance with BS EN ISO or a similar alternative surface protection treatment which has a current BBA HAPAS Roads and Bridges Certificate or equivalent as an anticorrosion protective coating for use on steel fixings intended for use on steel highway structures .
For such similar alternative surface protection treatments prior to commencement of the works the Contractor shall provide to the Overseeing Organisation a copy of the BBA HAPAS Roads and Bridges Certificate or equivalent and the fasteners shall be installed and prepared prior to application of paint in accordance with the requirements of the Certificate .
ii Hot dip galvanized fasteners in steelwork that is to be painted shall have surfaces that are to be painted treated with an adhesion promoter Item before installation or alternatively after installation shall be cleaned with a solvent wipe to remove all traces of oil and grease and be abraded with coarse grade abrasive paper to sufficiently roughen the exposed galvanized surface in order to provide a suitable adhesion key and be painted with a coat of either Item Item or Item as an adhesion promoter .
iii After the joints are made and fasteners have been treated with an adhesion promoter fasteners shall be protected as specified for the joint material .
Amendment August Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Protection of Steelwork Against Corrosion TABLE A Requirements for Steel in Bridge Bearings and Metal Coated Fasteners Surface Preparation Area Description Method Standard Area A Exterior surfaces excepting wearing surfaces but including a mm minimum return on areas of top bearing plates or base plates in contact with grout or mortar Blast clean Sa Medium profile Area B Central area of top bearing plates in contact with grout or mortar Blast clean Sa Medium profile Area C Areas of top bearing plates or base plates in contact with structural steel components Blast clean Sa Medium profile Area D Exposed shop fasteners in components to be coated after assembly Blast clean Sa Medium profile Area E Concealed shop fasteners No requirement No requirement Area F Site fasteners for fixing bearings to piers or abutments and for fixing bridge components to bearings Restore metal coating as necessary to specified standard of cleanliness Restore metal coating as necessary to specified standard of cleanliness Amendment August Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Protection of Steelwork Against Corrosion TABLE B Requirements for Steel in Bridge Bearings and Metal Coated Fasteners Protective System Type V Applied over Metal Coating st Coat nd Coat rd Coat th Coat Minimum total dry film thickness of the paint system microns Area A and D Item No Aluminium metal spray or or if Item finish is specified Min dry film thickness per coat m m litre or Area B Item No Min dry film thickness per coat m Area C Item No Aluminium metal spray Min dry film thickness per coat m m litre Area F Item No Hot dip galvanize Adhesion promoter see Notes or or if Item finish is specified Min dry film thickness per coat m or Notes Finish Coats i Items or finish coats min .
dft m .
Item finish coat min .
dft m Area A and D i th coat for bearings for steel bridge beams brush applied on site colour to match finish on main steelwork .
ii Aluminium metal spray plus Items or are required on interfaces of machined surfaces of spreader plates and of bearing .
Areas A B C and D i Aluminium metal spray Items or and shall be applied at the bearing manufacturers works .
Item or shall be applied on site .
ii Items or shall not be overapplied and shall not be included in the overall thickness of the protective paint system .
Amendment August Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Protection of Steelwork Against Corrosion TABLE B Requirements for Steel in Bridge Bearings and Metal Coated Fasteners Continued Area F i Adhesion promoter Item shall be applied on site either before or after erection to surfaces to be painted .
Item coming into contact with adjacent paint coats shall be removed immediately .
Alternatively after installation surfaces to be painted shall be cleaned with a solvent wipe to remove all traces of oil and grease and be abraded with coarse grade abrasive paper to sufficiently roughen the exposed surface in order to provide a suitable adhesion key and be painted with a coat of either Item Item or Item as an adhesion promoter .
The remaining site coats shall be applied to exposed surfaces after erection .
Stripe coats for bearings only i Area F Stripe coats are not required for bearing site fasteners .
ii Area A and D A single stripe coat in Item paint shall be applied over Item at the bearing manufacturers works .
A second stripe coat in Item shall be applied on site .
Item coats shall be in contrasting shades eg medium grey natural grey .
Site Coats i Site coats shall be applied by the Contractor .
Paint suppliers i The requirements of Clause shall be noted .
Appendix i When completing Appendix the appropriate finish paints shall be selected from the protective system .
The letter references A B C etc shall be varied as appropriate and the application instructions arranged to suit .
Surface Preparation and Protective Systems for CCTV Masts Cantilever Masts Steel Lighting Columns and Bracket Arms General i Details of protective systems A G Aa and Ga Ab and Gb are given in Tables A B C. ii In the case of protective systems Aa and Ga Ab and Gb the Contractor may opt to apply the finishes in the workshop or if within the intermediate coat overcoating time at site unless otherwise specified .
iii When a white or pale tint finish is specified an additional finish coat may be required to ensure full opacity is achieved completely obliterating the Item undercoat .
iv Type A Aa and Ab protective systems are based on aluminium metal spray .
v Type G Ga and Gb protective systems are based on hot dip galvanizing .
vi Unless otherwise stated in Appendix the nominal ground level adjacent to a mast or column shall be assumed to be at a distance of mm below the door opening .
The ground section of planted masts and columns shall extend from the bottom of the mast or column to mm above the nominal ground level .
The ground section of flange mounted masts and columns applies where the flange is below ground level or is built over and shall extend from the bottom of the mast or column to mm above the nominal ground level .
The upper section of a mast or column with a ground section is the remainder of the mast or column above the ground section .
Protective system Amendment August Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Protection of Steelwork Against Corrosion TABLE A Requirements for CCTV Masts Cantilever Masts Steel Lighting Columns and Bracket Arms Systems System Environment Access A Inland Ready Aa and Ab Inland Difficult Marine Ready or Difficult G Inland Ready Ga and Gb Inland Difficult Marine Ready or Difficult TABLE B Requirements for CCTV Masts Cantilever Masts Steel Lighting Columns and Bracket Arms Surface Preparation System A Aa and Ab Location Method Surface Standard External surface Flange mounted and planted masts and columns overall surface preparation .
Blast clean Sa Medium profile Internal surfaces Flange mounted and planted masts and columns surface preparation from the bottom to mm above the door opening .
Blast clean where access allows or Hand tool preparation Sa Medium profile or Bright steel System G Ga and Gb External and internal surfaces Flange mounted and planted masts and columns overall surface preparation .
In accordance with subclause .
In accordance with subclause .
Amendment August Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Protection of Steelwork Against Corrosion TABLE C Requirements for CCTV Masts Cantilever Masts Steel Lighting Columns and Bracket Arms Protective Systems Type Metal Coating st Coat nd Coat Minimum total dry film thickness of the paint system microns A i External surfaces Flange mounted and planted masts and columns overall protection plus nd coat for ground section See .
vi .
Item No Thermally sprayed aluminium metal Application rateMin dry film thickness per coat m mlitre ii Internal surfaces Flange mounted and planted masts and columns protection applied from the bottom to mm above the door opening .
Item No Min dry film thickness per coat m Notes i Item finish coat colour to be black BS shade E ii Blast cleaning thermally sprayed aluminium metal and all workshop paint coats on external surfaces shall be returned on to edges at ends at door and other openings and under the base flange .
iii All paint coats shall be applied in the workshop .
iv Item shall be overcoated within hours .
Amendment August Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Protection of Steelwork Against Corrosion TABLE C Requirements for CCTV Masts Cantilever Masts Steel Lighting Columns and Bracket Arms Protective Systems continued Type Metal Coating st Coat nd Coat rd Coat Minimum total dry film thickness of the paint system microns Aa i External surfaces Flange mounted and upper section See .
vi of masts and columns overall protection .
Item No Thermally sprayed aluminium metal or or if Item finish is specified Application rateMin dry film thickness per coatm m litre or Overall protection for ground section See .
vi .
Item No Thermally sprayed aluminium metal or Application rateMin dry film thickness per coatm mlitre ii Internal surfaces Flange mounted and planted masts and columns protection applied from the bottom to mm above the door opening .
Item No Min dry film thickness per coatm Notes i Items or finish coats min .
dft m .
Item finish coat min .
dft m ii Item finish coat colour to be black BS shade E iii Blast cleaning thermally sprayed aluminium metal and all workshop paint coats on external surfaces and site paint coats where access permits shall be returned on to edges at ends at door and other openings and under the base flange .
iv All paint coats except finish coats shall be applied in the workshop .
Finish coats may be applied in the workshop or if within the intermediate coat overcoating time on site .
v Item or applied over thermally sprayed aluminium metal shall be overcoated within hours .
vi For external surfaces the upper section finish coat shall overlap the ground section finish coat by mm .
Amendment August Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Protection of Steelwork Against Corrosion TABLE C Requirements for CCTV Masts Cantilever Masts Steel Lighting Columns and Bracket Arms Protective Systems continued Type Metal Coating st Coat nd Coat rd Coat Minimum total dry film thickness of the paint system microns Ab i External surfaces Flange mounted and planted masts and columns overall protection .
Item No Thermally sprayed aluminium metal or Application rateMin dry film thickness per coatm ii Internal surfaces Flange mounted and planted masts and columns protection applied from the bottom to mm above the door opening .
Item No Min dry film thickness per coatm Notes i Blast cleaning thermally sprayed aluminium metal and all workshop paint coats on external surfaces and site paint coats where access permits shall be returned on to edges and mm inside at ends at door and other openings and under the base flange .
ii Item or shall be overcoated within hours .
iii The ground section See .
vi of masts and columns shall have an additional sacrificial steel section thickness of a minimum .mm above that needed in the design .
The additional thickness shall be recorded in which ever is appropriate of the following Part A of Appendix Typical Lighting Column and Bracket Data Sheet Part A of Appendix Typical CCTV Mast Data Sheet Part A of Appendix Typical Cantilever Mast Data Sheet .
Amendment August Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Protection of Steelwork Against Corrosion TABLE C Requirements for CCTV Masts Cantilever Masts Steel Lighting Columns and Bracket Arms Protective Systems continued Type Metal Coating st Coat nd Coat rd Coat Minimum total dry film thickness of the paint system microns G i External surfaces Flange mounted and planted masts and columns overall protection plus adhesion promotion and nd and rd coats for ground section See .
vi .
Item No Hot dip galvanize or sweep blast or or at ground section Min dry film thickness per coatm ii Internal surfaces Flange mounted and planted masts and columns overall protection Item No Hot dip galvanize Min dry film thickness per coatm Notes i Items or finish coat colour to be black BS shade E ii The requirements of subClause .
relating to the application of the first coat of paint need not apply for CCTV masts cantilever masts and steel lighting columns and bracket arms which remain in a workshop environment after hot dip galvanizing .
iii All workshop paint coats on external surfaces shall be returned on to edges and mm inside at ends at door and other openings and under the base flange .
iv All paint coats shall be applied in the workshop .
v Where sweep blast is the chosen method of adhesion promotion it shall be undertaken in accordance with BS EN ISO to surface roughness fine in accordance with BS EN ISO .
Amendment August Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Protection of Steelwork Against Corrosion TABLE C Requirements for CCTV Masts Cantilever Masts Steel Lighting Columns and Bracket Arms Protective Systems continued Type Metal Coating st Coat nd Coat rd Coat th Coat Minimum total dry film thickness of the paint system microns Ga i External surfaces Flange mounted and upper section See .
vi of masts and columns overall protection .
Item No Hot dip galvanize or sweep blast or or or if Item finish is specified Min dry film thickness per coatm or Overall protection for ground section See .
vi .
Item No Hot dip galvanize or sweep blast or or or Min dry film thickness per coatm ii Internal surfaces Overall protection .
Item No Hot dip galvanize Min dry film thickness per coatm Notes i Items or finish coats min .
dft m .
Item finish coat min .
dft m ii Items or finish coat colour to be black BS shade E iii The requirement of subClause .
relating to the application of the first coat of paint need not apply for CCTV masts cantilever masts and steel lighting columns and bracket arms which remain in a workshop environment after hot dip galvanizing .
iv All workshop paint coats on external surfaces and site paint coats where access permits shall be returned on to edges and mm inside at ends at door and other openings and under the base flange .
v All paint coats except finish coats shall be applied in the workshop .
Finish coats may be applied in the workshop or if within the intermediate coat overcoating time on site .
vi Where sweep blast is the chosen method of adhesion promotion it shall be undertaken in accordance with BS EN ISO to surface roughness fine in accordance with BS EN ISO .
vii For external surfaces the upper section finish coat shall overlap the ground section finish coat by mm .
Amendment August Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Protection of Steelwork Against Corrosion TABLE C Requirements for CCTV Masts Cantilever Masts Steel Lighting Columns and Bracket Arms Protective Systems continued Type Metal Coating st Coat nd Coat rd Coat th Coat Minimum total dry film thickness of the paint system microns Gb i External surfaces Flange mounted and upper section See .
vi of masts and columns overall protection .
Item No Hot dip galvanize or sweep blast or or if Item finish is specified Min dry film thickness per coatm or Overall protection for ground section See .
vi .
Item No Hot dip galvanize or sweep blast or or Min dry film thickness per coatm ii Internal surfaces Overall protection .
Item No Hot dip galvanize Min dry film thickness per coatm Notes i Items or finish coats min .
dft m .
Item finish coat min .
dft m ii Items or finish coat colour to be black BS shade E iii The requirements of subClause .
relating to the application of the first coat of paint need not apply for CCTV masts cantilever masts and steel lighting columns and bracket arms which remain in a workshop environment after hot dip galvanizing .
iv All workshop paint coats on external surfaces and site paint coats where access permits shall be returned on to edges and mm inside at ends at door and other openings and under the base flange .
v Where sweep blast is the chosen method of adhesion promotion it shall be undertaken in accordance with BS EN ISO to surface roughness fine in accordance with BS EN ISO .
vi For external surfaces the upper section finish coat shall overlap the ground section finish coat by mm .
vii The ground section See .
vi of masts and columns shall have an additional sacrificial steel section thickness of a minimum .mm above that needed in the design from the bottom of the column to at least mm above ground level .
The additional thickness shall be recorded in which ever is appropriate of the following Part A of Appendix Typical Lighting Column and Bracket Data Sheet Part A of Appendix Typical CCTV Mast Data Sheet Part A of Appendix Typical Cantilever Mast Data Sheet .
Amendment August Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Protection of Steelwork Against Corrosion Testing of Paints Provision of Samples Unless otherwise described in Appendix the Contractor shall provide unopened samples known as A samples for quality assurance purposes for each type of paint to be used for the works in accordance with this Clause .
In addition the Contractor shall supply at least ml samples known as B samples for application control purposes .
A and B samples are tested for paint composition andor properties against the values obtained during the approval testing of the original formulation and issued by the paint manufacturer to the certifying body .
A Samples A samples are required in all cases where more than litres of any one type of paint is to be used in the works .
A samples are not required for paints to be applied to bearings CCTV masts cantilever masts steel lighting columns and bracket arms .
For twopack systems separate samples of the base and activator shall be despatched by the Contractor to the testing authority .
The first A samples shall be taken from the first representative batch of each type of paint delivered to the fabricators workshop or to site .
Additional A samples of the paints subject to testing under subClause of this Clause shall be provided by the Contractor at a rate of one set of samples for each litres or part there of of each type of paint used in the works .
The Contractor shall also provide an A sample i of any replacement batch of paint subject to testing under subClause of this Clause ii returned paint described in subClause .
iii when the paint is showing unsatisfactory application characteristics under Clause .
The A samples shall be selected at random to be fully representative of each litres or part thereof of paint to be used in the Works .
Immediately after selection the A samples shall be despatched by the Contractor to the testing authority together with Appendix Form HAP .
Paint shall be supplied in sufficient time to allow for sampling and testing before the start of application .
Except for procedure trials paint shall not be applied until the A sample from the paint to be applied has been tested and confirmed as being satisfactory for use .
B Samples B samples are required in all cases including for paints to be applied to bearings CCTV masts cantilever masts steel lighting columns and bracket arms .
B samples shall be taken as spot checks with a minimum of every batch of paint being sampled .
The Contractor shall take B samples for twopack materials as separate unmixed samples of the base and activator cure components .
The B samples shall be taken following homogenization of the individual components and immediately prior to mixing the two components for use in the Works .
The samples shall be decanted directly into clean new and clearly labelled ml tins which shall be filled and immediately sealed prior to despatch to the testing authority .
Immediately after selection the B samples shall be despatched by the Contractor to the testing authority together with Appendix Form HAP .
Provision of ml Tins Packing and Transport of A and B Samples The Contractor shall provide ml tins with lids and lid clips for B samples at the start of painting or before any procedure trials required by Clause .
The quantity supplied shall be sufficient to avoid any delay in taking B samples throughout the work .
Amendment August Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Protection of Steelwork Against Corrosion The Contractor shall ensure that the lids of all tins of sample paint are securely clipped down when they are despatched for testing .
The Contractor shall be responsible for handling packing as necessary prompt despatch and transit of A and B samples including collection of samples from the testing authority for use or disposal as appropriate following satisfactory testing and reporting .
Overseeing Organisation shall report back to the Supervising Firm as stated on Appendix Form HAP all results of the testing who shall then notify the Contractor of the results .
Storage Requirements and Keeping Periods for Paints On delivery to the workshop or site paint shall be unloaded directly into one or more secure paint stores which shall be located within metres of the painting area .
Insulation and means of heating and ventilating shall be provided as necessary to maintain the temperature of paint stores between C and C .
If at any time or place paint in tins painters kettles or airless spray containers is allowed to reach temperatures outside the C and C limits or the paint manufacturers recommended storage temperature the paint shall be discarded and not used in the works .
Two pack products which produce an exothermic reaction when mixed may be allowed to exceed the specified higher temperature limit .
The Contractor shall also implement any additional storage requirements recommended by the paint manufacturer .
Unless excepted in accordance with subClause of this Clause paint which has not been used within the shelf life recommended by the manufacturer or within months of the date of manufacture whichever is the lesser shall be discarded or returned to the manufacturer and not used in the works .
Chemically or moisture cured paints shall not be used after the expiry of the pot life stipulated by the paint manufacturer .
They shall be discarded on expiry of the pot life or at the end of each working daynight whichever is the less .
All other paints in opened tins or open containers including painters kettles shall be returned to store and kept in sealed containers with not more than ullage .
Exceptionally components of twopack epoxy paints may have their shelf life extended to months provided that the Contractor returns the paints to the paint manufacturer and ascertains that the manufacturer examines the contents of each tin and reconstitutes the paints as necessary so that such paints are equal in all respects to the paints described in the Contract .
The Contractor shall provide a Certificate of Conformity confirming that such paints have been inspected and where necessary reconstituted and conform in all respects to the Contract .
Each tin of reconstituted paint returned to the workshop or site by the manufacturer shall have an additional label affixed stating Extended Shelf Life to date .
The previous date marking shall remain and not be obscured .
A set of A samples shall be taken and be submitted for testing in accordance with Clause from all batches of paint that have their shelf life extended .
Application of Paint Paint shall be supplied from the Contractors paint store to the painters ready for application the only adjustment of formulation permitted being as described in subClause ..
In exceptional circumstances any addition of solvent necessary to improve application shall be in accordance with the paint manufacturers instructions and be carried out by the paint manufacturer preferably in the paint process plant with adequate equipment and controlled measurements .
Paint shall be applied only to surfaces that have been prepared and cleaned to the specified standard as described in this Series .
Amendment August Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Protection of Steelwork Against Corrosion Unless otherwise described in Appendix a coat of paint in a system shall be applied by one of the following methods i brush B ii airless spray AS iii air assisted spray .
Application of paint by roller is not permitted .
Paint shall not be applied when the following conditions will apply during paint application andor curing i when the temperature of the surfaces to be coated is less than C above the Dew Point andor when the ambient air temperature is at or below C or the relative humidity is above in an enclosed workshop or on site or outside the temperatures and humidities recommended in the paint manufacturers data sheet ii during rain snow fog mist or in a dust laden atmosphere iii when moisture is likely to be deposited on the surface by condensation or rain iv when windborne dust may adhere to and contaminate the paint .
All workshop painting of steelwork shall be carried out in a fully enclosed weatherproof workshop .
Before starting the procedure trials described in Clause the Contractor shall make available details of the overall wet film thickness for each coat he proposes to apply .
He shall also make available information as to the total amount of paint that he expects to use for each coat of each system for which procedure trials are required .
The calculation of the amount of paint to be used shall be based on the volume solids plus an allowance for waste .
The following requirements on paint film thicknesses shall apply i Wet film thickness gauges shall be used where practicable to check that the wet film thickness is not less than minimum dry film thickness mdft x volume solids ii During the application of a paint system the Contractor shall ensure that the progressive total thickness of the applied coats shall allow the specified minimum total dft of the system to be attained without exceeding overall the proposed wet film thicknesses referred to in subClause of this Clause by more than .
iii In no case shall the total dry film thickness of a paint system or the mdft of the last undercoat and finish be less than that specified in Appendix Form HAP New Works Paint System Sheet .
iv The local dry film thickness for any primer shall not exceed the specified mdft by more than and for other paints by more than .
Each coat of paint of a specified system shall have satisfactory adhesion which shall be determined by testing to ASTM D Type III .
A minimum value of kgfcm psi shall be achieved before any paint film detachment occurs .
The satisfactory adhesion of the coating system shall be confirmed by representative testing .
Damage resulting from the adhesion testing shall be restored in accordance with Clause .
Each applied specified paint coat shall be free from defects including bloom cratering pinholing blistering rivelling sagging bittiness dry spray and cissing etc .
The presence of these defects shall be determined by unaided visual assessment supplemented by other appropriate test methods .
The presence of pinholing or porosity in the completed paint system except at corners bolted joints or welds shall be determined by using low or highvoltage detectors in accordance with ASTM G. The finished system shall have an even and uniform appearance with no defects and the finishing paint in visually sensitive areas shall be from the same batch .
Amendment August Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Protection of Steelwork Against Corrosion The gloss level of the finishing coat shall be established before the procedure trials .
A painted tin plate reference panel mm x mm shall be provided by the Contractor for this purpose .
All successive coats in a system including the stripe coats shall be contrasting colours to aid identification .
Before starting the procedure trials described in Clause the Contractor shall provide a reference panel coated with the steppedback paint system to indicate the contrast between each coat of paint .
Stripe Coats Stripe coats shall be applied to all welds and all fasteners including washers and to all external corners except those of RHS .
The first stripe coat using second undercoat paint shall be applied over the primer sealer or adhesion promoter .
When a second stripe coat is specified in Appendix it shall be separated from the first stripe coat by an undercoat .
All stripe coats shall be applied by brush .
A solvent shall be used to remove all traces of oil and grease from fasteners before treatment with an adhesion promoter .
The Contractor shall enter the details of the stripe coats he has selected in Appendix Form HAP New Works Paint System Sheet giving the Item No .
colour and method of application .
Square solid infill bars shall after the second undercoat has been applied be given an extra coat of first undercoat in lieu of stripe coats .
Exposure Times for Prepared Steel Surfaces and for Metal Coatings .
Exposure Times and Treatment of Item and Overcoating Times for Paints Clean steel prepared by dry blast cleaning or bright steel prepared by abrading or by grinding shall be primed within hours .
Clean steel prepared by wet blast cleaning only shall be primed within hours of being dry enough for painting .
Clean steel prepared by combined wetdry blast cleaning shall be primed within hours of dry blast cleaning .
Steel or steelwork blast cleaned and primed at the mills or in the workshop shall be overcoated within weeks .
The primed surfaces shall only be exposed outside for a maximum of weeks of the week period .
Prepared surfaces affected by detrimental contamination or corrosion shall be restored before overcoating .
Workshop steelwork which has been thermally metal sprayed shall be primed and sealed within hours .
The next coat shall be applied within hours .
Workshop prepared steel surfaces unsealed thermally sprayed aluminium metal coating and undercoats except final workshop undercoat shall not be exposed outside .
All surfaces treated with Item except those of fasteners which have been treated in compliance with subClause .
shall after initial drying be wet cleaned in compliance with subClause .
taking care not to remove adhering Item and allowed to dry before overcoating .
The first coat of paint shall be applied within hours of the surfaces treated with Item being first dry enough for painting over .
When hot dip galvanized steel is to be protected by a paint system the adhesion promoter shall be applied not later than days after delivery to site .
When hot dip galvanized steelwork is to be erected in a Marine environment and is to be protected by a paint system the adhesion promoter and the workshop coats shall be applied within days after hot dip galvanizing .
A first workshop undercoat shall be overcoated within hours .
Further shop coats shall be applied within hour intervals per coat .
Amendment August Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Protection of Steelwork Against Corrosion The application of sealant in gaps in compliance with subClause .
may be carried out either before or after application as appropriate of the first coat of paint to be applied to the completed joints or assembled plies .
Prepared steel surfaces and thermally sprayed aluminium metal coatings which have been restored also paint coats and hot dip galvanizing which have been prepared after surface damage or deterioration shall be overcoated with the sealer primer or first undercoat as appropriate before the surfaces have been affected by moisture and in any case within hours .
On site steel surfaces and thermally sprayed aluminium metal coating shall be primed or sealed within hours and shall have the following coat applied within hours .
The next coat shall be applied within a further hours .
Finish coats shall be applied within days of application of the preceding undercoat .
Procedure Trials Unless otherwise described in Appendix the Contractor shall carry out workshop and site procedure trials of the protective system when more than litres of any coat of paint are to be applied to Difficult Access roadbridge footbridge and gantry steelwork .
Procedure trials are not required for systems applied to joints or for hot dip galvanizing only .
The procedure trials shall be completed at least ten days before the start of application of the systems on the main steelwork .
The trials shall be carried out with the labour methods and equipment to be used for the work .
The Contractor shall provide for the workshop trials samples of steel from m to m representing the main steelwork hot dip galvanized when necessary .
The Contractor shall demonstrate his ability to carry out surface preparation by blast cleaning and by using power assisted tools to apply thermally sprayed aluminium metal coating where specified and the paints he has selected .
The Contractor shall provide sufficient paint for the trials in containers of the size to be used for the works .
Thermally sprayed aluminium metal coating application and painting of the main steelwork shall not be started in the workshop or on site until procedure trials have been completed satisfactorily .
Any adjustment to the registered paint formulations shown to be required by the trials other than an adjustment to the solvent shall be agreed with the Overseeing Organisation and made at the paint manufacturers works .
The Contractor shall carry out further procedure trials whenever he employs replacement skilled labour or proposes to use equipment of a different type .
Storage and Transport of Steel and Fabricated Steelwork Steel awaiting fabrication for the works and uncoated steelwork shall be adequately protected from contaminants liable to cause heavy rusting and possibly pitting of the surfaces .
Steelwork shall not be loaded for transport until the paint system is sufficiently hard for handling .
During storage steelwork shall be kept clear of the ground and shall be laid out or stacked so as to prevent water or dirt accumulating on or against any of the surfaces .
Suitable packings shall be placed between layers of stacked steelwork .
When cover is provided it shall be ventilated sufficiently to keep condensation to a minimum .
Components weighing less than one tonne shall be kept in a storage area away from their erection point in order to minimise damage to protective coatings .
Lengths of parapet and individual steel lighting columns and masts shall be supported on timber and precautions taken to prevent damage to their protective coatings and ingress of water .
They shall only be positioned adjacent to their erection point immediately before erection .
If the planned erection time is delayed by more than hours the components shall be returned to the storage area .
Amendment August Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Protection of Steelwork Against Corrosion Hot dip galvanized components shall be transported and stored under dry and well ventilated conditions to avoid wet storage staining .
If stored outdoors close contact of surfaces of components shall be avoided and suitable packing shall be placed between components and to keep the components clear of the ground .
Components shall be stored wherever possible at a slight angle to allow water run off .
When cover is provided it shall be ventilated sufficiently to keep condensation to a minimum .
If damage to coatings is excessive or may be difficult to deal with satisfactorily after erection the Contractor shall restore the coatings before erection .
Surfaces in Contact with Concrete Unless otherwise described in Appendix or in Series .
if applicable thermally sprayed aluminium metal coating and all workshop paint coats shall be returned mm into the concretesteelwork contact area .
Where aluminium metal spray which has been sealed only is returned into the contact area it shall be given a coat of Item of microns mdft not later than hours before concreting .
Application of the paint outside the contact area shall be prevented by masking if necessary .
Hot dip galvanized coatings shall be applied overall .
Unless otherwise described in Appendix or in Series .
if applicable concrete may come into direct contact with the hot dip galvanized surfaces .
Form HAP New Works Paint System Sheet Appendix Form HAP Paint Data Sheet Appendix As soon as the Contract has been awarded the Contractor shall prepare and make available a copy of Form HAP New Works Paint System Sheet Appendix of which he shall have completed Parts to together with relevant copies of Form HAP Paint Data Sheet Appendix .
Following any relevant approvals in accordance with the Contract and recorded in Part of Form HA P New Works Paint System Sheet Appendix Forms HAP New Works Paint System Sheet Appendix shall be adopted for the works .
Access and Lighting Without prejudice to the Conditions of Contract access for inspection shall be provided and erected by the Contractor .
The access shall be adequate in all respects for inspection purposes .
Manual surface preparation and coating application work shall not be carried out when light intensity at the workface is less than lux .
When the natural light intensity falls below this level the Contractor shall install and maintain temporary lighting which shall provide a minimum light intensity of lux over at least .
m at the workface during the work and also for inspection when required .
Additional Requirements for the Protection of Steel in Bridge Bearings Applicable Clauses Unless otherwise described in Appendix the work described in this Clause shall be carried out in compliance with Appendix and with Clauses to and the following Supply of Coatings Information including the name of the paint manufacturer required for completing Form HAP New Works Paint System Sheet Appendix for the bearings shall be obtained by the Contractor from the bearing manufacturer .
Amendment August Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Protection of Steelwork Against Corrosion Item and Epoxy MIO paints when required for application on site shall be obtained from the manufacturer of the workshop applied coats .
Paint applied to the bearings on site to match the bridge steelwork paint system shall be obtained from the manufacturer of that system .
Additional Requirements for the Protection of CCTV Masts Cantilever Masts Steel Lighting Columns and Bracket Arms Applicable Clauses Unless otherwise described in Appendix the work described in this Clause shall be carried out in compliance with Appendix and with Clauses to and the following Surface Preparation In the workshop any CCTV mast steel lighting column or component material the surfaces of which show rust pitting when viewed by normal vision after surface preparation shall be discarded and not used for the works .
On site any CCTV mast cantilever masts steel lighting column and bracket arms or component material the internal surfaces of which show rust pitting when viewed by normal vision after surface preparation shall be discarded and not used for the works .
Stripe Coats For CCTV Masts cantilever masts and steel lighting columns and bracket arms only one stripe coat in undercoat paint is required .
For protective system Types A and G the stripe coat shall be applied before the last undercoat of the total protective system in the workshop or on site as appropriate .
All stripe coats shall be applied by brush .
Adhesion Strength of Aluminium Metal Spray For aluminium metal sprayed CCTV masts cantilever masts and steel lighting columns and bracket arms the strength of adhesion of thermally sprayed aluminium metal coating to the steel shall not be less than kgfcm when tested by means of a tensile test in accordance with BS EN ISO .
Amendment August F Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Protection of Steelwork Against Corrosion NATIONAL ALTERATIONS OF THE OVERSEEING ORGANISATION OF SCOTLAND SE Paint and Similar Protective Coatings The term paint shall be deemed to refer also to similar protective coatings including specialist coatings such as grease paints .
The paints permitted for use by the Overseeing Organisation in the works are listed in the Manual of Paints for Structural Steelwork which is included in BD DMRB .. and which also contains details of the quality assurance scheme for paints and similar protective coatings .
All paints shall have a current BBA HAPAS Roads and Bridges Certificate or equivalent .
All paints shall be supplied in sealed containers of not more than litre capacity and these shall be used in order of delivery .
Each container shall be of the completely removable lid type and be clearly marked on the side to show the name of the manufacturer registered description of the material including purpose eg whether primer undercoat or finish colour Item No paint manufacturers reference number batch number and date of manufacture .
Where date of manufacture is coded the Contractor shall provide the code key .
The Contractor shall ensure that the properties of the paints he has selected are suitable for the conditions in the workshop and on site including temperature and humidity and that he is able to apply the paints satisfactorily to all parts of the structure in these conditions .
Unless otherwise described in Appendix all paints forming any one protective system or overlapping systems shall be obtained from the same manufacturer as named by the Contractor in Form HAP New Works Paint System Sheet Appendix .
The requirements of subClauses .
and and their respective Tables shall apply in Scotland .
SE Testing of Paints Unless otherwise described in the Contract the Contractor shall provide unopened litre samples known as A samples of each type of paint to be used in the works for testing for quality assurance purposes .
A samples shall be taken from the first batch of each type of paint delivered to the fabricators workshop or site .
In addition during the painting work the Contractor shall supply ml samples known as B samples taken from painters kettles or from nozzles of airless spray guns directly into clean new tins .
For twopack systems separate unmixed samples of the base and activator shall be dispatched by the Contractor to the testing authority approved by the Overseeing Organisation .
Depending upon the importance of the proposed painting application the Overseeing Organisation may elect to have A samples sent for limited testing by a local paint testing firm or other agency approved by the Overseeing Organisation .
Appropriate forms for use in connection with limited testing shall be derived from the standard paint forms and shall be agreed with the Overseeing Organisation .
The Contractor shall supply paint in sufficient time to allow for sampling and testing of A samples at least weeks prior to the start of application .
The Contractor shall be responsible for handling provision of clean tins for samples packing as necessary and prompt despatch and transit of all samples for testing .
A and B samples are tested for paint composition andor properties against the original formulation issued by the paint manufacturer to the certifying body .
The requirements of subClauses .
and shall apply in Scotland .
Except for procedure trials painting shall not start until the first of the A samples are confirmed as satisfactory .
Amendment August S Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Protection of Steelwork Against Corrosion SE Additional Requirements for the Protection of Steel in Bridge Bearings Applicable Clauses Unless otherwise described in the Contract the work described in this Clause shall be carried out in compliance with Appendix and with Clauses to inclusive .
Supply of Coatings Information including the name of the paint manufacturer required for completing Form HAP New Works Paint System Sheet Appendix for the bearings shall be obtained by the Contractor from the bearing manufacturer .
Item and MIO Epoxy paints when required for application on site shall be obtained from the manufacturer of the workshop applied coats .
Paint applied to the bearings on site to match the bridge steelwork paint system shall be obtained from the manufacturer of that system .
Amendment August SF MANUAL OF CONTRACT DOCUMENTS FOR HIGHWAY WORKS VOLUME SPECIFICATION FOR HIGHWAY WORKS SERIES WATERPROOFING FOR CONCRETE STRUCTURES Contents Clause Title Page General Protection of Bridge Deck Waterproofing During Construction Materials for Waterproofing Concrete Bridge Decks Materials for Waterproofing Below Ground Concrete Surfaces Workmanship for Waterproofing Concrete Bridge Decks Workmanship for Waterproofing Below Ground Concrete Surfaces Integrity Testing of Concrete Bridge Deck Waterproofing Repair and Replacement of Bridge Deck Waterproofing Amendment May Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Waterproofing for Concrete Structures WATERPROOFING FOR CONCRETE STRUCTURES General The surface finish for new bridge decks between parapet upstands and to top of buried structures to be waterproofed shall be Class U finish in accordance with subClause ..
Existing waterproofing systems to bridge decks between parapet upstands are to be repaired or replaced in accordance with Clause .
Protection of Bridge Deck Waterproofing During Construction On any structure providing no damage results plant and equipment all fitted only with rubber tyres may stand or travel on permitted waterproofing systems solely for the purposes of laying an additional protective layer or surfacing course on that structure .
Rollers shall not be permitted to stand or travel directly on the waterproofing system .
Where it is necessary for plant equipment or traffic to stand or travel on a bridge deck that has been waterproofed with a permitted system before the laying of an additional protective layer suitable temporary protection shall be provided .
All such plant and equipment shall have its tyre treads regularly inspected and any embedded hard objects removed .
Temporary protection shall be provided where damage to the waterproofing protective layer or additional protective layer could result from particular site traffic .
The protective layer of a permitted two layer waterproofing system or any protective layer additional to that included as part of a permitted waterproofing system shall be laid immediately after the waterproofing layers bonding agent has set or cured .
Where a waterproofing membrane also serves as an adhesive for the protective layer any additional protective layer shall not be laid until the liquid waterproofing membraneadhesive has set or cured .
Materials for Waterproofing Concrete Bridge Decks Permitted Waterproofing Systems Permitted waterproofing systems incorporated in the Permanent Works shall have a current BBA British Board of Agrment Roads and Bridges Agrment Certificate which shall be registered with the Overseeing Organisation .
Prior to commencement of the Works the Contractor shall provide to the Overseeing Organisation a copy of the BBA Roads and Bridges Agrment Certificate appropriate to the work to be undertaken .
The procedure shall be repeated for each subsequent operation either for a different system or a different location .
Additional Bituminous Protection Bituminous protection where required as an additional protective layer shall comply with BS recipe type F surface course mixture designation except that .
of the total mix shall be inorganic red oxide and regarded as part of the filler content where the additional protective layer is required to be tinted .
Materials for Waterproofing Below Ground Concrete Surfaces Primer for Tar and Bitumen Primer for sealing concrete surfaces prior to waterproofing shall be compatible with the selected tar or bitumen waterproofing material .
The viscosity of the primer shall be such that it penetrates the concrete without forming a skin .
Tar Tar shall comply with BS of viscosity grade within the range C equiviscous temperature .
Cut Back Bitumen Cut back bitumen shall comply with BS Part of viscosity grade seconds .
Amendment November Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Waterproofing for Concrete Structures Proprietary Materials Subject to any restrictions specified in Appendix proprietary materials may be used .
Workmanship for Waterproofing Concrete Bridge Decks Permitted Waterproofing Systems Permitted waterproofing systems shall be supplied and installed in accordance with the BBA Roads and Bridges Agrment Certificate .
The formation of defects affecting the integrity of the membrane including pinblow holes continuous or noncontinuous and blisters in the waterproofing shall i be made good by repair in accordance with the BBA Roads and Bridges Agrment Certificate before any subsequent layers are applied or ii require the system to be replaced .
For sheet membranes bonded with oxidized bitumen the heating and temperature of the bitumen shall comply with the manufacturers requirements within the limits stated in BS Part .
A means of checking the bitumen temperature shall be provided .
Sheet membranes shall wherever possible be laid in the direction that the additional protective layer or surfacing will be laid and compacted by roller .
Unless otherwise specified in the BBA Roads and Bridges Agrment Certificate joints between sheets shall be lapped with end laps of at least mm and side laps of at least mm .
The joints shall be arranged so that i at no point are there more than three thicknesses of sheeting and ii water will drain away from the exposed edge .
Permitted waterproofing systems shall be laid to follow the contours of the concrete surface .
Laps ridges and ripples in waterproofing sheeting and peaks and steps at butt joints in waterproofing boards shall not be greater than mm in height .
Additional Bituminous Protection Bituminous protection complying with subClause .
shall be laid on the clean and dry substrate and compacted in accordance with Clause to the areas and thickness shown on the Drawings .
Bond Between Additional Protective Layer or Surfacing and the Waterproofing System The additional protective layer or surfacing laid on the waterproofing system shall be fully bonded to the system for the life of the system .
The bond shall be achieved by either i the binder within the directly applied additional protective layer or surfacing or ii a separate tack coat which has been assessed by the BBA as part of the registration procedure and details of which are given on the BBA Roads and Bridges Agrment Certificate .
Where the tack coat is of the type activated by the heat of the succeeding bituminous layer the rolling temperature of this layer shall be sufficient to ensure adhesion .
Workmanship for Waterproofing Below Ground Concrete Surfaces Priming for Tar and Bitumen Unless otherwise described in Appendix and prior to the application of the selected tar or bitumen waterproofing concrete surfaces shall be thoroughly sealed with an evenly applied primer .
The primer shall be well brushed in and not allowed to pond in any depressions .
Tar For tar waterproofing two coats of tar shall be hot applied at a rate of spread per coat of litrem .
The first coat shall be allowed to dry before the second coat is applied .
Cut Back Bitumen For bitumen waterproofing two coats of cut back bitumen shall be hot applied at a rate of spread per coat of .
litrem .
The first coat shall be allowed to dry before the second coat is applied .
Proprietary Materials For proprietary materials the method of application rate of spread number of coats and other requirements for each system shall be as described in the product literature supplied by the manufacturer .
Amendment May Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Waterproofing for Concrete Structures Integrity Testing of Concrete Bridge Deck Waterproofing Waterproofing systems to concrete bridge decks shall be tested where required in Appendix in accordance with the requirements therein to verify the integrity of the waterproofing .
Repair and Replacement of Bridge Deck Waterproofing The repair and replacement of existing bridge deck waterproofing systems shall comply with the requirements of Clauses and and any additional requirements described in Appendix .
F Amendment May MANUAL OF CONTRACT DOCUMENTS FOR HIGHWAY WORKS VOLUME SPECIFICATION FOR HIGHWAY WORKS Amendment February SERIES BRIDGE BEARINGS Contents Clause Title Page General F Surface Preparation and Protection Against Corrosion F Bedding Mortars F Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Bridge Bearings Amendment February F BRIDGE BEARINGS General This Series is part of the Specification for Highway Works .
Whilst this Series is particularly relevant to the subject matter in its title it must be read in conjunction with the general requirements in Series and and with all other Series relevant to the specification for the particular works to be undertaken .
Bridge bearings shall be in accordance with this Series and contract specific Appendix .
They shall conform to BS EN and the Contractor shall submit a Declaration of Performance for each bearing to the Overseeing Organisation a minimum of four weeks prior to the installation of the bearing .
The Declaration of Performance shall demonstrate that the bearing meets the requirements of the relevant part of BS EN and the performance requirements stated in contract specific Appendix .
The system of attestation of conformity or assessment and verification of consistency of performance AVCP as detailed in Annex ZA of the relevant part of BS EN shall be that which has intended use requirements on individual bearings which are critical .
The Contractor shall undertake the design of bearings detailed in contract specific Appendix .
The design shall be in accordance with requirements stated in contract specific Appendix .
The Contractor shall undertake the contract compliance testing detailed in contract specific Appendix in accordance with requirements given in contract specific Appendix .
The Contractor shall provide reports on the transport storage and installation of the bearings installed and information on the required maintenance in accordance with the relevant parts of BS EN and requirements given in contract specific Appendix .
This shall include identifying any requirements for the bearings to be replaced in the future .
The reports shall be submitted to the Overseeing Organisation within the timescale stated in contract specific Appendix .
The reports shall include the following as appropriate i details of clamping required during transport storage and lifting ii details for protection measures for improved durability including skirts concertinas or housing assemblies this shall include details of how to remove maintain or replace these for inspection andor maintenance of the bearing iii installation and removal methods including sequences and timings iv as installed information including confirmation of removal of any temporary measures for example transit bolts or props v specific maintenance requirements including cleaning grease measurements and the required intervals .
Surface Preparation and Protection Against Corrosion Unless otherwise stated in contract specific Appendix the surface preparation and corrosion protection of bearings shall comply with Series Bedding Mortars Bedding mortars shall be in accordance with Clause .
March MANUAL OF CONTRACT DOCUMENTS FOR HIGHWAY WORKS VOLUME SPECIFICATION FOR HIGHWAY WORKS SERIES BRIDGE EXPANSION JOINTS AND SEALING OF GAPS Contents Clause Title Page General Installation of Bridge Deck Expansion Joints Sealing of Gaps Protective Treatment Amendment May Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Bridge Expansion Joints and Sealing of Gaps BRIDGE EXPANSION JOINTS AND SEALING OF GAPS General Bridge deck expansion joints and sealing of gaps in bridges and structures shall be as described in Appendices and respectively and shall comply with the requirements of this Series .
Only bridge deck expansion joints which have been registered with the Overseeing Organisation in accordance with the requirements of BD shall be incorporated into the Works .
Storage and installation of joints jointing materials sealants and other associated items shall be in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
The same joint system seal or sealant shall continue across the full width of the deck including footway verge hard strip hard shoulder and central reserve .
Different joint systems shall not be combined at one end of a deck unless otherwise specified in Appendix .
Installation of Bridge Deck Expansion Joints The positioning of holding down bolts and anchorage systems shall be checked for accuracy before the casting of concrete commences .
Templates or shuttering shall be fixed to box out the concrete for the joint and to locate holding down bolts or anchorage pockets .
Threaded parts shall be protected kept clean and free from rust .
Where the surfacing and bridge deck waterproofing are to be removed to accommodate the bridge joint these shall be cut to a clean straight line for the full depth of the surfacing without damage to the concrete substrate .
Before installation of the joint the concrete surfaces shall be free from laitance sound clean and comply with the manufacturers requirements .
The expansion joint and the bridge deck waterproofing shall be formed so that a watertight seal is provided .
Where prefabricated units are used the seal between each unit shall be made watertight and in addition a secondary waterproofing system in the form of a continuous membrane shall be installed .
The gap width shall be set in relation to the prevailing deck temperature with the joint gap sides parallel as described in Appendix .
Seals which are not held in metal runners shall remain in compression for the full range of joint movement .
Expansion joints shall be of uniform width and straight alignment and shall be accurately set and finished and aligned with the finished surface .
During the placing and hardening of the bedding and bonding materials movement between the joint and the substrate shall be prevented .
Where required in Appendix subsurface and belowjoint drainage systems shall be designed provided and installed in accordance with the requirements therein and the joint manufacturers recommendations .
The complete drainage system shall be accessible for cleaning and on completion of the joint the drainage system shall be checked and cleared of any obstructions .
Before vehicles traffic the joints temporary covers capable of withstanding vehicular loading shall be provided over expansion joints during and after their installation as appropriate for protection .
Sealing of Gaps Sealant materials and water stops shall be as described in Appendix .
Joint filler board in any gaps shall comply with Clause .
Joint filler board and sealant materials shall be compatible .
Gunned or poured sealants shall be placed when the temperature of the structure is such that any movements which may take place will not cause the strain in the sealant to exceed the maximum value recommended by the manufacturer .
Immediately before sealing the Contractor shall ensure that the sides of the joint gap are clean dry and free from loose material .
Any concrete projections into the gap shall be removed .
Where a bond breaker in the form of a compressible strip is placed between the filler board and the sealant it shall be compatible with both materials .
All seals shall where practicable be poured or fixed in one continuous length .
Where required a joint Amendment May Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Bridge Expansion Joints and Sealing of Gaps F in a seal shall be located and formed in accordance with the manufacturers instructions .
Where gunned or poured sealants are visible the concrete shall be masked on either side of the joint with suitable tape prior to the placement of the sealant to prevent its adherence to the exposed concrete surface .
The tape shall not stain the concrete surface .
Protective Treatment Surface preparation and protection of metal components of expansion joints shall be in accordance with the joint manufacturers recommendations unless otherwise specified in Appendix .
Amendment May MANUAL OF CONTRACT DOCUMENTS FOR HIGHWAY WORKS VOLUME SPECIFICATION FOR HIGHWAY WORKS SERIES BRICKWORK BLOCKWORK AND STONEWORK Contents Clause Title Page Cement Aggregates Water Mortar Lime Mortar Masonry Units Bricks Blocks Reconstructed Stone Natural Stone Reinforcement Anchorages Dowels Fixings and Ties Brickwork and Blockwork Stonework Cold Weather Working Protection of New Work Brick Block and Stone Facework Fixed to Concrete Brick and Other Works for Unreinforced Masonry Arch Bridges Unreinforced Masonry Arch Bridges Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Brickwork Blockwork and Stonework BRICKWORK BLOCKWORK AND STONEWORK Cement Cement shall be one of the following i Portland cement conforming to BS EN ii Masonry cement conforming to BS EN iii Sulfateresisting Portland cement conforming to BS where described in Appendix .
Aggregates Fine aggregate shall conform to BS EN .
Water If water for the Works is not available from a water companys supply the Contractor shall ensure that the water complies with the guidance given in BS EN .
The sulfate content of the water shall be tested in accordance with Test No .
in TRL Report .
The water shall not be used if the sulfate content exceeds .
g of sulfate as SO per litre .
Water from the sea or tidal rivers shall not be used .
Mortar Mortar Work Other Than Unreinforced Masonry Arch Bridges Cement mortar for brickwork blockwork and stonework shall be mixed in the proportions given in Table according to the mortar designation described in Appendix .
The chloride ion content of the mortar determined in accordance with BS EN shall not exceed .
of the mass of cement for mortar made with Portland cement and .
for mortar made with sulfateresisting Portland cement .
Calcium chloride or admixtures containing calcium chloride shall not be used .
For work in which cement mortars of designation ii or iii as defined in BS are required the Contractor shall select the appropriate mortar from one of the mixes for the designation given in Table .
If the work is to be carried out in frosty weather and the bricks are wet when laid then a cement sand mortar with an air entraining plasticiser shall be used .
Admixtures shall conform to BS EN and any additional performance requirements stated in Appendix and shall not contain calcium chloride .
TABLE Mortar Proportions by Volume Mortar Cement Masonry Cement designation lime sand cement sand sand with plasticiser i to ii  to   to  to iii to  to The inclusion of lime in mortar designation i is optional .
The proportions of lime given in Table are for lime putty conforming to BS EN .
If the lime is measured as the dry hydrate the amount may be increased up to .
volumes for each volume of lime putty .
Where a range of sand contents is given in Table the higher shall be used for sand that is well graded and the lower for coarse or uniformly fine sand .
Mortar shall be mixed thoroughly either by hand or mechanically until its colour and consistency are uniform .
The constituent materials shall be accurately gauged allowance being made for bulking of sand .
Mortar shall be made in small quantities only as and when required .
Mortar which has begun to set or which has been mixed for a period of more than one hour in the case of a mortar designation i or more than two hours in the case of other designations shall be discarded .
A set of mortar prisms shall be made for each type of mortar designated to be used and shall be tested in accordance with subClause .. Lime Mortar Lime mortar shall consist of one part by volume of hydrated lime conforming to BS EN to .
parts by volume of sand .
Amendment May Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Brickwork Blockwork and Stonework Masonry Units Bricks Brick Work Other than Unreinforced Masonry Arch Bridges Clay masonry units bricks shall conform to the particular requirements of BS EN as described in Appendix .
The determination of sulfate content for the soluble salt content test shall be in accordance with Test No .
in TRL Report .
Calcium silicate bricks sand lime and flint lime shall comply with BS EN .
Bricks beneath frames for chambers and gullies and for the construction of brick chambers shall unless otherwise described in Appendix be HD type Class B clay engineering bricks conforming to BS EN and the performance characteristics given in Table TABLE Performance Characteristic Requirements Performance characteristic Reference Clay engineering bricks Class B Compressive strength N mm BS EN Water absorption by mass and also when used as DPC units and Net dry density kgm BS EN and BS EN and DPC and Freezethaw resistance category BS EN F Active soluble salts content category BS EN S or concrete bricks or blocks conforming to BS EN and BS EN having an average crushing strength value of not less than Nmm when used for surface water drainage or special purpose concrete bricks having a minimum cement content of kgm when used for foul drainage .
Blocks Concrete blocks shall comply with the particular requirements of BS EN and BS EN as described in Appendix .
Amendment May Reconstructed Stone Reconstructed stone shall be used only in blockwork and shall comply with BS EN and any particular requirements described in Appendix .
Natural Stone Building stone shall be of the type and quality described in Appendix .
Reinforcement Wire or fabric laid between brickwork or blockwork shall be stainless steel to BS EN designation . . or .
softened condition excluding free machining specifications .
Steel bars laid between brickwork or blockwork shall be stainless steel to BS designation or softened condition excluding free machining specifications .
Anchorages Dowels Fixings and Ties Anchorages dowels fixings and ties shall be stainless steel designation . . or .
softened condition excluding free machining specifications complying with the requirements given in the British Standards listed in Table .
TABLE Austenitic Stainless Steel Form Standard to be complied with Strip BS EN BS EN BS EN BS EN BS EN Rod BS EN Bar BS Tube BS EN Wire BS EN Brickwork and Blockwork Brickwork and blockwork shall be laid on a full bed of mortar and bonded as described in Appendix .
Single frogged bricks shall be laid with the frog uppermost .
Perpends between bricks and blocks shall be filled with mortar before the next mortar bed is laid .
Whole bricks and blocks shall be used except where it is necessary to cut closers .
Brickwork and blockwork shall be built uniformly .
Corners and other advanced work shall be stepped back and not raised above the general level more than Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Brickwork Blockwork and Stonework mm .
Courses shall be kept horizontal and matching perpends shall be in vertical alignment .
Unless stated in Appendix overhand work shall not be permitted .
Bedjoint reinforcement shall have a mm minimum of mortar cover to each masonry face .
It shall not be laid dry on a bed face but shall be embedded within the mortar bed thickness .
Where pointing is required in Appendix the joint shall be raked out to a depth of mm and after the completion of the entire facework pointed in mortar as described in Appendix .
Where jointing is required in Appendix it shall be done as the work proceeds to the finish described in Appendix .
Stonework General Except where otherwise described in Appendix the length of any stone shall not exceed three times its height .
The breadth on the bed shall be not less than mm nor greater than threequarters of the thickness of the wall .
All stratified stone possessing bedding planes shall be laid with its natural bed as nearly as possible at right angles to the direction of load .
In the case of arch rings the natural bed shall be radial .
Facework quoins shall be built to a height not exceeding mm in advance of the main body of the work and adjacent walling stepped down on either side .
Stone facework between the quoins shall then be built to a height not exceeding mm above the backing which shall then be brought up level with the completed facework .
At no time shall the backing be built up higher than the facework .
Except for dry rubble walling all joints shall be sufficiently thick to prevent stonetostone contact and shall be completely filled with mortar .
Ashlar All stones shall be dressed to accurate planes on the beds and joints and they shall be fair and neatly or fine tooled on the face as described in Appendix .
Blockincourse Beds and joints shall be squared and dressed for a distance of at least mm from the exposed face .
Bond stones shall form not less than one sixth of the area of the exposed face and shall extend at least mm into the wall or for the full thickness of the wall if the latter is less than mm .
Unless described in Appendix as tooled or worked the exposed face of all stone shall be blocked and left rough .
Arrises shall be dressed square at all beds and joints .
Squared Random Rubble Coursed and Uncoursed All stones shall be truly squared and dressed on the beds and joints for a distance of at least mm from the exposed face .
Bond stones shall be provided at the rate of not less than one to every square metre of exposed face and shall measure not less than mm x mm on the face and not less than mm or the full thickness of the wall if the latter is less than mm .
Sneck stones shall be not less than mm in any dimension .
Vertical joints shall not include more than three consecutive stones and the horizontal lapping of the stones shall be not less than mm .
Random Rubble Coursed and Uncoursed All stones shall be carefully set with a bond stone provided at the rate of not less than one to every square metre of exposed face .
Bond stones shall measure not less than mm x mm on the exposed face and not less than mm in length or the full thickness of the wall if the latter is less than mm unless otherwise described in Appendix .
For coursed work the joints shall be levelled as described in Appendix and the backing flushed up in mortar .
Dry Rubble Dry rubble stonework shall be constructed generally to the requirements of uncoursed random rubble stonework as specified in subClause of this Clause but without mortar .
All stones shall be carefully shaped to obtain a close fit at all beds and joints any interstices between the stones being filled with selected stone chippings or spalls .
The exposed tops or copings of dry rubble walls shall be formed as shown on the Drawings .
Special Stonework Including Quoins Copings Plinths Voussoirs etc Special stonework shall consist of selected stones dressed to the shapes and dimensions and where required their faces worked all as shown on the Drawings .
Cold Weather Working No bricks blocks or stones shall be laid when the air temperature in the shade is below C unless precautions are taken either in accordance with Amendment May Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Brickwork Blockwork and Stonework BS or to ensure that all materials when used are free from snow ice and frost .
Protection of New Work Immediately after laying and for days thereafter brickwork blockwork and stonework shall be protected against the harmful effects of weather .
The upper surface of newly laid brickwork blockwork and stonework shall be protected against rain as the work proceeds until such time as the work is completed and the upper dampcourse coping or other finishing feature is laid .
All visible brickwork blockwork and stonework and any surface below such work which is visible at the completion of the Works shall be clean and free from damage and spillage .
All purposemade open joints shall be free from debris of any description .
Brick Block and Stone Facework Fixed to Concrete Any loose material shall be removed from the concrete and its surface washed with clean water before any bricks blocks or masonry is laid .
The portion of the stainless steel fixing projecting from the concrete shall be completely embedded in the mortar of the facework and shall be kept back a minimum of mm from the face of the brickwork and blockwork or mm from the face of the masonry .
The cavity between brick and block facework and the concrete shall be completely filled as the work proceeds with mortar of the same mix as that specified for the facework .
The variation in depth front to back of stones for natural stone facework shall not exceed that described in Appendix and the space between the facework and the backing shall be completely filled as the work proceeds with concrete strength class C and a maximum aggregate size of mm conforming to Series .
Brick and Other Works for Unreinforced Masonry Arch Bridges Unreinforced Masonry Arch Bridges General The masonry and associated work requirements for unreinforced masonry arch bridges shall conform to this Series .
Brick Work Unless otherwise described in Appendix masonry units bricks shall be HD type Class A or Class B clay engineering bricks conforming to the particular requirements of BS EN and the performance characteristics given in Table .
The determination of sulfate content for the soluble salt content test shall be in accordance with Test No .
in TRL Report .
Amendment May TABLE Performance Characteristic Requirements Performance characteristic Reference Clay engineering bricks Class A Class B Compressive strength Nmm BS EN Water absorption by mass and also when used as DPC units and Net dry density kgm BS EN and BS EN and DPC and and DPC and Freezethaw resistance category BS EN F F Active soluble salts content category BS EN S S Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Brickwork Blockwork and Stonework Concrete bricks and blocks shall conform to BS EN and BS EN having an average crushing strength value of not less than Nmm and a minimum cement content of kgm .
Natural stone shall conform to BS and shall be selected on the basis of proven durability and weather resistance as described in Appendix .
Reconstructed stone shall conform to BS EN and the requirements stated in Appendix .
Calcium silicate units shall not be permitted for use in unreinforced masonry arch bridge construction .
Mortar Work Mortar shall be in accordance with Clause and the following .
Mortar designation shall be in accordance with Table .
Materials and mix proportions shall be in accordance with subClauses .
to .
and .
as appropriate .
TABLE Mortar Designation LocationElement Mortar Designation Below a level of mm above finished ground level i or ii Above a level of mm above finished ground level Abutments spandrelwing walls piers parapets Arch rings ii or iii iii A set of mortar prisms shall be made for each type of mortar designation used on each arch structure .
The mortar used shall be representative of the mortar used in the structure .
The prisms shall be made and tested for compressive strength in accordance with BS EN .
Each set comprises three prisms each divided in two to give six individual tests .
The mean of the six tests shall be within the limits shown in Table TABLE Mortar Compressive Strengths Mortar designation day mean compressive strength in Nmm Minimum Maximum i . . ii . . iii . .
In cases such as where an existing arch with lime mortar is being widened or where additional tolerance of movement is considered desirable lime mortar may be used .
In such cases the mortar shall comply with the recommendations of Best Practice Guide for Hydraulic Lime Mortar for Stone Brick and Block Masonry .
WORKMANSHIP FOR BRICKWORK BLOCKWORK AND STONEWORK Workmanship shall be in accordance with Clauses and and Annex A of BS .
Forms of bonding in which the rings of masonry are jointed by mortar alone as with concentric rings in stretcher bond shall not be used unless stated in Appendix .
Clay bricks shall not be used within days of firing .
Masonry in an arch ring shall be flush jointed .
Exposed surfaces of masonry shall be regular clean and have an acceptable appearance .
Finished surfaces of buried masonry to be waterproofed shall have no abrupt irregularities greater than mm .
Masonry shall not be subjected to loading including its own weight within days of construction which will induce a stress exceeding of its strength at the time of loading .
Removal of centring to the arch ring shall only take place after the material has gained sufficient strength .
The centring shall not be removed until at least days after completion of the arch ring .
Waterproofing Unless otherwise described in Appendix the waterproofing system shall be a permitted system conforming to Clauses and .
Protection of Waterproofing Waterproofing systems shall be protected with a single leaf of masonry or insitu concrete when unbound materials are used as a permeable backing .
Amendment May Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Brickwork Blockwork and Stonework Waterproofing systems with a permeable backing of porous no fines concrete or precast hollow concrete blocks in accordance with subClauses .ii and iii shall require no further protection .
Permeable Backing to Structures Permeable backing to spandrelwing walls and abutments shall comply with Clause .
Where foamed concrete fill to Clause is used subClause .
shall apply .
Where Class N or P fill is used permeable backing to the arch ring shall be a granular material or porous nofines concrete in accordance with Clause .. Where Class A B or foamed concrete fill is used permeable backing to the arch ring shall conform to subClause ..
Fill Fill shall be Class N P A or B conforming to Clause or foamed concrete conforming to Clause .
Fill shall be placed and compacted in accordance with Clause .
Plant for compaction of material within metre or within one fifth of the span if greater of the arch ring shall conform to subClause .. For bridges carrying public highways a minimum depth of fill of mm shall be provided between the crown of the arch and the underside of the pavement as described in Appendix .
Unless otherwise described in Appendix fill shall be drained by a mm minimum diameter pipe with rodding facilities provided at springing .
Drainage pipes and rodding facilities shall conform to Series .
Amendment May F Amendment May MANUAL OF CONTRACT DOCUMENTS FOR HIGHWAY WORKS VOLUME SPECIFICATION FOR HIGHWAY WORKS SERIES SPECIAL STRUCTURES Contents Clause Title Page Corrugated Steel Buried Structures Reinforced Soil and Anchored Earth Structures Reinforced Clay Brickwork Retaining Walls of Pockettype and GroutedCavity Construction Environmental Barriers Drainage Structures Buried Rigid Pipes for Drainage Structures Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Special Structures SPECIAL STRUCTURES Corrugated Steel Buried Structures General Corrugated steel buried structures of clear span or internal diameter exceeding mm shall comply with this Clause .
The Contractor shall design the corrugated steel buried structures listed in Appendix in accordance with Standard BD DMRB .. and the design requirements given in Appendix .
Earthworks Earthworks shall comply with Series .
Steel Components All helically wound systems and all bolted segmental systems to be incorporated in the Works shall have a current Type Approval Certificate .
All the individual components and materials making up the system shall comply with the properties listed in the current Type Approval Certificate .
Helically wound systems shall additionally have a current British Board of Agrment Roads and Bridges Certificate .
The lockseams of helically wound systems shall be able to withstand tensile forces across the seam according to steel sheet thickness as tabulated below Nominal Sheet Minimum Tensile Force Thickness across Seam mm kNm .
. . . . . . For intermediate sheet thicknesses the minimum tensile force required may be determined by linear interpolation .
After forming the depth of the corrugations shall be within a tolerance of and the pitch of the corrugations within a tolerance of of the nominal dimensions .
Plates shall have a minimum lip of mm beyond each end crest .
Cut edges shall be free from notches gouges rust or burrs .
When all the plates of a bolted segmental structure have been assembled the nuts shall be tightened by applying a torque within the range stated on the Type Approval Certificate .
The tightening shall be repeated if necessary to achieve the required torque .
Bolts nuts and washers if provided shall be of such a design that no damage is caused to metal coatings when the nuts are tightened as described above .
Hot Dip Galvanizing of Steel Components All surfaces of steel components shall be hot dip galvanized in compliance with the standards listed in the appropriate Type Approval Certificate and British Board of Agrment Roads and Bridges Certificate .
Plates for bolted segmental structures shall be galvanized after forming the corrugations and completing all necessary cutting punching and drilling .
Units in which the galvanized coating has been burned by welding or otherwise damaged in fabrication transport cutting or handling at site shall be made good in compliance with Clauses and .
Bolts and nuts shall be hot dip galvanized in compliance with the standards listed in the appropriate Type Approval Certificate and British Board of Agrment Roads and Bridges Certificate .
Concrete Foundations of Arch Profile Structures Concrete foundations shall be constructed as described in Appendix with concrete complying with Series .
Concrete Invert Pavings Where described in Appendix concrete invert pavings shall be constructed in compliance with that Appendix using strength class C concrete and a maximum aggregate size of mm complying with Series .
Concrete invert pavings shall be reinforced with a steel fabric complying with Series having mesh dimensions not greater than mm x mm and a nominal wire size not less than mm .
All laps in the mesh shall be at least mm .
The steel fabric shall be securely fixed to the structure by means of fixings at the bolt positions .
It shall extend to within a distance not greater than mm nor less than mm inside the Amendment November Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Special Structures edges of the concrete on each side .
A nominal cover of mm shall be provided to all other faces including that to the crest of the corrugations in the structural steel .
Concrete invert pavings shall be cast in lengths not exceeding metres with the provision of a water bar between adjacent panels and the joints sealed with a joint sealant to Clause .
At each end of the structure the concrete invert paving shall be either i terminated with a toe that returns at least mm under the structural steel forming the structure .
The steel fabric shall be folded under the lips of the structure to suit .
The toe shall be detailed with a thickness of not less than that required for the paving in Standard BD DMRB .. or ii detailed to suit any headwall arrangement eg paving reinforcement lapped with headwall reinforcement .
All foreign matter but not any secondary proprietary protective coating unless indicated otherwise in the Type Approval Certificate or British Board of Agrment Roads and Bridges Certificate referred to in subClauses and of this Clause and free standing water shall be removed from the steel surfaces to be paved before commencing work .
Proprietary Invert Pavings Any proposed proprietary invert paving system shall have a current British Board of Agrment Roads and Bridges Certificate .
Proprietary Secondary Protective Coatings Applied Above Hot Dip Galvanized Coating Any proposed proprietary protective coating system shall have a current British Board of Agrment Roads and Bridges Certificate .
Additional Protective Coatings Where described in Appendix exposed galvanized steel surfaces shall be prepared and protected after erection in compliance with that Appendix .
The additional protective coating may be factory or site applied and shall have a service life of at least six years in aggressive conditions .
Reinforced Soil and Anchored Earth Structures General Reinforced soil or anchored earth structures shall comply with this Clause .
The Contractor shall design the reinforced soil or anchored earth structures listed in Appendix in accordance with Standard BD DMRB .. and the design requirements and procedures described in Appendix .
Earthworks Earthworks for reinforced soil and anchored earth structures shall comply with Series .
Reinforcing Elements for Reinforced Soil and Anchor Elements for Anchored Earth Carbon steel strip to be hot dip galvanized shall comply with BS EN and BS EN either grade S JR or S JR or BS Part .
either quality KHR P or quality KHR P each having a silicon content of not less than .
and not more than ..
The fabricated element shall be hot dip galvanized in compliance with Clause except that the average zinc coating weight for any individual test area shall be not less than gm .
Stainless steel strip shall comply with i BS EN BS EN BS EN BS EN BS EN designation .
or .
except that the material shall be cold rolled to provide a . proof stress of not less than N mm and the tensile strength shall be not less than Nmm or ii BS EN BS EN BS EN BS EN BS EN designation .
CR temper rolled to a minimum .
proof stress of Nmm .
Proprietary reinforcing elements and systems using such elements shall have a current British Board of Agrment Roads and Bridges Certificate .
Anchor elements for anchored earth shall be made of cold worked steel reinforcing bar conforming to BS EN and BS Grade BB except that no bar shall contain a flash weld .
Welding of steel reinforcement bars to form anchors shall comply with Clause .
The fabricated elements shall be hot dip galvanized in compliance with Clause except that the average zinc coating weight for any individual test area shall be not less than gm .
Amendment November Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Special Structures Reinforcing and anchor elements shall be prefabricated and delivered to Site ready for installation into the Works .
The elements shall be i Loaded unloaded and handled in such a manner that a no permanent set or other structural damage is caused b the protective coating is not damaged .
ii Stored flat and clearly marked to identify items having different lengths and cross sectional dimensions .
Fasteners Bolts screws and nuts complying with BS EN ISO property classes A and B shall comply with BS EN ISO BS EN ISO and BS EN ISO and shall be made from one of the following i Steel property class .
complying with BS EN ISO and hot dip galvanized in compliance with Series .
ii Stainless steel to BS EN designation .
or .
except that the .
proof stress of the bolt shall be not less than Nmm and the tensile strength shall be not less than Nmm .
Bolts screws and nuts shall comply with one of the following i BS EN ISO and BS EN ISO BS EN ISO and BS EN ISO hot dip galvanized in compliance with Clause .
The property class of the bolts and screws shall be not less than .
while the property class of the nuts shall not be less than .. ii Stainless steel to BS EN ISO and BS EN ISO grade A .
Plain washers shall be of either Form A or Form E complying with BS and shall be made from one of the following i Cold rolled carbon steel strip CS complying with BS Part .
hot dip galvanized in compliance with Clause .
ii Stainless steel strip designation .
or .
complying with BS EN BS EN BS EN BS EN and BS EN .
Dowels and rods shall be made from one of the following i Steel bar conforming to BS EN and BS Grade BB hot dip galvanized in compliance with Clause .
ii Steel of grade S JR complying with BS EN hot dip galvanized in compliance with Clause .
iii Stainless steel to BS EN designation .
or .
except that the .
proof stress shall be not less than Nmm and the tensile strength shall be not less than Nmm .
Prefabricated and Precast Facing and Capping Units Carbon steel strip or sheet to be hot dip galvanized shall comply with BS Part .
either quality KHR P or quality KHR P each having a silicon content of not less than .
and not more than ..
Following fabrication the units shall be hot dip galvanized in compliance with Clause except that the average zinc coating weight for any individual test area shall be not less than gm .
Stainless steel strip or sheet shall comply with BS EN BS EN BS EN BS EN and BS EN designation .
or .. Reinforced concrete shall comply with Series .
Proprietary facing units and systems using such units shall have a current British Board of Agrment Roads and Bridges Certificate .
Metal Components Material Compatibility All metallic components buried in the soil ie reinforcing elements connections facing lugs and facing units shall be of electrolytically compatible material .
Where this is not possible effective insulation shall be provided between different materials .
Reinforced Clay Brickwork Retaining Walls of Pockettype and GroutedCavity Construction Materials Cement aggregates water and mortars for reinforced brickwork retaining wall structures shall comply with the relevant Clauses of Series except where different requirements are given in this Clause .
Masonry cement or high alumina cement shall not be used .
Amendment November Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Special Structures Unless otherwise described in Appendix masonry units bricks shall be HD type Class B clay engineering bricks conforming to the particular requirements of BS EN and the performance characteristics given in Table .
The equivalent strength grades of BS EN as compared to BS see BD DMRB .. shall be given in Appendix .
The determination of sulfate content for the soluble salt content test shall be in accordance with Test No .
in TRL Report .
Selection of bricks shall follow the recommendations contained in BS in respect of durability and other considerations .
Second hand masonry units shall not be used .
Unless otherwise described in Appendix concrete shall be a designed concrete and shall be either ordinary structural concrete or special structural concrete .
It shall comply with the requirements of Series .
Reinforcement types shall comply with Series and Clauses except that all stainless steel shall be designation .. Bedjoint reinforcement shall not exceed mm diameter .
No bimetallic contact is permitted .
Wall ties shall be as described in Appendix .
Dovetail wall ties shall not be used .
Damp proof courses shall be as described in Appendix .
Storage of Materials The handling storage and mixture of materials shall follow the recommendations of BS .
Bricks shall be unloaded with due care to minimize damage placed on site in different stacks according to strength and type and be marked clearly .
They shall be stacked on prepared level areas avoiding ground contamination and be protected from rain or snow .
Cement lime and limesand mix shall be stored off the ground in dry areas and used in the sequence of delivery .
Different types of cements shall be stored separately and clearly identified .
Lime and limesand mix shall be protected from drying out .
Reinforcement shall be stored on site in a safe manner and be free from loose rust scale dirt paint oil grease or any other harmful material prior to fixing .
Laying of Bricks Brickwork shall be laid in accordance with Clause .
Jointing is preferable to pointing and shall be used unless there is a specific need for pointing .
Joints shall be tooled as the work progresses to either a flush or bucket handle profile .
Bricks shall not be used within days of firing .
The maximum height of brickwork to be built in a day shall be limited to .
m and hours shall elapse before recommencing bricklaying .
Cutting of bricks shall be kept to a minimum .
When cutting is necessary cutting discs shall be used .
Where sleeves chases or holes are required they shall be provided during the erection of brickwork .
Mixing of Mortar Mortar shall be mixed mechanically until its colour and consistency are uniform .
The constituent material shall be accurately measured .
Where ready mixed mortars are specified their use shall be in accordance with the manufacturers instructions and BS EN and BS EN .
Mortar shall be made in small quantities only as and when required .
Mortar which has begun to set or which has been mixed for a period of more than one hour shall be discarded .
When additives or admixtures are specified in Appendix their use shall strictly follow the manufacturers instructions and shall be demonstrated in the trial panel .
Mortars shall be tested in accordance with Annex A of BS .
Concrete General Batching and mixing of concrete shall comply with Clause .
Concrete compliance shall be in accordance with Clauses to and .
Transporting placing compacting and finishing of concrete shall be in accordance with Clauses and .
The rate of placing of concrete with respect to the rate of brickwork construction shall be as required by Appendix .
The placing and compaction of concrete shall not disrupt either the masonry or the reinforcement .
Cold Weather Working Cold weather working shall be in accordance with Clauses and .
Hot Weather Working During hot weather the Contractor shall ensure that the constituent materials of mortar and concrete are sufficiently cool to prevent stiffening before placement in Amendment May Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Special Structures their final position .
Cement shall not be allowed to come into contact with water at a temperature greater than C. Protection of New Work Protection of newly laid brickwork shall be in accordance with Clause .
In addition during freezing conditions brickwork shall be covered with an insulating layer followed by a waterproofing material .
Covers shall be held clear of the brickwork and be well secured .
Side protection shall be provided in exposed site conditions .
Weatherproofing Backfill and Drainage The retaining face of the wall shall be flushjointed and tooled and shall be subsequently painted with a waterproofing material in accordance with Clauses and .
Backfilling shall be in accordance with Clause .
Before commencing backfilling a period of days or longer if required by Appendix shall elapse after the completion of the wall .
Permeable backing to the retaining wall shall be in accordance with Clause .
When used weepholes shall not be allowed to drain freely across footways or carriageways .
Trial Panel The Contractor shall construct a trial panel of pocket type or groutedcavity reinforced brickwork retaining wall of dimensions specified in Appendix prior to commencement of permanent work .
The trial panel shall be used to demonstrate the colour of mortar workability of mortar formation of pockets and infilling of concrete .
Where required in Appendix the panel shall be dismantled in such a manner that the effectiveness of each element can be examined .
Where required in Appendix the Contractor shall construct additional panels to comply with the appearance requirements of BS .
Environmental Barriers General Environmental barriers shall be constructed from the quality of materials and be erected to standards described in the following subClauses unless otherwise specified in Appendix .
Where an environmental barrier is erected on ground or any other surface which follows the longitudinal profile of the adjacent road or on existing ground or earthwork environmental bund which has a gradient of not greater than in along the line of the barrier the top of the barrier shall follow a flowing vertical alignment .
Where the earthwork environmental bund or original ground has a slope exceeding in the top of the barrier may be stepped where permitted in Appendix .
The minimum height of the barrier and the maximum step increments where steps are permitted shall be as specified in Appendix .
Where necessary the ground shall be excavated or filled and compacted in compliance with the appropriate Clauses in Series .
Any excavation required shall not affect the minimum height of the barrier as shown in Appendix .
The gravel board or bottom edge of the barrier shall be buried to a depth of at least mm .
Where the environmental barrier is combined with a safety barrier the safety barrier shall comply with the current standards issued by the Overseeing Organisation .
Where the environmental barrier is to be erected on an earthwork environmental bund the bund shall comply with Clause .
Tolerances Tolerances shall be as follows i An environmental barrier shall be erected along a line or smooth curve as indicated on the contract drawings within a tolerance of mm normal to the plane of the barrier in addition the horizontal deviation from the required positions at adjacent panels or posts shall not vary by more than mm .
ii The top edge of the barrier shall be at the specified height above the road surface existing ground or finished ground level of the earthwork environmental bund within a tolerance of mm and the deviation from the required levels at adjacent panels or posts shall not vary by more than mm .
iii Barriers shall be vertical unless otherwise stated in Appendix .
Timber Timber shall comply with Clause .
Non structural timber shall be acceptable if it complies with HCD Drawing Number H and H. For checking compliance the rejection numbers shall be and respectively instead of and .
Timber surfaces shall be sawn unless otherwise stated in Appendix .
Timber within panels shall not be butt jointed .
The thickness of panel boards shall be sufficient to ensure the specified acoustic requirements and their width Amendment May Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Special Structures shall not be more than mm measured at moisture content .
Exposed ends of vertical boards shall be protected against weathering by a top or capping rail .
Fittings Fittings shall comply with Clause unless otherwise stated in Appendix .
Nails in timber preserved with copperchromiumarsenic CCA treatment shall be austenitic stainless steel designation .
to BS EN .
Concrete Reinforced concrete components shall comply with the requirements of Annex A of BS Part .
Combination of Timber and Concrete Timber cladding used to screen concrete panel barriers shall comply with BS Part and Clause .
Steel Steel posts and environmental barrier members shall comply with the requirements in Series and shall i be hot dip galvanized to comply with Clause and either be a painted with the following paint system to comply with Series Table B system IV coat of Item coat of Item or Item coat of Item or Item coat of Item or Item to achieve a minimum total dry film thickness of the paint system of microns or b plastic coated to comply with Clause ii have improved atmospheric corrosion resistance complying with Clauses and .
Brickwork Brickwork shall comply with Series .
Other Materials Other materials or combination of materials shall comply with Appendix .
Design Where required the Contractor shall design the environmental barriers listed in Appendix in accordance with the design specification and procedures in Appendix .
In addition if required in Appendix he shall design foundations posts andor other supports .
The Contractor shall submit his design to the Overseeing Organisation for aesthetic approval .
The Contractor shall also take account of the following i The Contractor shall when required in Appendix erect sample panels of barrier not less than weeks before starting construction .
One section shall show the horizontal elevation the other a sloping elevation .
Spacing of barrier posts shall be as described in Appendix .
When Appendix requires a safety barrier to be attached to the environmental barrier the safety barrier shall be supplied and fixed to the sample panels of the environmental barrier .
The sample panels shall be used as the standard which must be maintained throughout the Contract .
ii The Contractor shall provide working drawings of the design and details of fabrication .
iii The Contractor shall supply the Overseeing Organisation with the following a Design calculations .
b Details of materials and components used in the barrier .
c Details of gates and methods of fixing where applicable .
d Details of fixing to adjoining structures and parapets where applicable .
iv Fixings shall be fitted so that bolts either do not protrude on the traffic side or only do so with a coach bolt head a cup square head or with a dome headed nut .
v Fixings and fastenings used shall be designed to prevent wilful damage .
The design and materials used shall also enable damaged components to be replaced .
vi Stepping of panels shall only be permitted as specified in Appendix to be compatible with aesthetic requirements .
vii The design shall be such that movement due to change in moisture content thermal effects or weathering will not reduce the acoustic attenuation of the barrier .
Amendment May Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Special Structures viii All joints shall be sufficiently masked by cover strips or rebated to ensure acoustic integrity .
ix The design shall ensure that all members of the barrier can drain freely and do not allow water to stand on their surfaces or within joints .
x Where access gates are required in Appendix their design shall be such that they blend unobtrusively into the barrier .
They shall open away from the nearest carriageway and leave no gap when closed .
The gates shall be selfclosing by the provision of a heavy duty spring and be secured as described in Appendix .
In barriers up to and including .
m high the top edge of the gate shall be at the specified height of the barrier .
Gates in barriers over .
m high shall be .
m high and provided with a header panel to align with the top of the barrier .
Where a gate is not to be provided but a gap is to be left for access as described in Appendix a length of barrier shall be erected behind the gap or an overlap provided sufficient to maintain the acoustic properties of the barrier .
xi When timber is used in the barrier the following shall apply a One or two gravel boards not less than mm deep shall be provided having a total thickness of not less than mm .
Concrete gravel boards or edging will be acceptable .
b Fixings shall be such as to allow timber movement due to change in moisture content to be accommodated without inducing splitting .
Testing of Acoustic Performance Where required in Appendix the complete form of construction proposed for an environment barrier shall have been tested by an appropriate organisation accredited in accordance with subClauses .
and .
for acoustic testing in accordance with BS EN .
Insulation Requirements The overall performance characteristic DLR determined in accordance with BS EN Part shall meet the requirements stated in Appendix .
Absorption Requirements The performance characteristic DL determined in accordance with BS EN Part shall meet the requirements stated in Appendix .
Post Foundation Test i Where stated in Appendix the Contractor shall provide test equipment and carry out loading tests on post foundations as described in Appendix .
The results shall be available at least one week prior to installation of the relevant length of fence unless otherwise stated in Appendix .
ii The Contractor shall install foundations for testing after completion of the finished ground .
iii On completion of loading tests the Contractor shall remove the test posts and foundations and make good the finished ground unless the posts and foundations have not exhibited failure and can be incorporated into the Permanent Works .
iv The Contractor shall establish and maintain appropriate traffic safety and management measures complying with Clause during installation loading and removal of the test posts and foundations .
Drainage Structures General All drains piped and box culverts sewers and drainage structures other than bridges that have a diameter or clear span exceeding mm shall comply with this Clause and any additional requirements described in Appendices and .
Where the term drain is used in this Series it shall be deemed to include the terms sewer and piped culvert .
The Contractor shall design the piped and box culverts and other drainage structures listed in Appendix in accordance with the requirements of Clause .
Unless otherwise described in Appendices and only one type of pipe shall be used within any individual drain between consecutive chambers .
Pipes for drains shall be selected from the alternatives in Table and shall comply with the standards and particular requirements therein .
The Contractor shall show that the pipes which have been selected have an hydraulic flow capacity equal to that adopted in the hydraulic design of the system as Amendment November Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Special Structures described in Appendices and .
On completion of the whole of the drainage works the Contractor shall provide the Overseeing Organisation with a schedule showing details of all pipe types used including quality joints and name of manufacturer .
TABLE Pipes for Drains and Culverts having Diameter or Clear Span Exceeding mm Material Usage Standard Particular requirements Vitrified clay Surface foul BS EN Shall comply with water drains Clause Concrete With Surface foul BS Pipes having a cement types water drains and BS EN concrete mix meeting CEM I or SRPC or the following as defined in BS requirement .
Testing Table A. of in accordance with the BS when relevant BS and required in sampling in Appendix .
accordance with Supersulfated subClause of cement shall not Clause be used A total chloride content not exceeding the values in Table Shall comply with Clause Iron Surface foul BS EN water drains Ductile iron Corrugated steel Surface water BD Type approval drains DMRB certificate and BBA ..
Roads and Bridges Certificate Shall comply with Clause Buried Rigid Pipes for Drainage Structures Scope For the purposes of this Clause rigid pipes include vitrified clay pipes and plain reinforced and prestressed concrete pipes as set out in Table .
The maximum length of pipe between flexible joints shall comply with the requirements of Appendix .
Excavation for Pipes and Chambers Excavation shall comply with Clause and with subClause .. Trenches shall not exceed the maximum widths scheduled in Appendix .
Unless otherwise described in Appendix all pipes in or under new embankments shall be laid only when the embankment has been formed and compacted to formation level under paved areas to finished earthworks level in other areas or to a level which will give a minimum cover of .
m to the pipes whichever is the lowest .
Bedding Laying and Surrounding of Pipes Immediately following the excavation of the trench the pipes shall be laid and jointed on the pipe bed in accordance with subClause .. Where described in Appendix limestone aggregates shall not be used as bedding .
Drainage pipe and bedding combinations shall be selected from the alternatives described in Appendix .
Pipe bedding haunching and surrounding material shall be as shown on HCD Drawing Numbers F and F and shall comply with subClause .i ii iii iv and vi .
Completion of the bedding haunching and surrounding of the pipes shall be carried out immediately after jointing in accordance with sub Clause .. Precautions shall be taken to minimise water flows through the granular beddings surrounding rigid pipes as required in Appendix .
Jointing of Pipes Rigid joints shall mean joints made solid by caulking the sockets or bolting together flanges integral with the pipes .
Flexible joints shall mean joints made with deformable rings or gaskets held between pipe spigots and sockets sleeves or collars .
Joints in surface water drains and foul sewers shall be watertight and comply with the appropriate British Standards and the manufacturers instructions .
Rigid joints shall be used only where permitted in Appendix .
Spigots and sockets of rigid joints may be caulked with tarred rope yarn or equivalent and the socket completely filled with mortar designation i complying with Clause but excluding lime a fillet of mortar shall be worked around the socket extending for a length of not less than mm from the face of the socket .
Where a concrete bed cradle arch or surround is used with rigid pipes having flexible joints joint filler board complying with Clause shall be placed in contact with the end of the socket at all pipe joints and shall extend through the full thickness of the concrete bed haunch and surround in contact with the pipe .
Amendment May Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Special Structures Backfilling of Trenches Backfilling shall be undertaken immediately after the required operations preceding it have been completed .
Except where otherwise described in Appendix trenches shall be backfilled above the pipe surround material described in Clause with Class or general fill material complying with Series .
Backfilling shall be deposited and compacted in compliance with Clause .
The material used for backfilling shall be deposited in even layers and shall not be heaped in the trench before being spread .
Spreading and compaction shall be carried out evenly without dislodging distorting or damaging the pipe .
Power rammers shall not be used within mm of any part of the pipe or joint .
Except in carriageways and other paved areas and locations described in Appendix backfill of trenches shall be brought up to ground level .
Where topsoil is at the surface on the line of the trench the upper section of the backfill shall be topsoil of the thickness described in Appendix or of the same thickness and quality of topsoil as on the surrounding ground where no thickness is specified .
For trenches in carriageways or other paved areas the backfill shall be brought up to formation level or subformation level where capping is required unless a lower level is described in Appendix .
Sheeting and other excavation supports shall be removed as the filling proceeds unless otherwise described in Appendix .
Connecting to Existing Drains Chambers and Channels Connections to existing drains chambers and channels shall be carried out in accordance with Clause with the exception that where Appendix is mentioned in subClauses .
and .
it shall be altered to read Appendix .
Chambers Chambers other than those used in motorway communications installations shall include manholes catchpits inspection chambers draw pits and walled soakaways .
Chambers shall be one of the types specified in Appendix .
Foundations to chambers shall be of ST concrete complying with Clause .
Channels for chambers shall be formed and finished smooth in the foundation concrete or constructed of preformed half circle channels with sides benched in the same mix of concrete or mortar designation i complying with Clause but excluding lime .
Brickwork shall comply with Series and be built with mortar designation i in English bond .
The joints of brickwork where exposed shall be finished as specified for unpointed joints in Clause .
The ends of all pipes shall be neatly built into the brickwork and finished flush with mortar designation i complying with Clause .
Precast concrete chambers shall comply with BS and BS EN .
Cast in situ concrete chambers shall be constructed of ST concrete complying with Clause unless otherwise described in Appendix .
Manhole steps complying with BS EN shall be built in accordance with relevant Series F HCD Drawings .
Steelwork used for ladders handholds and other fittings shall comply with BS Part and be galvanized in compliance with Clause after fabrication .
Threaded components shall be galvanized in compliance with Clause .
Excavation around chambers shall be backfilled with Class A wet cohesive fill material Table with the plasticity and grading requirements set out in Appendix this material shall be compacted in accordance with Clause .
Where mechanical compaction is impracticable the excavation shall be backfilled with ST concrete complying with Clause .
Where there are precast concrete access shafts to precast concrete chambers the shafts shall be surrounded by a minimum thickness of mm of ST concrete complying with Clause and the remaining excavation backfilled with general fill material as described in Table compacted in accordance with Clause .
Chambers for foul drains shall be tested for watertightness as scheduled in Appendix .
Chamber covers gratings and frames shall be as described in Appendix .
and shall comply with BS EN and subClauses and of Clause they shall be set in cement mortar or quick setting mortar complying with subClause .. For rigid pipelines the nearest joint to any chamber shall be not more than mm from the inner face of the wall and shall not be restricted by any concrete surround .
Between this and the next joint the length of the articulated pipe rocker pipe shall be not less than mm .
Where the adjustment or replacement of existing frames and covers or gratings is required the units shall be taken up and refixed or replaced with new units in accordance with subClause of this Clause or such other specification as agreed with the Overseeing Organisation .
The finished thickness of the mortar bed shall be between mm and mm .
Unless otherwise Amendment November Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Special Structures F described in Appendix adjusted or replaced chamber frames and covers or gratings shall be set flush with the new surface .
Any additional adjustments shall be by modifying the brickwork in compliance with subClause of this Clause or by using a frame of a suitable depth .
Pipe Junctions Junction pipes shall be manufactured of the same type and class of material as the remainder of the pipes in the run .
Junction pipes which are laid but not immediately connected shall be fitted with temporary stoppers or seals and the position of all such junctions shall be clearly defined by means of stakes or tracing wires properly marked or labelled .
Saddles may be used to form junctions only where permitted in Appendix .
No internal projections greater than mm shall be permitted .
Saddles for rigid pipes shall be jointed with mortar designation i complying with Clause but excluding lime .
Saddles and pipes shall be surrounded with ST concrete complying with Clause .
Pipe Quality For rigid pipes the Contractor shall obtain test certificates provided by the manufacturer based on the following sampling rates i For the hydraulic or hydrostatic test and for the works proof load test samples shall be taken at random from each batch of consecutively manufactured pipes of each diameter joint type and strength class as described in Table .
ii For the maximum load test one pipe shall be taken at random from those which have been selected for and have passed the proof load test .
If this pipe fails a further two pipes taken from those which have been selected for and have passed the proof load test shall be tested and if either pipe then fails the whole batch shall be rejected .
Testing and Cleaning Drainage structures shall be visually examined before backfilling is commenced and after backfilling is completed .
Where such installations are subsequently subjected to heavy construction plant loads they shall be inspected again when the construction work has finished and before handover of the completed works .
Drainage structures shall at all times be left clean and free from silt and obstruction .
TABLE Sampling Rates Number of pipes Sample size If all pass If or more fail If fails take a If or more of the in batch further sample of further sample fails or less REJECT or test REJECT or test ALL ALL remaining pipes remaining pipes in in batch failing pipes batch failing pipes to to be rejected be rejected ACCEPT More than per batch of Amendment November March MANUAL OF CONTRACT DOCUMENTS FOR HIGHWAY WORKS VOLUME SPECIFICATION FOR HIGHWAY WORKS SERIES MISCELLANEOUS Contents Clause Title Page Bedding Mortar Concrete for Ancillary Purposes Porous No Fines Concrete Plastic Coating to Fencing Posts Gates and Ancillaries Plastic Coated High Tensile Wire Cored Thermoplastic Node Markers Granolithic Concrete Rendering and Screed Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Miscellaneous MISCELLANEOUS Bedding Mortar General Bedding mortar shall satisfy the following performance requirements i Unless otherwise described in Appendix bedding mortar shall have a compressive strength not less than Nmm when tested in accordance with subClause iv or v of this Clause .
ii The flow characteristics shall be such that the volume of the bed or plinth as shown on the Drawings is completely filled with homogeneous material when placed within the range of ambient temperature between C and C or as otherwise described in Appendix .
iii The physical and chemical properties shall be compatible with those of all adjoining surfaces .
The stress in the mortar shall not exceed that defined in Appendix for bridge bearings and Appendix for other applications .
Where the mortar is required to resist stress before attaining its day strength the compressive strength shall be confirmed by tests on mortar cubes stored under conditions that simulate the field conditions .
Materials i The maximum aggregate size in bedding mortar shall be .
mm .
ii Proprietary materials shall be stored as follows a The materials shall be stored in a dry environment at a temperature of between C and C. b The containers shall be dampproof leak proof and readily emptied of their contents .
c Containers shall be marked with the batch reference number component identification manufacturers name net weight and such warnings or precautions concerning the contents as are required .
iii The material shall not be removed from the store for use in the Works until immediately prior to mixing .
iv Material shall not be used more than six months after the date of manufacture or any lesser period specified by the manufacturer or supplier .
v The Contractor shall supply with each batch or part of a batch of the material delivered to the Site certificates furnished by the supplier or manufacturer stating the following a Manufacturers name and address .
b Manufacturers agents name and address where applicable .
c Description of material and brand name .
d Batch reference number size of batch and number of containers in the delivery order .
e Date of manufacture .
f The chloride ion content expressed as a percentage by mass of cement .
vi Calcium chloride or admixtures containing chloride salts shall not be used and the total chloride ion content shall not exceed .
of the mass of cement .
vii Portland cement CEM I shall comply with BS EN .
viii The total acidsoluble sulfate content of the mortar mix as SO shall not exceed of the mass of cement in the mix .
The acid soluble sulfate AS shall be determined in accordance with Test No .
in TRL Report .
The sulfate content shall be calculated as the total from the various constituents of the mix .
ix If water for the Works is not available from a water companys supply the Contractor shall ensure that the water complies with the guidance given in BS EN .
Water from a water company supply may be used without testing .
Where testing is required the sulfate content of the water shall be tested in accordance with Test No .
in TRL Report .
The water shall not be used Amendment November Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Miscellaneous if the sulfate content exceeds .
g of sulfate as SO per litre .
Water from the sea or tidal rivers shall not be used .
x Resinous bedding mortars shall be based on thermosetting organic polymers consisting of stable fluid andor solid components which on mixing react chemically to form a hardened solid mass .
Products shall be formulated from epoxide polyester polyurethane or acrylic resin systems .
Fillers or aggregates to be incorporated in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations to extend or modify the properties of the resinous composition shall be prebagged dry and factory proportioned .
The addition of other fillers or aggregates shall not be permitted .
Site Mixing Placing and Curing i Mixing placing and curing of proprietary bedding mortar shall be carried out in accordance with the manufacturers written instructions together with the following a The material shall not be mixed or placed in the Works at ambient temperatures of less than C. If for hours before during or after placing the ambient temperature falls below C the Contractor shall maintain the temperature of the substrate and other adjoining surfaces at not less than C for the duration of the curing period recommended by the manufacturer .
b For cementitious bedding mortars the watercement ratio shall not exceed ..
The water content shall be confirmed during the approval tests and maintained within a tolerance of per cent in mortars placed in the Works .
c Only full packs of mortar as supplied shall be mixed .
Onsite proportioning shall not be permitted .
d The temperature of the mortar on completion of mixing shall be between C and C. ii For cementitious bedding mortars the substrate shall be flushed clean with water two hours before placing and maintained wet until placing commences .
Any free water on the surface of the substrate shall be removed before placing the mortar .
The underside of the base plate shall be clean and free from loose rust and loose mill scale at the time of bedding .
The mortar shall be placed in its final position within minutes of commencement of mixing .
Immediately after casting the mortar shall be protected to prevent evaporation for at least three days .
iii For resinous bedding mortars the substrate shall be dry free from loose dirt and dust and shall meet the conditions specified by the manufacturer .
The underside of the base plate shall be clean and free from loose rust and loose mill scale at the time of bedding .
The mortar shall be placed in its final position within one hour or lesser period specified by the manufacturer of commencement of mixing .
iv The mortar shall be poured in one corner of the plinth .
The addition of mortar to the sides of the plinth shall only be permitted after the mortar has flowed completely under the plinth .
v No internal metal shims shall be allowed to remain in the hardened bedding mortar except where described in Appendix .
Laboratory Approval Tests i General Every batch of mortar to be used in the Works shall be tested by the Contractor .
Where more than one batch of mortar is to be used in the Works the Elastic Stability Test may be omitted from the testing regime subsequent to the initial laboratory approval tests .
The Contractor shall state the water content to be used expressed as a percentage by weight of the material .
Mixing shall be carried out in accordance with the manufacturers written instructions .
ii Flow Cone Test Calibration of Flow a The flow characteristics of the mortar shall be determined by the Flow Cone Test method described in ASTM Standard C. b Tests shall be conducted at ambient temperatures of C and C within minutes of commencement of mixing .
c For the test at C the temperature of the flow cone and the mixer shall be C the temperature of the dry material C and the temperature of the water where required C. d For the test at C the temperature of the flow cone the mixer the dry material and the water where required shall be C. Amendment November Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Miscellaneous e For each temperature at least two tests having times of efflux within shall be made and the average time of efflux to the nearest .
second shall be reported .
iii Flow Between Glass Plates a The flow characteristics of the mortar between glass plates shall be determined using the apparatus shown in HCD Drawing Number K. b Tests shall be conducted at ambient temperatures of C and C. c The temperature of the apparatus dry material and water for each test shall comply with subClause iic and d of this Clause .
d The mortar shall be poured in one corner of the apparatus commencing between minutes and minutes after commencement of mixing .
e A satisfactory flow shall be achieved when the mortar flows under the glass plate and rises at least mm above the underside of the top plate at all positions without signs of segregation bleeding effervescence or air inclusions .
iv Compressive Strength Cementitious a The compressive strength of cementitious bedding mortars shall be carried out on six mm cubes at an age of days .
b The temperature of the mixer the dry material the water and the moulds shall be C. c The mm cube moulds shall comply with BS EN .
Test specimens shall be made by filling the moulds carefully through a funnel to produce a voidfree mortar .
The moulds shall be covered by a steel plate to prevent expansion of the mortar .
d There shall be no compaction .
Specimens shall be dampcured for the first hours removed from the moulds and then water cured .
Curing shall comply with BS EN .
e Testing shall comply with BS EN .
f The strength requirement shall be satisfied if none of the compressive strengths obtained is lower than Nmm and the difference between the highest and lowest values is not more than of the average .
All results shall be reported .
v Compressive Strength Resinous a The compressive strength for resinous bedding mortars shall be carried out on six mm cubes at an age of hours .
b The mm cube moulds shall comply with BS Part and shall be carefully filled using a funnel to ensure voidfree cubes .
There shall be no compaction .
c Testing shall comply with BS Part .
d The strength requirement shall be satisfied if none of the compressive strengths obtained is lower than Nmm and the difference between the highest and lowest values is not more than of the average .
All results shall be reported .
vi Expansion Test a Short term expansion shall be determined by the method described in ASTM Standard Ca .
Results shall be determined from the mean of two tests .
b The expansion of cementitious bedding mortars at hours shall be less than .
and greater than .. c The volume change of resinous bedding mortars at hours shall be between .
and .. vii Water Absorption Test a Absorption of water by resinous bedding mortars shall be determined by the method described in ASTM Standard C. The absorption shall be not more than .. viiiElastic stability tests for cementitious bedding mortars shall be carried out on one set of three cubes made at C as described in sub Clause iv of this Clause .
a Curing shall comply with BS EN .
After a minimum of days the cubes shall be placed in water at C heated at a uniform rate to C in hours .
Amendment November Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Miscellaneous b Upon attaining C the cubes shall be sealed in a plastic bag and then loaded at a compressive stress of Nmm maintained for six hours at C and the strain measured .
c The total compressive strain shall not exceed on each cube .
ix Elastic stability tests for resinous bedding mortars shall be carried out on one set of two mm cubes complying with BS Part .
a On removing the cubes from the moulds after hours they shall be heated at a uniform rate to C in a further hours .
b Upon attaining C the cubes shall be loaded at a compressive stress of Nmm maintained for six hours at C and the strain measured .
c The total compressive strain shall not exceed on each cube .
Site Control Tests i If the efflux times at C and C determined as described in subClause ii of this Clause are within or two seconds of each other whichever is the greater then site control tests for flow shall be carried out as described in a below .
In other cases when the air temperature is less than C site control tests for flow shall be carried out as described in b below and when the air temperature is greater than C site control tests for flow shall be carried out as described in a below .
a Each load of mortar mixed for placing in the Works shall be tested at ambient temperature by the flow cone test method as described in subClause ii of this Clause .
The results shall agree within or two seconds whichever is the greater of the values obtained in the approval tests at C. b Each load of mortar mixed for placing in the Works shall be tested at ambient temperature by the flow cone test method as described in subClause ii of this Clause .
The results shall agree within or two seconds whichever is the greater of the values obtained in the approval tests at C. ii Compressive Strength .
Three cubes from each load of mortar mixed for placing in the Works shall be tested for compressive strength as described in subClause iv or v of this Clause as appropriate .
Tolerances The following tolerances shall apply to all temperatures referred to in this Clause C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C The tolerances applying to all linear dimensions unless otherwise shown on the Drawings shall be .
Concrete for Ancillary Purposes General Concrete mixes referred to in the Contract as ST followed by a number shall mean concrete for ancillary purposes which shall comply with this Clause and any additional requirements in Appendix .
Concrete for ancillary purposes shall be a standardised prescribed concrete complying with BS EN and BS and with the additional requirements of this Clause .
Cement Cement types as defined in BS see Table A. of BS or Table of BS shall comprise one of the following CEM I CEM IIAV CEM IIBV BIIIA or where required in Appendix SRPC sulfateresisting Portland cement .
Aggregates Aggregates shall comply with BS EN and unless otherwise described in Appendix the maximum size shall be mm .
The total acidsoluble sulfate content of the concrete mix as SO shall not exceed of the mass of cement in the mix .
The acid soluble sulfate AS shall be determined in accordance with Test No .
in TRL Report .
Amendment November Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Miscellaneous Consistence The consistence of the concrete shall be defined by its consistence class slump and be within either consistence class S or consistence class S of BS EN BS as appropriate to the purpose .
Standardised Prescribed Concrete The standardised prescribed concrete used for each purpose shall be as described in Table unless otherwise described in Appendix .
TABLE Concrete for Ancillary Purposes Purpose Standardised prescribed concrete Footings for fence posts and augered ST foundations for traffic sign posts Foundations for environmental barrier posts ST and planted lighting columns Blinding concrete backfill for structural ST foundations overdig of post holes and preparation of formation to Clause Bedding and backing to precast concrete ST kerbs channels edgings and quadrants Bed to drains Type A .
Foundations channels ST and benching to chambers Bed haunch and surround to drains other ST than Type A .
Surround to chambers and gullies Unless otherwise described in Appendix Refer to HCD drawing number F and F Transporting Placing and Compacting Concrete Concrete shall be transported and placed so that contamination segregation and loss of materials does not occur .
The maximum temperature of the concrete at any time between mixing and placing shall be no greater than C. Concrete shall be placed and compacted within two hours of mixing .
After compaction it shall not be disturbed within hours .
Concrete shall be compacted by tamping or vibrating until it is thoroughly worked around any embedded metal and into corners of formwork or excavations until a solid mass substantially free from voids is obtained without segregation and with no free water on the surface .
The Contractor shall select the consistence as described in subClause of this Clause to achieve this .
Surface finishes shall comply with Clause and unless otherwise described in Appendix the following Buried surfaces Unformed surfaces shall be Class U Formed surfaces shall be Class F Exposed surfaces Unformed surfaces shall be Class U except benching to chambers which shall be Class U Formed surfaces shall be Class F Formwork shall be struck without damage to the concrete not less than two days after placing the concrete and exposed surfaces shall be cured as described in Clause or by covering them with an opaque impermeable membrane or with hessian or sand which shall be kept damp .
Such covering shall not be removed for two days after placing .
This Clause shall be complied with where standardised prescribed concrete to BS EN and BS EN are shown on the Drawings for purposes other than those in Table .
Porous No Fines Concrete No fines concrete shall consist of Portland cement CEM I to BS EN and mm single size aggregate complying with BS EN .
The ratio of aggregate to cement shall be by volume or by mass .
The concrete shall be mixed by machine or by hand to a uniform colour and consistency before placing .
The quantity of water used shall not exceed that required to coat all of the aggregate particles without forming excess grout .
The concrete shall be compacted by hand only .
Plastic Coating to Fencing Posts Gates and Ancillaries Plastic coating to steel or galvanized steel fence posts gates and ancillaries shall comply with BS Part .
Preparation of steel and galvanizing shall comply with Series .
Plastic Coated High Tensile Wire Wire shall be .
mm diameter high tensile drawn carbon steel wire with a minimum tensile strength of Nmm zinc coated to class A to comply with BS EN and plastic coated to Amendment May Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Miscellaneous joining the centres of the markers shall be perpendicular to the centre line of the lane in which the markers are installed .
ii The base of the pockets shall be cleaned and dried ensuring that all loose material is removed .
iii Thermoplastic road marking material or paint shall be in accordance with BS EN shall then be poured into the pockets until the material projects slightly above the level of the road surface but the material must not be allowed to spread onto the surrounding carriageway surface .
The completed markers shall be free from raggedness at their edges and free from streaks and be flush ie not more than mm above with the surface of the adjacent carriageway .
Granolithic Concrete Rendering and Screed Granolithic concrete shall be designed concrete to Clause and shall be strength class C with maximum aggregate size mm to Clause .
It shall conform to Clauses and .
Aggregate shall be crushed granite complying with BS EN for heavy duty concrete floor finishes .
The aggregate shall comply with either the grading requirements in Table for GA or .
GA maximum size allin aggregate or the coarse aggregate grading in Table for GC single sized aggregate and the sand within the limits of CP or MP of BS EN .
Granolithic concrete to this Clause shall be laid on base concrete which has been prepared in the following manner .
The laitance on the base concrete shall be removed by wire brushing and by hosing with water .
This shall be done after the initial set of the base concrete but before hardening and without disturbing the aggregate .
Granolithic concrete to this clause shall be laid not later than three days after placing the base concrete .
After compaction the surface of the render or screed shall be trowelled to a smooth finish to the required levels profiles and contours and shall present a surface finish Class U to Clause .
F comply with the following subClauses and shall be grade designated Grade A .
Plastic coatings shall be applied to wire by extrusion using a compound complying with BS Type EA and with the following additional requirements i to iii i The vinyl chloride homopolymer shall be mixed with appropriate primary plasticizers heat and light stabilizers lubricants and pigments .
No extender or filler other than stabilizers or pigments shall be used .
No other material shall be added to the compound .
ii Not more than of clean once reworked material which shall be of the same composition shall be added to the virgin material from which the compound is to be manufactured .
iii The softness number of the compound shall be not less than five nor greater than when tested as described in BS Part Method A .
The surface of extruded plastic coatings shall be smooth continuous and free from discolouration .
The colour of the coating shall be as required by Appendix either green or black in accordance with BS .
The overall nominal diameter of the plastic coated wire shall be .
mm .
When two diameter measurements are made at right angles to each other at a crosssection the average of the two measurements shall not differ from the specified nominal diameter by more than .
mm .
Cored Thermoplastic Node Markers General Cored thermoplastic node markers shall be white and installed in pairs or sets of three at the locations described in Appendix .
Node Markers The node markers shall be constructed as follows i mm diameter pockets mm mm deep shall be cored in the finished road surface at mm mm centres within a longitudinal tolerance of .
m. The pockets shall be cored using a drill consisting of central pilot bit surrounded by a mm annular bit .
The material within the annulus shall be carefully broken out leaving a rough surface to the base of the pocket .
The line Amendment November Amendment May MANUAL OF CONTRACT DOCUMENTS FOR HIGHWAY WORKS VOLUME SPECIFICATION FOR HIGHWAY WORKS SERIES LANDSCAPE AND ECOLOGY Contents Clause Title Page General Weed Control Control of Rabbits and Deer Ground Preparation Grass Seeding Wildflower Seeding and Turfing Planting Grass Bulbs and Wildflower Maintenance Watering Establishment Maintenance for Planting Maintenance of Established Trees and Shrubs Management of Waterbodies Special Ecological Measures Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Landscape and Ecology LANDSCAPE AND ECOLOGY General Quality Management Schemes Organizations providing landscape and ecology works for highway schemes shall comply with this Series and the associated quality management schemes detailed in Appendix A .
Notice and Liaison If required in Appendix the Contractor shall give at least hours notice to the Overseeing Organisation of the intention to commence any of the following operations or other operations stated in Appendix i Subsoil treatment .
ii Topsoil cultivations .
iii Grass or wildflower seeding or turfing .
iv Planting .
v Mulching .
vi Tree felling .
vii Arboricultural works .
viii Application of pesticides .
ix Works outside the road boundary .
x Any works within adjacent to or which may affect any site of nature conservation or archaeological interest stated in Appendix .
This notice shall be repeated subsequent to periods when the operations have been temporarily suspended .
If required in Appendix the Contractor shall liaise directly with other landowners to give notice and arrange precise access dates for works outside the road boundary .
Peat Peat or peatbased products shall not be used except i where peat is excavated on Site or ii where peat is required in Appendix or iii in Wales where reduced peat products are acceptable provided proof that the peat is extracted from areas of little conservation value as defined in the Report of the Working Group on Peat Extraction and Related Matters published by DETR .
The Contractor shall provide such proof to the Overseeing Organisation of Wales in the manner stated in Appendix .
Pesticide Application A pesticide shall be any agent exerting biological control over living organisms and as such shall include herbicides pesticides lumbricides fungicides algaecides moss killers and all such similar products or materials .
All pesticides methods of application materials and tank mixes methods of working transportation storage and records shall be strictly in accordance with current legislation and codes of practice .
The Contractor shall make available to the Overseeing Organisation evidence of competency in the use of pesticides .
The pesticides shall be fit for the purpose for which they are intended .
Only pesticides intended for horticultural applications not agricultural applications shall be used .
All pesticides shall be used in strict accordance with the manufacturers instructions .
The method of application and the undertaking of the work shall not lead to the pollution of any watercourse or water supply .
The Contractor shall comply with current advice pertaining to the Overseeing Organisations of England Scotland Wales or Northern Ireland as appropriate for pesticides application near watercourses .
Such advice is given as follows In England and Wales the Contractor shall comply with current Department for Environment Food and Rural Affairs DEFRA and Environment Agency guidelines for pesticides application near watercourses .
Before each pesticide application near a watercourse the Contractor shall notify the Environment Agency and obtain any necessary consent forms .
The Contractor shall be responsible for the return of completed consent forms to the Environment Agency .
In Scotland the Contractor shall comply with current Environment and Rural Affairs Department Scottish Executive and Scottish Environment Protection Agency guidelines for pesticides application near watercourses .
Before each pesticide application near a watercourse the Contractor shall notify the Scottish Environment Protection Agency and obtain any necessary consent Amendment May Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Landscape and Ecology forms .
The Contractor shall be responsible for the return of completed consent forms to the Scottish Environment Protection Agency .
In Northern Ireland the Contractor shall comply with current Department of Agriculture and Rural Development and Environment and Heritage Service guidelines for pesticides application near watercourses .
Before each pesticide application near a watercourse the Contractor shall notify the Environment and Heritage Service and obtain any necessary consent forms .
The Contractor shall be responsible for the return of completed consent forms to the Environment and Heritage Service .
All pesticides shall be securely and safely stored and transported .
All used or partly used containers shall be removed from Site immediately after use .
Application equipment and containers shall not be rinsed out on Site under any circumstances .
The Contractor shall ensure that all machinery and equipment used in the application of all pesticides is properly cleaned maintained serviced and repaired in accordance with the manufacturers instructions to ensure correct application and to prevent malfunction and leakage at all times .
Water used for dilution of pesticides shall be from a clean supply .
The pesticide is to be applied during the season and weather conditions favourable to the effective control of the targeted species .
The method of application shall minimise spray drift .
No pesticide shall be applied when wind speeds are high enough to cause spray drift .
The Contractor shall postpone cancel or suspend the application of pesticides at any time when it is considered that conditions have become unsuitable .
Prior to commencement the Contractor shall publicise in accordance with current regulations that pesticides applications are to be undertaken .
A record of all pesticide use shall be maintained by the Contractor on a form as detailed in Appendix .
It shall contain such information as the pesticide name of operative location of Site and weather conditions .
A copy of the record form shall be submitted to the Overseeing Organisation at intervals to be stated in Appendix .
Bird Nesting Season For the purposes of this Specification the bird nesting season shall be the period stated in Appendix .
Inspection Reports If required in Appendix the Contractor shall provide Inspection Reports for the activities carried out under Clauses and .
The reports shall identify the level of work activities undertaken for each operation on a form as detailed in Appendix .
Weed Control General Weed control shall be required in the locations and at the frequencies given in Appendix for infestations of injurious weeds as follows i Broad leafed dock .
ii Curled dock .
iii Common ragwort .
iv Creeping thistle .
v Spear thistle .
vi Himalayan Balsam .
vii Giant hogweed .
viii Japanese knotweed .
Other species which may be a nuisance locally that require control in accordance with this subClause shall be stated in Appendix .
Weed killing shall achieve total dieback of weeds and in the case of total weed control shall not allow any significant regrowth less than within months of application .
In the case of selective weed control there shall be not more than regrowth during the season .
Total Weed Control On hardstandings gravelled or paved areas and around street furniture contact translocated and residual herbicides approved for total weed control shall be applied in accordance with the manufacturers instructions at the locations and frequency stated in Appendix .
For site preparation on topsoil heaps and in planted beds a translocated nonresidual herbicide approved for total weed control shall be applied in accordance with the manufacturers instructions at the locations and frequency stated in Appendix .
In open ditches lagoons watercourses and filter drains a contact or translocated herbicide approved for use in or near water shall be applied in accordance with the manufacturers instructions at the locations and frequency stated in Appendix .
Amendment May Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Landscape and Ecology Selective Weed Control in Grass At the locations and frequency stated in Appendix weeds in verges central reserves planted areas and other grassed areas shall be controlled using a selective translocated herbicide .
The herbicide shall be applied during a period of active growth in accordance with the manufacturers instructions .
Weed Control by Spot Application of Herbicide Where described in Appendix weed control shall be carried out to control the target species listed using spot treatment with a translocated herbicide ie applied with a device that ensures that the herbicide touches weed species only .
The herbicide shall be applied in accordance with Clause at the season and frequency stated in Appendix .
Weed Control by PullingHandweeding Handweeding shall be carried out at the locations and frequency stated in Appendix .
Handweeding shall consist of the removal of the entire weed including roots by digging forking hoeing or pulling .
Weeds shall be removed prior to flowering and the arisings removed in accordance with subClause of this Clause .
Weed Control by Cutting Weeds shall be cut at the locations and frequency stated in Appendix .
The weeds shall be cut prior to flowering to a height of between and mm or as otherwise stated in Appendix .
Arisings from Weed Control Operations Where described in Appendix all arisings from weed control operations shall be removed from Site .
Injurious weed arisings shall be destroyed .
Control of Rabbits and Deer General In the locations and for the period of time stated in Appendix or when instructed by the Overseeing Organisation the Contractor shall carry out rabbit control .
Prior to instructing rabbit control the Overseeing Organisation will have contacted adjacent landowners regarding their obligation to control infestations on their own land .
Thereafter the Contractor shall liaise as necessary with adjacent landowners for access to control coordination and report any further complaints to the Overseeing Organisation .
The Contractor shall comply with current legislation in relation to pest control and make available to the Overseeing Organisation evidence of suitable formal training of operatives as competent for the procedures and pesticides to be employed .
A register shall be maintained by the Contractor detailing persons employed pesticides used weather site observations made e.g .
badger setts vehicle damage or vandalism together with confirmation that the areas are satisfactorily controlled .
Control Operations Badger setts and fox earths shall be clearly identified and marked in an inconspicuous manner using a method to be agreed with the Overseeing Organisation .
The location shall be recorded and reported to the Overseeing Organisation .
Sett and earth markers shall be removed immediately after rabbit control operations have been completed .
As required under the Wildlife and Countryside Act and the Protection of Badgers Act in Northern Ireland the Wildlife Northern Ireland Order the Contractor shall not divulge the location of badger setts to any other party or parties .
After treatment the ground shall be left clear with rabbit holes filled in .
Where stated in Appendix any bramble and herbage that will interfere with the control of rabbits shall be cut and the arisings dealt with in accordance with subClauses .
and .. Rabbit Control within the Road Boundary Initial clearance and thereafter effective control of rabbit infestations shall be undertaken within the road boundary .
Effective control is defined as i No damage to verges embankmentscuttings site furniture or drains .
ii No fresh signs of bark stripping on woody plants .
iii Few fresh droppings seen .
iv No new appreciable grazing seen .
v No complaints from adjoining landowners .
The area where control is required shall be visited a sufficient number of times during the first month to keep the rabbits controlled and substantially eliminated .
Thereafter the Contractor shall ensure effective control for the period stated in Appendix or instructed by the Overseeing Organisation .
If required in Appendix the Overseeing Organisation will inspect the Site together with a representative of the Contractor at monthly intervals to agree whether effective control has been achieved .
Amendment May Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Landscape and Ecology Clearance of Rabbits and Deer in Fenced Areas to be Planted Any rabbit burrows located within fenced enclosures for planting shall be cleared of all rabbits and all exitentry holes effectively blocked immediately after completing the fencing of each enclosure in accordance with the requirements described in Series .
Unless otherwise instructed by the Overseeing Organisation the Contractor shall not plant any area until all rabbits and deer have been cleared from the fenced enclosure .
The Contractor shall maintain the enclosure free of rabbits rabbit burrows including exitentry holes and deer for the period stated in Appendix or instructed by the Overseeing Organisation .
Replacement of Plants Damaged by Animals The Contractor shall replace any plant material damaged by rabbits or deer due to the failure of the Contractor to effectively block entry points burrows and nests or failure of the Contractor to maintain the fences shelters or guards as described in the Contract .
The Contractor shall replace the damaged plants in accordance with Clause and maintain them in accordance with Clause and Clause for the period stated in Appendix or instructed by the Overseeing Organisation .
Ground Preparation Vegetation Clearance Where stated in Appendix all grass and other herbaceous vegetation shall be cut in accordance with subClause .
to a height of between mm and mm and the arisings removed off Site .
Where stated in Appendix the Contractor shall apply a nonresidual translocated herbicide in accordance with subClause .
to all areas to be planted between and days prior to planting .
Where the area to be treated with herbicide has been cut in accordance with subClause .
the Contractor shall await active vegetative regrowth sufficient for the herbicide to be at its most effective before applying the herbicide .
The treatment for total herbicide control shall kill all treated growth including their root systems .
The Contractor shall not commence any excavation or cultivation of the areas where herbicide has been applied until the vegetation has been effectively controlled .
Subsoil Treatment Where stated in Appendix planting areas shall be ripped using a ripping tine or subsoil plough .
The minimum depth of treatment shall be mm unless otherwise stated in Appendix .
The spacing between the tine furrows shall be as stated in Appendix .
If no dimension is stated the spacing shall be close enough to cause the uplifting and fracturing of the soil throughout the profile to the minimum treated depth and shall be determined by the soil type and conditions and the type of subsoiler used .
Approximate spacings shall be as follows i conventional subsoiler alone mm ii winged subsoiler alone mm iii winged subsoiler with leading tines .
m. Final Preparation of Soils Where stated in Appendix the requirements of subClauses .
to .
shall apply to subsoil to be seeded or topsoil spread under the Contract .
Any consolidated material is to be broken up to mm depth and the top mm of all soil reduced to a tilth suitable for final shaping with a grading blade particle size mm and below .
All undesirable material brought to the surface including stones larger than mm in any dimension roots tufts of grass and foreign matter is to be removed off Site unless otherwise stated in Appendix .
When material is reasonably dry and workable it shall be graded in accordance with the Drawings .
Finished levels of material after settlement shall be i as shown on the Drawings adjoining pavings kerbs or grass areas ii not less than mm below damp proof course of adjoining buildings iii at the same level as adjoining soil areas .
Once material has been spread andor graded the area shall not be traversed by machinery or used for storage purposes .
Soil Contaminated During the Contract Where the Contractor has contaminated the ground with cement slurry oil tar or any material harmful to plant life soil shall be excavated to a depth of .
m and removed off Site .
Uncontaminated subsoil and topsoil shall be used for backfilling to the finished profiles required under the Contract .
Amendment May Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Landscape and Ecology Grass Seeding Wildflower Seeding and Turfing Season Grass seed shall be sown during the period March to May or September to October unless otherwise stated in Appendix .
Wildflower seed shall be sown during the period stated in Appendix .
Final Cultivations Where stated in Appendix immediately prior to sowing or hydraulic seeding or laying turf the upper mm of soil shall be reduced to a fine tilth by use of a chain harrow or other suitable plant .
If required in Appendix fertiliser or other soil ameliorants shall be evenly incorporated into the upper mm of soil during final cultivations at the rate stated in Appendix .
Seed Seed shall comprise the mixtures stated in Appendix .
Grass seed shall comply with BS .
Grass seed shall be a tested mixture and certificates of germination and purity obtained from an Official Seed Testing Station not more than six months prior to sowing shall be provided to the Overseeing Organisation before sowing together with the names of the varieties used in the mixture .
The information on seed certificates and seed bag labels shall correspond .
The Contractor shall provide written evidence that seeds comply with any provenance requirements described in Appendix .
Conventional Sowing Unless otherwise stated in Appendix sowing shall be carried out by evenly distributing the seed at a rate of not less than gm for side slopes of embankments and cuttings and not less than gm elsewhere .
Sowing shall be immediately followed by lightly raking the surface of the soil to cover the seeds by use of a chain harrow or other suitable plant .
Hydraulic Seeding Hydraulic seeding shall be applied in the locations stated in Appendix .
The hydraulic seeding mixture any special process requirements and the rate of application shall be as described in Appendix .
The mixture shall be kept constantly stirred during application to maintain a homogenous slurry .
Grass Seed Germination The seeding shall be repeated as necessary until an evenly distributed dense sward is established over the seeded area .
The Contractor shall allow for maintenance of all grass areas in accordance with Clause until this has been achieved .
Establishment shall be regarded as achieved when at least of quadrant subdivisions are recorded as filled when tested in accordance with Annex A of BS .
Turf Turfing shall be carried out in accordance with BS and BS .
When it is stated in Appendix that turf arising on Site shall be used such turf shall be stripped as follows or as otherwise described in Appendix i Grass shall be mown before lifting to no more than mm high .
ii Turves shall be cut using plant or tools designed for the purpose .
iii Turves shall not be cut from soil that is frozen waterlogged as defined in Clause or excessively dry .
iv Turves shall be of uniform thickness in accordance with BS .
v Turves shall be rectangular with the shorter sides not less than mm .
Where stated in Appendix imported turf shall be used .
All imported turf shall comply with BS and BS .
Imported turf shall contain the grass and or herb mixture stated in Appendix .
The source of turf shall be notified in writing to the Overseeing Organisation and a sample of not less than no .
mm x mm turves provided for approval in accordance with Clause not less than one week prior to commencing turfing .
Imported turf shall be delivered to the Site within hours of lifting .
Care shall be taken in transport to avoid deterioration due to inadequate covering or overheating .
Turf shall be laid within hours of delivery between April and September and within hours of delivery between October and March .
If this is not possible turf shall be temporarily laid flat on topsoil and kept moist .
Turves shall not be stored in stacks over .
m in height .
Amendment May Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Landscape and Ecology Turf shall be laid on soil that is moist but not frozen or waterlogged as defined in Clause .
Turf shall not be laid during periods of drought or onto soil that is excessively dry or during heavy rainfall .
Turf shall be placed working from planks laid on previously laid turves .
Turf shall be laid to a bond with broken joints butted up with joints no wider than mm .
When laid on slopes the bond shall be laid diagonally across the slope .
Levels shall be adjusted by raking out or infilling with fine soil under the turves .
When laid turf shall be lightly tamped in place with clean wooden beaters .
The use of rollers shall not be permitted .
After laying turf the surface shall be dressed with finely sifted topsoilsand which shall be brushed in to completely fill all joints .
Whole turves shall be used at edges and trimmed to a clean line .
Turf shall be neatly cut away to a diameter of mm around individual trees .
If required in Appendix turf shall be secured in position using either i Softwood pegs mm long x mm square or ii Galvanised wire pins mm long x mm diameter bent or hairpin pattern .
Where stated in Appendix immediately after laying turfed areas shall be watered at a rate of lm .
Newly sown or turfed grass shall be watered as necessary to ensure establishment .
When grassed areas require irrigation water shall be applied at the rate of lm using low pressure hose sprinkler or spray evenly over the entire area .
Establishment Cuts Any opening of joints or uneven levels in turf areas caused by shrinkage of turves or settlement shall be made good by topdressing with sieved topsoil fine sand mix .
For the number of cuts stated in Appendix newlyestablished grass whether newlysown or turfed shall be mown to leave a nominal mm height .
The first mowing shall be carried out once the grass has reached a height of mm the second and any subsequent establishment cuts when it has regrown to mm .
The plant used for mowing shall comply with any requirements of Appendix .
Any turves disturbed by mowing shall be refirmed into their original position and watered to their full depth .
Amendment May Unless permitted otherwise in Appendix all areas shall be left clear of grass cuttings following each mowing by raking or other suitable method and arisings disposed of off Site .
Planting All Planting Works shall be carried out in accordance with BS BS and BS .
On completion of planting operations all disturbed accesses to and ground around the planted areas shall be completely reinstated to their former condition as at the commencement of planting .
Plants All plants to be supplied shall be as scheduled in Appendix and shall comply with BS Parts to as relevant BS the National Plant Specification published by the Horticultural Trades Association andor as otherwise required in Appendix .
If plants grown in cells are required the cells shall be designed for tree or shrub use and the plants shall be grown in open conditions for one growing season .
No grafted stock shall be supplied unless it is stated in Appendix that grafted plants are permitted .
If required in Appendix plants shall be supplied in a planting medium containing specified mycorrhiza .
Where the seed origin of native plant species is required to be of specific provenance the provenance shall be determined and described in accordance with Forestry Commission Practice Note Using Local Stock for Planting Native Trees and Shrubs .
Written evidence of its provenance shall be provided to the Overseeing Organisation prior to planting using the Provenance Certificate proforma in Appendix .
Plant material shall comply with any other special provenance requirements stated in Appendix .
The Contractor shall provide the Overseeing Organisation with written evidence that the supply of bulbs and wildflower plants is from a cultivated source .
The Contractor shall inform the Overseeing Organisation in writing of the proposed source of supply of all plant materials at least days prior to delivery so as to enable the plants to be inspected at the nursery before delivery to Site .
If required in Appendix the Contractor shall make arrangements for the Overseeing Organisation to select individual trees of Standard size and larger at the nursery .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Landscape and Ecology Plants shall be lifted packed and handled in accordance with BS BS and the Horticultural Trades Association publication the National Plant Specification Section .
Handling and Establishing Landscape Plants .
During the period subsequent to the receipt of the plants and prior to planting the Contractor shall comply with the treatment of nursery stock specified below i Bareroot plants .
Prior to despatch or on arrival at Site plants may be stored up to days in bundles with a covering of freely draining moistureretentive material such as wet sacking or straw which is moistened periodically .
For a storage period of more than three days bundles shall be opened and the plants spread out and heeled into trenches in topsoil minimum depth mm with the roots fully in contact with the soil .
ii Bareroot plants transported in plastic bags .
Plants in bags shall be stored no more than one layer deep and be protected from direct sunlight at all times .
Where delay of more than one day occurs the bags shall be stored upright not stacked in a cool shady position or shed or placed in a cold store .
If cold store facilities are not available plants shall be removed from bags and heeled into soil with all roots covered .
iii Container or cell grown plants .
Containers shall be maintained upright watered as required sheltered and protected from frost and shall not be packaged or stored more than one layer deep .
Degradable pots cells or roottrainers that may disintegrate in transit shall be enclosed in polythene film gauge and firmly secured .
iv Rootballed plants .
Permeable wrappings shall be kept moist by watering and plants in polythene wrappings protected from direct sunlight .
For longer periods of storage rootballs with permeable wrappings shall be placed on a well drained surface and covered with a deep layer of sand pulverised bark wood shavings or other suitable material .
v Protection from frost .
When necessary additional measures shall be undertaken to protect plants from frost .
vi The location for temporary storage shall be sheltered from winds and well drained .
vii All containers shall remain completely filled with compost .
If up to compost has been lost from containers at any stage then further suitable moistened compost shall be added to completely cover the root systems and fill the containers .
Any containers which have lost more than compost shall be replaced .
All containerised plants shall be thoroughly soaked prior to planting and all containers removed .
viii Any plants damaged by frost desiccation or in any other way prior to planting shall be removed from site and replaced with new plants .
Unless otherwise stated in Appendix all labels canes and ties shall be retained on the plant for months unless they prove restrictive to growth .
All other arisings from the planting including containers wrappings paddings fastenings and bags shall be collected immediately by the Contractor and removed off Site .
Topsoil Compost Fertiliser and Antidessicants Unless otherwise stated in Appendix topsoil for tree pits shall be General Purpose Grade conforming to BS .
Where stated in Appendix compost or fertiliser shall be deposited over planting areas for incorporation into the soil during ground cultivation or incorporated into soil during pit preparation and backfilling .
Compost shall be peatfree organic composted material graded less than mm particle size and free from any non biodegradable material weed material or plant pathogens .
It shall have an organic matter content greater than on a dry matter basis and readily available trace elements .
The pH conductivity and nutrient composition shall be as required in Appendix .
The compost shall be supplied with a volume tolerance of less than .
Where specified in Appendix slowrelease fertiliser shall be used .
The fertiliser shall be thoroughly and evenly mixed with the pit backfill or into the top mm of planting bed soil or scattered over an area mm in diameter around the planting position at the rates specified in Appendix .
Where stated in Appendix antitranspiration sprays root dips antidesiccant soil additives or other forms of antidesiccant shall be used .
Where such antidesiccant measures are specified these shall be applied in strict accordance with the manufacturers instructions .
Time of Planting Planting of barerooted rootballed or cellgrown trees shrubs nonaquatic perennials and wildflowers Amendment May Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Landscape and Ecology shall take place during favourable weather and soil conditions during the season stated in Appendix .
Bare rooted or root balled conifers or evergreens shall be planted during November or March .
Containergrown plants of the types listed above may be planted at any time during favourable weather and soil conditions .
Bulbs shall be planted between September and November unless otherwise stated in Appendix .
The planting season for reeds and other marginal aquatic plants shall be March to April .
No planting or preparatory operations shall take place when the ground is frost bound covered by snow excessively wet or waterlogged as defined in Clause or in excessively dry or windy conditions .
Planting Depth Cellgrown plants shall be planted with the top of the root plug covered by mm of planting medium .
Planting depth for all other plants shall be to the original nursery soil mark on the plant unless otherwise stated in Appendix .
Notch Planting of Trees Shrubs and Hedges Where pits beds or trenches are not used plants shall be notchplanted upright by one of the following methods as directed in Appendix i into a Tshaped opening of sufficient size for the roots of bareroot plants to be fully spread out or to accommodate a cellgrown plant without breaking the rootplug or ii into a Tshaped opening size as directed in i above through upturned turf which has been dug from the planting location .
For individual plants turfs shall be cut mm square and mm deep for single row hedges a strip of turf shall be cut mm wide and for doublerow hedges a strip of turf shall be cut mm wide .
All existing vegetation on turf to be inverted shall be cut to a height of not more than mm before the turf is cut or iii cellgrown plants may be planted using a proprietary tool for the purpose or iv as directed in Appendix .
Surrounding soil shall be firmed back after planting .
Planting Pits Beds and Trenches Planting pits for Feathered trees Light standard trees and all larger trees shall be excavated to the dimensions given in Table .
The subsoil in the pit base shall be broken up to a further depth as given in Table .
If required in Appendix pits shall be excavated for whips transplants and shrubs and trenches excavated for hedges to the dimensions given in Table .
The subsoil in the pit base shall be broken up to a further depth as given in Table .
Arisings from planting pits and trenches shall be disposed of as directed in Appendix .
TABLE Planting Pits Beds and Trenches Type Dimension of excavation W x W x D mm Depth of cultivation at the base of pits or trenches mm Semimature trees Measurement of rootball plus in each direction Extra heavy standard and Heavy standard trees x x Selected standard trees Tall standard trees Standard trees x x Light standard trees Half standard trees Feathered trees x x Whips where pit Transplants planting is Shrubs specified x x Hedging where specified x x Cellgrown plants mm greater than W and D of rootplug length of hedging On sloping ground pits shall be dug with vertical sides and horizontal base and shall maintain the specified minimum depth throughout .
When backfilled planting pits shall be finished to existing contours .
For pits for Standard trees and larger trees any excavated topsoil shall be set aside to be used as backfill .
The Contractor shall import topsoil in accordance with subClause .
to make up for any deficiencies caused by the removal of subsoil or fill material .
Unless otherwise stated in Appendix or where the soil is naturally free draining prior to backfilling mm x mm x mm pits a mm thick layer of riverwashed gravel or crushed stone mm shall be laid in the base to facilitate drainage .
Amendment May Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Landscape and Ecology Planting in Cultivated Beds and Hedges Where required in Appendix hedgetrenches excavated in accordance with Table shall be backfilled with topsoil or with a premixed topsoil compost mixture or other mixture as stated in Appendix .
Where required in Appendix the ground shall be cultivated to a minimum depth of mm removing all live injurious weed roots and growth to a tip off Site .
Any stones or other rubbish over mm in any direction shall be removed from the surface and disposed of in accordance with subClause .. Root disturbance of adjacent plants shall be avoided and the surface left with a medium tilth .
Any ameliorants specified in Appendix shall be incorporated in a second pass following initial cultivation .
If required in Appendix a mm wide strip along hedgelines shall be cultivated in accordance with subClause ..
In planting beds the extent of the area to be planted shall first be defined by plants spaced around the perimeter .
The remaining plants shall then be used to fill in the centre of the area in an informal manner avoiding straight lines and regular geometric patterns .
At each planting position sufficient soil shall be excavated from the bed to allow mm clearance between either the rootball or the rootends when fully spread and the sides and bottom of the planting hole .
The plant shall be set in the centre of the plant position showing its best side to the front .
Finely broken backfill material shall be packed around the roots .
The plants shall be gently shaken to allow fine soil to surround the roots .
As soil is returned it shall be lightly consolidated and firmly heeled around the rootcollar .
Immediately after planting the soil surface shall be evenly graded .
Where required in Appendix the soil shall then be watered at the rate stated in Appendix .
Planting of Whips Transplants and Shrubs into Pits or Trenches Each plant shall be placed upright in the centre of the pit or where required in Appendix the hedge trench with the roots spread evenly outwards and downwards without restriction .
Where necessary any badly damaged roots shall be carefully pruned before being planted .
The pit or trench shall be backfilled with a pre mixed topsoil compost mixture or other mixture stated in Appendix and the backfill lightly firmed .
Stakes and Ties Unless otherwise stated in Appendix stakes shall be round timber peeled of bark straight in length and free of snags pests and diseases .
Stakes shall have a top diameter of mm .
Unless otherwise stated in Appendix adjustable tree ties strapping or spacers shall be made of black PVC or reinforced rubber .
The width of the belt shall be mm .
Planting of Trees Where required in Appendix root barriers shall be provided at the time of planting in order to constrain the growth of tree roots .
Root barriers shall be supplied and installed in accordance with Appendix and the manufacturers instructions .
All wrappings insulation and padding shall be removed from rootballs immediately before backfilling .
No wire or plastic mesh containers may be left in position .
Any damaged or torn roots shall be cut back cleanly to sound wood prior to planting .
Stakes for all standards and feathered trees shall be firmly driven and positioned into the tree planting pit before planting to a minimum depth of mm below the bottom of the pit .
The stake shall be positioned off centre on the prevailing windward side of the tree as near to the tree as possible but shall not interfere with the free movement of the branches and shall cause no rubbing .
Unless otherwise stated in Appendix the Contractor shall use the shortest possible stake to support the tree when the stake has been driven into the ground there shall be not more than one third of the height of the clear stem of the tree above ground .
Unless otherwise stated in Appendix for all standards and feathered trees one tie shall be used for each tree fixed within mm of the top of the stake and secured to the stake with a mm galvanised clout nail .
Ties shall be of a size appropriate to the size of the tree and stake and equipped with spacers of a size that will ensure that the tree and stake remain vertical .
For extra heavy standards and heavy standards the staking shall be undertaken after the tree has been positioned .
Unless otherwise stated in Appendix three stakes each of m length shall be driven down the side of the rootball and into the pit to a depth of mm below the bottom of the pit .
The stakes shall be angled outwards to between and at the top and pulled in moderately by tensioning all the supporting bands equally .
The stakes shall be equally spaced and shall not pass through the rootball .
Amendment May Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Landscape and Ecology Unless otherwise stated in Appendix for extra heavy standards and heavy standards with above ground staking the tree shall be secured centrally between the stakes with two sets of supporting bands of fire hose or equivalent webbing of minimum width mm .
The upper set shall be positioned as near to the tops of the stakes as possible and the lower set shall be positioned mm above ground level .
Each band shall take the form of a loop around the tree stem nailed to the stake and shall be equally tensioned so as to hold the tree centrally between the stakes .
Where stated in Appendix semimature trees shall be planted as shown on HCD Drawing Number K. Three proprietary anchors per pit shall be provided at angles of around the pit ensuring that they are securely locked in position with their cable eyes mm above the layer of coarse gravel and mm from the side of the rootball position .
The rootball surface shall be protected with a triangular timber frame formed from three pieces of mm x mm x mm timber securely fastened by nails at each corner .
Galvanised cable shall be threaded using a ratchet tensioner .
Wires shall not cut across the rootball .
Unless otherwise stated in Appendix backfill to tree pits shall comprise any excavated topsoil and imported topsoil as necessary with compost in accordance with subClause .
in a topsoil compost mixture thoroughly mixed .
For bare root trees each tree shall be planted upright in the centre of the hole and the root system fully spread outwards and downwards in the pit at the correct level so that the stake passes through the root system as closely to the trunk as possible with minimal disturbance to the roots themselves .
Once the tree has been correctly positioned the pit shall be backfilled with the premixed soilcompost mixture .
During backfilling the tree shall be gently shaken at regular intervals to settle the mixture closely around the roots .
The backfill mixture shall be firmed in layers not exceeding mm to a finished level equivalent to the nursery soil mark on the tree .
Where required in Appendix each tree shall be watered in on the same day as planting at the rate stated in Appendix .
The water shall be delivered by means of a low pressure hose to avoid any washing out of the soil into a depression made in the planting medium around the base of the stem to ensure that the water goes to the root system .
The planting medium shall then be returned to its previous level .
Where stated in Appendix a mm or mm diameter perforated flexible plastic irrigation pipe shall be inserted around the rootball during planting at a depth of mm below the ground surface .
The pipe shall be of sufficient length to coil completely around the root system or rootball and shall be provided with two Tpiece connections with aeration caps which shall be located opposite each other .
Where trees are to be situated within mown grass areas two additional posts of a diameter similar to that of the stake shall be driven firmly into the ground to leave a finished height of approximately mm above soil level .
These posts shall be sited clear of the tree roots in a triangular relationship to the stake such that the combined effect with the weedfree circle will prevent accidental damage by mowing machinery .
Tubes Guards and Ties In the locations stated in Appendix individual plant protectors as described in Appendix shall be provided .
Plant protectors shall be green brown or black and if formed of solid sheet material this shall be translucent .
The top edge of plant protectors shall be formed to prevent abrasion damage to the enclosed plants .
Plant protectors shall be fixed with releasable ratchet ties to softwood or hardwood stakes mm x mm in cross section .
The length of the stakes and the number of stakes and releasable ratchet ties to be used shall be as stated in Appendix .
Where two stakes are used they shall be placed opposite each other within the plant protector .
Mulches Ground Preparation Before application of any mulch the planting areas andor tree positions which are to be mulched shall be free of grass and weed growth .
Where required in Appendix the planting areas andor tree positions shall be watered at the rate stated in Appendix .
Organic Mulches Where it is stated in Appendix that compost shall be applied as a surface mulch it shall comply with subClause .
or other composition as specified in Appendix .
Where it is stated in Appendix that timber mulch is to be used it should be a product certified under the Forest Stewardship Council FSC as an appropriate grade for the site .
Two types may be used i Chipped conifer bark size range mm maximum fines composted for a minimum of six weeks prior to delivery or ii An organic mulch comprising composted wood chips or bark free of fungi and diseases methyl bromide contamination or foreign material .
It shall be matured for a minimum of weeks naturally heated by the process of decomposition to temperatures Amendment May Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Landscape and Ecology exceeding C for a minimum period of days followed by a period of stabilisation .
Where organic mulch is to be used as a mulch it shall be spread evenly over the planting bed or over a m diameter circle around trees to a depth of mm after settlement .
Organic mulch shall be hollowed out where necessary to ensure low branches and foliage are not covered .
The mulch surface shall be left even tidy and sloping down at bed edges .
Individual Mulch Mats Where it is stated in Appendix that mulch mats are to be used they may be square or round .
Unless otherwise specified in Appendix mulch mats shall be not less than mm x mm or mm diameter or greater than mm x mm or mm diameter .
Mulch mats shall be manufactured from the material specified in Appendix .
The mulch mat shall be placed over or split and placed around the plant stem and shall be spread out over the ground ensuring that the plant is in the centre of the mat .
Edges of mulch mats shall be secured as directed in Appendix by either i mm x mm diameter wire pegs or proprietary plastic pegs manufactured for this purpose driven through the mat to their full depth at the corners of square mats or at six equally spaced points around circular mats plus a peg to secure the overlapped slit .
Pegs shall not be used to secure polythene or bituminous felt mats or ii burying a strip mm wide around the edges of the mat vertically into the ground .
All cut edges of woven polypropylene mulch mats shall be so buried to prevent fraying or iii placing pieces of turf at least x mm in size or other materials of equal weight on at least eight positions around the mat or iv as specified in Appendix .
Sheet Mulch Where it is stated in Appendix that sheet mulch shall be used it shall be black olive green or brown in colour .
Unless otherwise specified in Appendix sheet mulch shall be manufactured from at least gauge tear resistant polythene or from woven or spunbonded polypropylene weighing to gm and shall contain an ultraviolet inhibitor .
As directed in Appendix where sheet mulch is used for hedges it shall be laid either in i strips of sheet mulch shall be laid along row hedges one between each planted row and one on each side to cover an area extending mm beyond both sides of the lines of hedge plants or ii one strip of sheet mulch shall be laid to extend at least mm beyond both sides of the lines of hedge plants and an L shaped slit measuring mm x mm shall be made to accommodate the planting of hedging plants .
Sheet mulch strips shall be overlapped at joins .
Strips used for hedges or over planting beds shall be secured by one of the following methods as directed in Appendix i mm x mm diameter wire pegs or proprietary plastic pegs manufactured for this purpose driven through the mat to their full depth at mm intervals along all edges and overlapping joins .
Pegs shall not be used to secure polythene or bituminous felt mulches or ii burying a strip mm wide along the edges of the mat vertically into the ground .
All cut edges of woven polypropylene sheet mulch shall be so buried to prevent fraying or iii placing pieces of turf minimum mm x mm in size laid at mm intervals along the outer edges and laid at mm intervals along overlapping joins .
Sheet Mulch Collars If required in Appendix where mulch mats or sheet mulch is used collars shall be fitted around the stem or trunk of each plant to secure the planting slit and shall be securely stapled in place .
Planting of Bulbs Bulbs shall comply with BS Part .
All bulbs must be commercially grown not collected from the wild .
The number of bulbs per unit area shall be as described in Appendix .
Bulbs shall be thrown onto the ground to ensure natural spacing and planted where they fall .
Bulbs shall be planted with the base of the bulb at the depth stated in Appendix .
Bulbs shall have their base in contact with the soil at the base of the hole .
Where bulbs are to be planted in formal grass areas a Amendment May Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Landscape and Ecology plug of turf shall be neatly removed to form the planting hole and replaced after planting .
Wildflower Plant Preparation and Planting Where it is stated in Appendix that areas are to be planted with wildflowers the Contractor shall prepare the ground by one of the following methods or otherwise as stated in Appendix i create an area free of all live plant growth not less than mm and not more than mm in diameter at each plant station using a translocated herbicide to subClause .. Where spacing is very close plant stations shall be merged or ii cultivate an area at each plant station to the following dimensions diameter width of plant rootball x . depth depth of plant rootball x .. Wildflower plants shall be distributed in natural informal groups or as shown on the Drawings .
Where required in Appendix the planting positions or areas shall be marked out prior to planting for approval by the Overseeing Organisation .
The density of plants m shall be as stated in Appendix .
A hole shall be formed in the cultivated plant station of a sufficient depth and width to allow roots to be spread without cutting or bending .
Friable topsoil shall be replaced over the roots to bring the surface level with that of adjacent areas .
Plants shall only be removed from their protective covering or packing immediately before planting and the roots shall not be allowed to dry .
Where stated in Appendix wildflowers shall be planted through mulch mats .
No more than five plants per m of mat shall be planted .
The Contractor shall lay the mat above the planting station after the cultivation is complete and cut the mat so that the hole created will be no greater than .
times the surface area of the plug .
The sides of the mat must be buried sufficiently and securely to prevent rodents or other such vermin entering beneath the mat .
The planting station shall be sufficiently concave to encourage positive runin of rainwater .
Each plant shall be watered in its container not less than hours or more than hours before planting. . litres of water shall be applied to each plant immediately after planting unless heavy rain is falling at the time .
Planting of Reeds Rushes Marginal Emergent and Aquatic Plants Where it is stated in Appendix Reeds Rushes Marginal Emergent or Aquatic Plants shall be planted in or adjacent to ponds rivers ditches lakes and other areas of impeded drainage .
Reeds and rushes shall be clumps of minimum size x x mm excluding top growth excavated from an approved source of established material and free of pests diseases weed species or pollutant chemicals or metals .
Emergent marginal and aquatic plants shall be containergrown in pots of minimum litre size and shall have been rooted and grown within the pot for at least six months .
Aquatic plants may be supplied in plastic or wire basket pots .
All plant material shall be kept fully watered up until time of planting and the soil or rooting zone prevented from drying out .
Planting positions above the water level shall be formed by excavating and setting aside sufficient material to allow mm between the rootrhizome ends and the sides of the pit when the roots are fully spread for backfilling .
The sides and bottom of the excavated position shall be cultivated to a depth of mm .
Excavated material from plant clump positions shall be disposed of in locations stated in Appendix .
When the clump has been set in the centre of the position fine material selected from the excavated material shall be packed and shaken around the roots and thoroughly firmed .
Excavated material shall be backfilled in layers not exceeding mm .
Following planting the area of backfilling around each clump shall be left tidy .
For planting positions below the water level clumps of plant material shall be pushed into the ground to sufficient depth to cover rootsrhizomes .
Plants shall be firmed by treading .
Aquatic plants shall be securely pegged or wired down into the bed .
Marker Posts for Planted Areas Where stated in Appendix the Contractor shall insert marker posts to mark out the boundary of each planting or wildflower seeding area which is not otherwise protected by fencing or other structures .
Marker posts shall be of timber complying with Clause and shall be at least mm long and have a diameter of mm .
The top mm of each marker post shall be painted with a white waterproof paint .
Where unpeeled stakes are used the top mm shall be peeled before painting .
Amendment May Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Landscape and Ecology Marker posts shall be driven at least mm into the ground leaving mm above ground .
Posts shall be spaced at not more than m apart around the perimeter of the planted area and shall be located at all corners of over .
Where a cable or underground service is adjacent to or within a planted area then any posts shall not be closer than .
m to the cable and painted red .
The pegs shall be maintained in good condition .
Replacement of Failed or Defective Plants The Contractor shall maintain all planting undertaken under the Contract in accordance with Clauses and until all planting works are certified as completed .
For the duration of the period stated in Appendix the Contractor shall replace all plants which are missing have died or which in the opinion of the Overseeing Organisation are failing to make satisfactory extension growth .
In early September of each year following completion of the initial planting of woody plants the Contractor shall arrange an inspection of each area of new planting works with a representative of the Overseeing Organisation .
Where bulbs perennials wildflowers or aquatic plants have been planted the Contractor shall also arrange an inspection of each area of new planting works with a representative of the Overseeing Organisation in the April following completion of the initial planting .
All plants which are missing are damaged have died or in the opinion of the Overseeing Organisation are failing to make satisfactory extension growth shall be replaced in the next planting season as stated in sub Clauses .
to .
immediately following the inspection .
Replacement plants shall in all aspects be the same as the original stock at the time of planting except that it shall be an additional year older for each year that has elapsed since the original stock was first planted unless otherwise stated in Appendix .
All replacement planting work shall be carried out in accordance with Clause .
The Contractor shall bear the cost of all plant replacements unless otherwise stated in Appendix .
When replacement planting is undertaken ground and pit preparation and planting shall be undertaken in accordance with this Clause .
All plants removed shall be taken to a tip off Site .
Diseased plants shall be disposed of in accordance with subClause ..
Following replacement planting any stakes ties tubes or guards shall be refixedreplaced and any mulch or mulch mats shall be reinstated to the original specification .
Where required in Appendix plants shall be watered at the rate stated in Appendix .
Watering shall be carried out prior to any mulch reinstatement .
Postplanting Maintenance For the duration of the period stated in Appendix which shall run concurrently with the period stated under subClause .
the Contractor shall carry out maintenance of new planting in accordance with Clauses and as appropriate .
Grass Bulbs and Wildflower Maintenance General Grass Maintenance The grass and wildflower areas to be maintained are scheduled in Appendix .
Prior to any cutting operation all stones or other harmful material from whatever source which may damage grass cutting plant or create a possible hazard to persons or property shall be removed off Site .
All litter from grass cutting areas shall be removed off Site prior to grass cutting .
Any movable obstructions such as seats and litterbins shall be removed to facilitate cutting and replaced prior to leaving the Site .
Tractors mounted with grass cutting equipment shall comply with manufacturers recommendations regarding the fitting and operation of attachments .
Grass cutting equipment fitted to tractors shall comply with manufacturers recommendations regarding the fitting and operation of such attachments .
All dedicated grasscutting machines shall have an effective silencer of the type originally fitted on manufacture .
All grass cutting equipment whether selfpropelled or attached to a tractor shall comply with the following i All cutters and blades shall be sharpened and set according to the manufacturers recommendations to ensure a consistent cleanly mown sward and the height of cut determined as the height above ground level to the cutting blade measured with the machine standing on a hard level surface .
ii All guards shall be in place and in good condition and all safety devices shall be operational and of a type originally fitted on manufacture .
iii For grass and vegetation cutting on slopes the grasscutting equipment manufacturers recommendations relating to safe gradients for cutting shall be observed .
Amendment May Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Landscape and Ecology Grass shall be cut cleanly and evenly at the frequencies and to the heights specified in this Clause without damage to the existing surface .
Soft vegetative growth such as clover and other broadleaved vegetation shall be deemed to be part of the cutting operation where it falls within areas of grass .
Mowing shall take place over the whole grass area up to its boundaries which may be fencing paving or similar leaving no areas uncut and producing an even sward height across the whole area .
The grass cutting operation shall include cutting around all obstacles such as trees posts and signs .
Strimmers may be used where appropriate .
Areas around obstacles shall be cut to the same height as specified for the surrounding grassed areas but no cutting shall be carried out within the distance from individual plants given in Appendix .
Mowing operations shall avoid spillage of debris such as stones onto carriageways or footways .
Grass clippings and arisings lying on roads footpaths car parks drains and other hard surfaces shall be immediately swept up and removed off Site .
Grass clippings and arisings on all other areas shall be dispersed evenly over the sward unless specified otherwise in this Clause or in Appendix .
During periods when ground conditions are so wet as to prevent grass cutting without causing damage to the surface or producing divots operations shall cease and shall recommence only when ground and weather conditions are suitable .
Bulb foliage in areas where grass is cut shall not be cut down as a separate operation .
The first cut of grass areas containing bulbs shall as far as is possible be timed to coincide with the commencement of bulb foliage dieback not earlier than six weeks after flowering and normally early June for Narcissus spp .
Grass Cutting High frequency In the locations stated in Appendix cutting requirements for close mown grass shall be as follows or as otherwise stated in Appendix i First cut after WinterSpring .
The areas shall be cut when the grass reaches a height of mm to a height between mm and the cuttings removed off Site .
ii Subsequent cuts .
The areas shall be cut to a height between mm at least times per year during the growing season .
The edges of planted areas adjoining kerbs hard surfaces and structures shall be cut with edging shears or a mechanical equivalent at least times per year during the growing season .
Clean straight or curved lines as determined by the original shape of the grass area or the adjacent structure or hard surface shall be produced .
Herbicide treatment in lieu of edging will not be permitted .
The edges of planted areas adjoining kerbs hard surfaces and structures shall be reformed at least twice per year to produce clean straight or curved lines as determined by the original shape and dimension of the grass area .
Where edges abut planted areas reforming shall include drawing back the soil from the edges so that edging shears can be used .
Where edges abut hard surfaces reforming shall include the removal of any soil or vegetation growing on or through the hard surface .
Grass Cutting Medium frequency In the locations stated in Appendix cutting requirements for parkway and other grass areas shall be as follows or as otherwise stated in Appendix i First Cut after WinterSpring .
The areas shall be cut when the grass reaches a height of mm to a height between mm and the cuttings removed off Site .
ii Subsequent Cuts .
The areas shall be cut to a height between mm at least times per year during the growing season and the cuttings evenly dispersed .
The edges to ornamental planting areas adjoining kerbs hard surfaces and structures shall be trimmed with edging shears or mechanical equivalent at least twice per year during the growing season .
Clean straight or curved lines shall be produced as determined by the original shape of the grass area .
Herbicide treatment in lieu of edging will not be permitted .
The edges of ornamental planting areas adjoining kerbs hard surfaces and structures shall be reformed with a half moon edging iron or a mechanical equivalent once per year to produce clean straight or curved lines as determined by the original shape of the grass area .
Where edges abut hard surfaces reforming shall include the removal of any soil or vegetation growing on or through the hard surface .
Grass Cutting Low frequency In the locations stated in Appendix cutting requirements for amenity and other grass areas shall be as follows or as otherwise stated in Appendix i First Cut after WinterSpring .
The areas shall be cut when the grass reaches a height of mm to a height between mm and the cuttings removed off Site .
Amendment May Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Landscape and Ecology ii Subsequent Cuts .
The areas shall be cut to a height between mm at least times per year during the growing season and the cuttings evenly dispersed .
Grass Cutting Minimal frequency In the locations stated in Appendix a single cut shall be undertaken once per year on swathe cuts visibility areas and other areas as required in Appendix .
The cut shall be to a height not exceeding mm and the cuttings evenly dispersed to leave a neat and uniform appearance .
The timing of the cutting shall be as stated in Appendix .
Where the areas contain injurious weeds as listed in subClause .
the first cut shall be undertaken prior to the weeds flowering .
Additional selective cuts shall be undertaken within these areas as required in Appendix or instructed by the Overseeing Organisation .
A single cut of m width from the edge of the carriageway shall be undertaken once per year .
Additional selective full width cuts shall be undertaken within sight lines at hazardous bends junctions roundabouts some central reservations major accesses bus stops and laybys and any other areas as required in Appendix or instructed by the Overseeing Organisation .
A single cut shall be undertaken once per year in the visibility splay in front of road signs .
The cut shall extend from the edge of the carriageway at a point m from the sign and be splayed to meet the full width of the sign .
Additional selective cuts shall be undertaken within these areas as required in Appendix or instructed by the Overseeing Organisation .
All vehicles involved in verge and visibility area cutting shall comply with the requirements of Clause .
Grass Cutting Banks and Ditches In the locations stated in Appendix banks and ditches shall be cut to a height of between and mm at a frequency of once per year or as otherwise stated in Appendix .
The arisings shall either be dispersed evenly over the sward avoiding blockage of drains and ditches or removed off Site as required in Appendix .
Grass Cutting Areas of Planting In the locations stated in Appendix grass and herbaceous groundcover in uncultivated planted areas plantations shall be cut to a height of between and mm after the seeding of desirable wildflower species every alternate year or at a frequency stated in Appendix .
Unless otherwise stated in Appendix the cutting shall include bramble and tree and shrub seedlings with stems of less than mm diameter but exclude trees and shrubs of less than mm diameter which form part of the plantation .
Unless otherwise stated in Appendix arisings shall be raked off and removed off Site by such means that avoids pulling tearing or causing other damage to the soil surface and retained vegetation .
Where it is stated in Appendix that grass and herbaceous plants shall be cut in planted areas plantations the Contractor shall cut between the woody plants over the whole area up to the boundaries of the planted areaplantation whilst avoiding damage to the trees and shrubs leaving no areas uncut and producing an even sward height across the whole area .
Wildflower Areas and Areas of Nature Conservation Value Where cutting of wildflower areas or areas of nature conservation value is required one or more of the following operations or any other operations shall be carried out as directed in Appendix i Annual SpringSummer Cut Areas shall be cut to a height of between and mm after the seeding of desirable species in late springearly summer or as directed in Appendix .
Arisings shall be raked off and removed off Site avoiding any pulling tearing or causing other damage to the soil surface and retained vegetation .
ii Annual SummerAutumn Cut Areas shall be cut to a height of between and mm after the seeding of desirable species in late summerearly autumn or as directed in Appendix .
Arisings shall be raked off and removed off Site by such means that avoids pulling tearing or causing other damage to the soil surface and retained vegetation .
iii Topping Cut Areas shall be cut to a height of between and mm after the seeding of desirable species in late autumn or as directed in Appendix with the cuttings being finely chopped and evenly dispersed over the area .
iv Biennial Cut Areas shall be cut to a height of between and mm after the seeding of desirable species every alternate year .
Arisings shall be raked off and removed off Site .
Amendment May Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Landscape and Ecology Within the wildflower areas or areas of nature conservation value stated in Appendix the cutting shall include areas of bramble tree and shrub saplings of less than mm diameter .
Cutting shall be timed to allow for prior seeding of desirable species listed in Appendix .
Where directed in Appendix to improve the potential for wildflower colonisation in wildflower areas or areas of conservation value identified by the Overseeing Organisation the ground shall be scarified by mechanical means to a depth of mm so that the thatch is broken up creating a proportion of exposed soil of .
Arisings shall be removed off Site .
The method employed shall avoid the uprooting of desirable vegetation such as fine grasses .
A sample area treatment shall be carried out to the Overseeing Organisations approval prior to the remainder being scarified .
Where directed in Appendix weed control in wildflower areas shall be carried out using spot treatment with a translocated herbicide applied in accordance with subClause .
at the frequency stated in Appendix .
Herbicide shall be applied to undesirable broadleaved species such as the thistles listed in Clause nettle and bramble unless they are stated in Appendix to be of nature conservation value .
Where directed in Appendix any weed growth that can not effectively be controlled by chemical means without risk of damage to wildflowers shall be hand weeded in accordance with subClause .
at the frequency stated in Appendix .
Molehills If required in Appendix molehills in grass areas shall be removed before grasscutting and the soil distributed widely over surrounding grass or on nearby cultivated areas .
Bulbs and Perennials Where required in Appendix bulb foliage within ornamental planting areas shall be cut down when leaves have died back naturally not earlier than six weeks after flowering and normally early June for Narcissus spp .
Bluebell stands shall not be cut .
Arisings shall be raked up and removed off Site .
Watering General The Contractor shall ensure that there is no delay in the execution of watering by obtaining all necessary licences and permissions from water companies for the efficient execution of watering on any particular Site including stand pipes pressure reducing valves hoses bowsers pumps sprinklers and ascertaining the availability of second class water from sewage works or other approved sources in the event of a Hose Pipe Ban .
Watering of grass shrubs hedges and trees shall be temporarily suspended in areas where ponding occurs or where there is a risk of surface runoff .
Once any surface water has soaked away repeated applications shall be applied until the watering operation has been completed .
Water to individual trees shall be applied either by low pressure hose or through irrigation hoses to the base of the plants ensuring thorough soaking of the ground occupied by the root system of the plant .
Where necessary a depression shall be formed around the stem base of the plant to ensure that water reaches the root zone and does not run off at the surface onto the surrounding ground .
Any damage caused as a result of watering operations shall be reinstated including the replacement of any soil lost from pits or beds due to washing off .
Following watering bed and pit surfaces shall be left even and all plants firm and root systems not exposed .
Particular care shall be taken not to damage plants when handling hoses in planted areas .
Establishment Watering The Contractor shall water all planting undertaken under the Contract in accordance with this Clause at the frequency necessary to ensure establishment and survival until all planting works are completed .
For the establishment period stated in Appendix the Contractor shall water all planting undertaken under the Contract in accordance with this Clause at the frequency necessary to ensure establishment and survival .
Additional Watering Where required in Appendix additional watering shall be instructed by the Overseeing Organisation in the locations stated in Appendix during periods of abnormally dry weather .
When instructed water shall be applied at the following rates or as stated in Appendix i Grassed areas water shall be applied at the rate of lm using low pressure hose sprinkler or spray evenly over the entire area .
ii Shrubs hedges and ornamental beds water shall be applied at the rate of lm to shrub beds and litres per linear metre to Amendment May Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Landscape and Ecology hedgerows by low pressure hose sprinkler or spray evenly over the entire area .
Careful forking of sealed or compacted surfaces shall be carried out to facilitate percolation .
iii Trees the minimum quantity of water specified in Appendix shall be applied by low pressure hose to each tree .
Before the first application of water and after any break of more than five weeks the ground surface around the tree for a radius of mm shall be loosened with a fork to aid penetration into the soil .
The water shall be applied at a steady rate to avoid runoff to and erosion of the surrounding area .
Establishment Maintenance for Planting Plants and planting areas shall be maintained in accordance with this Clause in the locations and over the time periods stated in Appendix .
Firming Plants shall be inspected during each visit to undertake maintenance operations and any which have been subject to frost heave or wind rock shall be straightened to an upright position and the ground refirmed .
Stakes Tubes Guards and their Ties Stakes tubes guards and their ties shall be inspected twice per year in October and March and adjusted to allow for the growth of each plant .
Any damaged items shall be removed off Site and replaced with new items in accordance with Clause .
Stakes tubes guards and ties shall be removed from plants where they are no longer required and either disposed of off Site or returned to the Overseeing Organisation for reuse as required in Appendix .
Pruning All pruning shall be undertaken in accordance with the requirements of Clause using secateurs and handsaws .
Stems shall only be removed so as to retain the natural appearance of the individual plant species in accordance with the guidance in BS Part .
Arisings from pruning shall be disposed of in accordance with Clause .
All broken and badly damaged branches from the plants shall be pruned by cutting back to within mm of the parent branch or trunk or to a suitable budnode .
The cut shall be angled correctly in accordance with BS Part .
At the edges of planted areas branches and stems shall be cut back to a minimum of mm behind the kerbline fence wall or other edge demarcation .
Organic Mulch Any mulch which has fallen onto adjoining hard surfaces and grassed areas shall be swept up and if not contaminated by weeds or rubbish returned to the planted area and spread to original depth .
Any mulch which has been contaminated by weeds or rubbish shall be removed off Site .
Weed Control Young Trees and Shrubs in Grass Plots Plant circles shall be defined as the area within a mm radius of an individual tree or shrub within which weed control operations are carried out .
At the locations and frequency stated in Appendix where mulch mats are not used translocated herbicides shall be applied to the plant circles around individual trees and shrubs in accordance with Clause and subClause .
using a shield to protect the plants from the herbicide .
The operation shall include the clearance of vegetation by hand from within shelters and guards .
At the locations and frequency stated in Appendix where mulch mats are not used a residual herbicide shall be applied to the plant circles around individual trees and shrubs in accordance with Clause and subClause .
whilst protecting the trees and shrubs from the herbicide .
Prior to application the ground surface shall either be free of grass or weeds or any grass present shall be no more than mm height .
Where directed in Appendix the depth of mulch in individual plant circles and overall plant areas shall be inspected once per year in March and if less than an even depth of mm new mulch to subClause .
shall be laid to restore the depth to mm .
Where directed in Appendix mulch mats shall be inspected three times per year .
Any mats and pegs which are not secure shall be refixed .
Damaged items shall be replaced with mulch mats to match the originals in accordance with subClauses .
and .
Five years after planting any nonbiodegradable mulch mats and any pegs shall be removed off Site and the soil surface made good .
Amendment May Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Landscape and Ecology Weed Control Young Trees and Shrubs in Cultivated Beds Ornamental planted areas shall be cleared of all litter and debris prior to weed control operations and the arisings removed off Site .
Where required in Appendix planting areas shall be visited monthly to carry out specified weed control operations .
Any grass and weed growth within the planted beds shall be removed by hand or chemical means as stated in Appendix .
Herbicides shall be used in accordance with Clause .
The roots and foliage of weeds and grass shall be removed off Site once die back is complete .
The use of herbicide will not be permitted in planting beds containing perennial plants even when the leaves of these plants have died down and they are dormant .
Where organic mulch has been applied the depth shall be maintained at an even depth of mm by the addition of fresh mulch in accordance with subClause .
at least once a year .
Where required in Appendix in ornamental planted beds in urban areas where the bed is not mulched the soil surface shall be cultivated in May and July or at the frequency stated in Appendix using a hoe or light rake to create a finetomedium tilth evenly graded without damage to plants or roots .
Weed Control Hedges Where required in Appendix the hedge base and an area of mm width on either side of the hedge plants shall be kept free of weeds by herbicide treatment or handweeding .
Herbicides shall be applied in accordance with Clause .
Where organic mulch was applied after planting the Contractor shall inspect the depth of mulch once per year in March .
If the mulch is less than an even depth of mm new mulch to subClause .
shall be laid to restore the depth to mm .
Where sheet mulch has been laid it shall be inspected three times per year .
Any sheet mulch or pegs which are not secure shall be refixed .
Damaged items shall be replaced with materials to match the original in accordance with subClauses .
and .
Five years after planting any nonbiodegradable sheet mulch and any pegs shall be removed off Site and the soil surface made good .
Individual Trees in Urban Streets Individual trees shall be defined as feathered standard and extra heavy standard trees planted as single specimens rather than as part of a planted group .
Street trees in pavements tree grilles and those planted as specimens within a plot are defined as individual trees as well as any other existing young or semi mature trees identified in Appendix or by the Overseeing Organisation .
The individual trees in the locations stated in Appendix shall be inspected annually during the growing season and maintained as follows i Irrigation systems shall be maintained in working order .
Any irrigation pipes shall be checked and repaired if necessary .
ii All weeds around the base of the tree shall be removed to a radius of mm in grass or to a whole tree station if in the pavement or a tree grille .
Removal shall be by hand andor chemical means as directed in Appendix .
When using herbicide the requirements of Clause and subClause .
shall apply .
iii Where organic mulch has been applied to a weedfree circle it shall be topped up to a depth of mm with bark mulch to subClause .. iv Tree supports stakes ties and anchoring systems shall be inspected and adjusted .
v Rabbit guards tree guards and grilles shall be inspected and adjusted .
vi The levels of aggregate mulch and soil beneath grilles shall be made up to the same level as the surrounding surface .
vii When trees can stand unsupported stakes andor ties shall be removed backfilling stake holes with topsoil and compacting topsoil .
viii Formative pruning shall be carried out in accordance with Clause including removal of epicormic shoots and the removal of deadwood .
Competing secondary leader shoots and closely spaced duplicated branches with potentially weak or tight forks shall be removed .
ix The Contractor shall report to the Overseeing Organisation any defects requiring further action .
Amendment May Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Landscape and Ecology Maintenance of Established Trees and Shrubs Plants shall be maintained in accordance with this Clause in the locations and over the time periods stated in Appendix .
Weed Control Trees and Shrubs in Cultivated Beds Cultivated beds shall receive weed control treatment four times per year during the growing season or at the frequency stated in Appendix .
Any grass and weed growth within the bed shall be removed by hand or chemical means as required in Appendix .
Herbicides shall be used in accordance with Clause and Clause .
The roots and foliage of weeds and grass shall be removed off Site when die back is complete .
Arisings from Pruning Cutting or Felling of Woody Plants Any infected diseased or pest prunings or timber arisings shall be removed off Site immediately after cutting and burned or buried at a depth of no less than .
m in a location to be approved in writing by the Overseeing Organisation except diseased arisings affected by diseases described in Arboriculture Research Notes or Arboriculture Research and Information Notes issued by the Arboricultural Advisory and Information Service which shall be dealt with in accordance with the advice published in these Notes .
In the event of a plant disease epidemic diseased arising shall be disposed of in accordance with the current recommendations of the Department for Environment Food and Rural Affairs DEFRA or the Forestry Commission or in Scotland the Environment and Rural Affairs Department Scottish Executive or Forestry Commission or in Wales the Welsh Assembly Government or Forestry Commission or in Northern Ireland the Department of Agriculture and Rural Development Forest Service .
Healthy arisings shall be dealt with in one or more of the following ways as required in Appendix i Removed off Site without chipping first .
ii Chipping .
All arisings shall be processed immediately using a woodchipper .
All remaining arisings from thinningcoppicing that can not be chipped shall be removed off Site .
iii All arisings from chipping shall be removed off Site .
iv Where chippings are to be retained on the Site the chipper shall produce chippings in the size range mm .
v Where chippings are to be spread back onto the Site within areas of existing vegetation without intending to suppress or kill the existing ground vegetation the chippings shall be returned to within the boundary of the areas stated in Appendix and spread to an even consolidated depth of mm maximum .
vi Where chippings are intended to act as a weedsuppressant mulch they shall be spread over the pruned or coppiced plantations stated in Appendix to a depth of mm .
vii Chippings which are excess to the requirements specified in Appendix shall be removed off Site .
viii Arisings of greater than mm diameter shall be securely placed on Site in the locations stated in Appendix for nature conservation purposes .
ix Where directed in Appendix the arisings from thinning and coppicing shall be windrowed on the centre of embankments or cuttings within the boundary of the area in which the work has taken place .
Material shall not be dragged from one area to another .
With crosscutting and cut branches only the timber shall be windrowed .
All side branches from the cut timber shall be removed and the timber reduced to m lengths .
Windrows shall be formed in one of the following patterns as required in Appendix keeping the arisings at least mm away from the retained trees and shrubs a For younger plantations windrows shall be m apart and a minimum of m from the edges of the plantation .
The windrows shall be secure with the material tightly packed and stacked to a height and width of between .
and m. b For older plantations windrows shall be m apart and a minimum of m from the edges of the plantation .
The windrows shall be secure with the material tightly packed and stacked to a height and width of between and .
m. Amendment November Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Landscape and Ecology Shrub Pruning All pruning cuts shall be made in accordance with BS Part .
Pruning shall be undertaken using secateurs and handsaws .
Mechanical hedgecutters may only be used on compact smallleafed species which have dense foliage .
Pruning shall be undertaken to promote flowering and fruiting in accordance with the species and age of the plant .
Stems shall only be removed so as to retain the natural appearance of the individual plant species .
All broken and badly damaged branches shall be pruned from the plants .
Species shall be pruned in accordance with the following categories i Shrubs grown for coloured stems All stems shall be cut down to mm above ground level or to mm above the coppice stool if cut down previously at a frequency to maintain a succession of coloured stems as stated in Appendix .
This shall be carried out during the dormant season but outside the bird nesting season .
ii Shrubs which flower on Current Season Wood All wood which has borne flowers shall be removed immediately after flowering and all young wood retained to bear flowers in the following year .
iii Shrubs which flower on Previous Season Wood All the previous season wood shall be cut back to within two or three buds of the old wood .
iv Shrubs which flower on Old Wood One or two of the oldest stems from each plant shall be removed completely crowded and weak growth shall be thinned out and the young shoots shall be cut back to fresh growth on the main stems .
v Roses For modern varieties of groundcover and bush roses all growth shall be pruned back to the point of the previous cut .
Hedge trimmers may be used on these modern varieties .
For other varieties of groundcover and floribunda roses all growth shall be pruned back to an outward facing bud buds from the base of the previous season wood in March .
For hybrid teas all growth shall be pruned back to an outward facing bud buds from the base of the previous season wood in March .
For Rugosa cultivars all growth shall be pruned back to an outward facing bud buds from the base every five years in March .
vi Shrubs which Require Trimming Pruning shall be undertaken back to the flowering heads but not into the old wood immediately after flowering .
vii Overgrown shrubs Where stated in Appendix shrubs shall be coppiced back to within mm of the base in late winter .
The final wound surface shall be smooth and angled to allow water runoff .
All growth which extends over the footway or carriageway which is dead dying or hazardous shall be removed .
All shrubs that are encroaching upon or obscuring visibility of adjacent signs structures electrical equipment gates or visibility splays shall be pruned .
All suckers shall be removed from rootstocks .
Climbing Plants Climber growth which extends over the footway or carriageway which is dead diseased dying or hazardous shall be removed .
Species which are encroaching onto adjacent trees and shrubs shall be pruned .
The climbers shall be inspected at regular intervals during the growing season and any branches which are not secure shall be reattached to the supporting netting or wires .
Any repairs or replacements to the supporting structures for the climbers shall be undertaken as necessary .
Hedge Maintenance The Contractor shall liaise with adjacent landowners regarding the access arrangements and working hours described in Appendices and in order to carry out hedge maintenance .
All arisings shall be disposed of by the Contractor .
No trimming laying or clipping shall take place during the bird nesting season .
The frequency and timing of cutting shall be as given in Appendix .
All cutters and blades shall be sharpened and set according to the manufacturers recommendations .
Where growth to be cut is up to two years old highway hedgerow planting may be maintained with tractor mounted side arm flails provided that they cut cleanly without leaving ragged ends .
For ornamental Amendment May Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Landscape and Ecology hedges and hedges where hard growth over two years old is to be cut only reciprocating blade cutting machinery shall be used .
Large leafed evergreen hedges shall be pruned with secateurs to avoid half cut leaves .
Growth shall be reduced to the point of the previous cut and on completion both sides of the hedge shall be perpendicular and the top shall be level and at right angles to the sides .
Exceptions to this shall be as described in Appendix .
All clippings lodged in the top or sides of the hedge shall be removed off Site .
During the cutting operation all litter and debris within the structure of the hedge shall be removed off Site .
All hedge laying works shall be carried out in a manner to ensure that the newly laid hedge possesses a neat uniform appearance of even density .
The work shall be carried out ensuring that the cut hedge plants are able to regrow vigorously .
All hedge laying work shall only be carried out during the dormant season but not during periods of extreme frost .
The terms for the component parts of a cut and laid hedge are as follows i Stakes pointed greenwood stems or hardwood cleft driven vertically into the ground to provide support to the laid hedge plants .
ii Binders flexible greenwood stems woven together along the top of the hedge to hold it down and provide support to the stakes applicable to Midland Hedge only see subClause .. iii CutSide the side of the hedge from which the hedge plants are cut applicable to Midland Hedge only see subClause .. iv Brash Side the side facing the adjoining field or forestry plantation through which the hedge brash protrudes applicable to Midland Hedge only see subClause .. v Stoving the exposed stump of a laid hedge plant .
vi Coppice Stool the cut stump of a hedge plant .
vii Pleacher a live hedge plant which has been cut and laid to form the body of the hedge .
If required in Appendix that hedges are to be laid the work shall be carried out in one of the following styles as described in Appendix i Midland Hedge All the pleachers shall be cut from one side of the hedge and laid diagonally across the line of the hedge so that all the brash protrudes on the opposite side .
The hedge shall be supported by greenwood stakes and binders .
ii Straight Hedge All the pleachers shall be cut and laid along the line of the hedge and interwoven between hardwood cleft stakes spaced at m intervals .
iii Any other regional variation described in Appendix .
All cutting tools used on the hedge laying works shall be maintained in a sharp condition to ensure that cut surfaces are smooth and made cleanly without tearing the wood grain .
The cuts which facilitate the laying of a pleacher shall be made with an axe or billhook only .
Chainsaws shall only be used in the preparation of the hedge and the trimming of hedge stovings .
When a mixed species hedge is to be laid the individual species shall be treated in one of the following ways as required in Appendix i Cutting and laying or ii Coppicing hedge plants shall be felled at a height not exceeding mm above ground level leaving their stumps with an angled surface to shed water and in a form to promote vigorous regrowth or iii Removal unwanted hedge plants shall be felled to ground level and their stumps either physically grubbed out or chemically treated to prevent regrowth or iv Retention certain young hedge plants which are either self set seedlings or growing from a healthy coppice stump may be selected to be retained to grow on as hedgerow trees .
Unless otherwise stated in Appendix the following materials shall be used for staking andor binding i Midland Hedge a Stakes shall be obtained from broadleaved species such as Castanea sativa Quercus robur Fraxinus excelsior or Acer pseudoplatanus .
Stakes from any Salix or Populus species shall not be used .
The stakes shall be pointed and cut from live greenwood stems not more than twelve weeks prior to being used .
They shall be at least .
m in length and of mm to mm diameter throughout .
Amendment May Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Landscape and Ecology b Binders shall be cut from live greenwood stems of Corylus avellana Fraxinus excelsior or Salix viminalis not more than six weeks prior to being used and shall be at least .
m in length and mm to mm diameter throughout .
Binders shall not be trimmed until immediately prior to use .
ii Straight Hedges a Stakes shall be cleft and of a hardwood species stated in Appendix pointed at one end .
m in length and mm to mm in width throughout .
All side branches from any hedge plants which may impede or obstruct the laying operation or detract from the style and appearance of the completed hedge shall be removed .
Any branches which are tangled or interwoven with other hedge plants shall be removed to ensure that the hedge plant to be laid is free to be guided into position .
Any dead damaged or diseased wood along with any other foreign objects and debris shall also be removed before the plant is laid .
All plants shall be laid in the same direction unless a gap is likely to occur .
All laid hedge plants shall as far as possible be interwoven into each other and the supporting hedge stakes to ensure maximum stability .
On sloping ground all hedge plants shall be laid in an uphill direction except when back laying is required to fill a gap .
On level ground the direction of laying shall be in the direction of traffic flow on that side of the carriageway except when back laying is required to fill a gap .
Stakes shall be driven centrally down the line of the hedge to offer support to the newly laid hedge plants in accordance with the following staking requirements specific to the two different styles of hedge described in subClause .
or as required in Appendix i Midland Hedges greenwood stakes of sufficient length to ensure that at least mm protrudes above the top of the laid hedge shall be driven in to a minimum depth of mm at .
m intervals along an even straight line .
When the binders have been fitted along the top of the hedge the stakes shall be cut off mm above the binders with a sloping cut which shall face the cut side of the hedge .
ii Straight Hedges Cleft stakes of sufficient length to ensure that mm protrudes above the top of the laid hedge shall be driven in to a minimum depth of mm at .
m intervals along a straight line .
Only greenwood binders shall be used along the top of the hedge .
These shall be tightly twisted around themselves and each stake in order to hold the laid hedge down and offer support to the line of stakes .
A minimum of four binders shall be included at any one point and additional binders introduced at each stake in order to maintain the required number .
When the hedge laying works at any location are complete any loose branch or twig ends shall be trimmed from the cut side and top of Midland Hedges and also from the brash side if necessary and from both sides and the top of Straight Hedges to leave a neat and compact appearance .
All cut material and other arisings shall be removed off Site by the end of each working day unless otherwise required in Appendix .
Where any significant gap exists in the hedge after it has been laid it shall be planted up with new hedge plants in accordance with Clause .
The size of the plants species and planting densitypattern shall be as specified in Appendix .
Individual Established Trees in Urban Streets Individual trees shall be defined as feathered standard and extra heavy standard trees planted as single specimens rather than as part of a planted group .
Street trees in footways tree grilles and those planted as specimens within a group shall be defined as individual trees as well as any other young or semi mature trees identified in Appendix .
The individual trees shall be inspected annually during the growing season and maintained as follows i All weeds around the base of the tree shall be removed to a radius of mm in grass or to a whole tree station if in the footway or a tree grille .
Removal shall be by hand and or chemical means as appropriate .
When using herbicide the requirements of Clause and subClause .
shall apply .
ii Tree supports stakes ties and anchoring systems shall be inspected and adjusted .
iii When trees can stand unsupported stakes andor ties shall be removed Stake holes shall be backfilled with topsoil which shall be lightly firmed .
iv Tree guards and grilles shall be inspected and adjusted .
Amendment May Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Landscape and Ecology v The levels of aggregate mulch and soil beneath grilles shall be made up to the same level as the surrounding surface .
vi Pruning shall be carried out in accordance with subClauses .
and including removal of epicormic shoots and the removal of deadwood .
Competing secondary leader shoots and closely spaced duplicated branches with potentially weak or tight forks shall be removed .
vii The Contractor shall report to the Overseeing Organisation any defects requiring further action .
Arboriculture General All work specified in this Clause shall be undertaken in accordance with BS except that cuts and wounds shall not be treated with a fungicidal sealant bitumen or latex paint unless otherwise stated in Appendix .
Where permission has been obtained to carry out any work under this Contract on trees covered by a Tree Preservation Order or in a Conservation Area this shall be noted in Appendix .
The Contractor shall comply with the current Forestry and Arboriculture Safety Training Council FASTCO recommendations in relation to all aspects of the arboricultural works .
If any defect is found within a tree during the course of carrying out work which would render the specified work inappropriate or inadequate the Contractor shall cease work and notify the Overseeing Organisation who shall agree any appropriate alternative action which is to be taken .
Where such a defect constitutes an imminent threat to public safety or property the Contractor shall take appropriate action to exclude the public from the area of danger notify the Overseeing Organisation immediately and protect the location until the Overseeing Organisation issues further instructions .
No tree work shall be carried out during periods of extreme weather except in emergency situations .
Except in an emergency incident the removal of live wood from any species shall not be undertaken during periods of severe frosts .
In such cases the work carried out shall be the minimum required to render the tree safe or to allow removal from the carriageway .
Except in an emergency incident tree surgery felling thinning and coppicing operations shall only be undertaken within the dormant season and outside the bird nesting season .
All mature trees shall be checked for bat roosts in any cavities before arboricultural works are carried out .
Any bat roosts shall be reported to the Overseeing Organisation and no works shall be carried out on any tree in which bat roosts are located without further written instructions from the Overseeing Organisation .
The inspection for bat roosts and any subsequent action thereon must be carried out by appropriately licensed personnel .
All tools shall be surface sterilised with methylated spirits after use on trees which are known or suspected to be diseased .
When using tower wagons or cranes the Contractor shall ensure that manufacturers safety limits are not exceeded .
Demountable towers shall have all fastening brackets secured and shall only be used on the appropriate vehicle .
Climbing irons shall not be used in the pruning of live trees and shall only be used during felling or dismantling operations when this is necessary during emergency works .
No trees are to be used as winch anchors without the prior consent of the Overseeing Organisation and these shall be protected .
Alternative types of winch anchor may be used provided they are appropriate for the conditions prevailing at the Site and the task to be undertaken and are of a recognised arboricultural type .
Tree Surgery Tree size categories reflecting the extent to which tree surgery and felling works shall be carried out are stated in Appendix .
Each tree shall be individually considered and the general description of work to be undertaken shall be interpreted in relation to the species shape size character and condition of each individual tree .
All operations shall be carried out so as to leave a wellbalanced tree crown .
The Contractor shall prune back all dead damaged or diseased wood to its point of origin .
The cutting of the branch shall not damage the branch collar if taken off at a main limb or on the bole .
The triple cut method shall be used when carrying out the pruning operation and the final wound shall be smooth and free of snags .
All damage to main limbs or boles shall be cleaned to remove damaged or diseased tissue back to but not into live wood or bark .
The final wound shall be smooth and free of snags .
The repair of major bark wounds over mm in diameter or length shall consist of the removal of dead damaged and loose bark and in addition any splintered Amendment May Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Landscape and Ecology wood back to the line of newly forming callus growth ensuring that no live tissue is damaged .
The size of the wound shall be kept to a minimum and its final shape shall be as far as possible rounded and free from sharp corners .
Both wet and dry cavities shall be inspected and probed to determine the extent of decay and ascertain their significance in relation to the structure and safety of the tree or branch .
Where possible all accumulated debris and loose decayed wood shall be removed from such cavities and where specified in Appendix the opening of the cavity covered with a fine mesh wire netting to prevent a further build up of debris .
This covering shall be secured with felt tacks in such a way that it does not prevent natural callus formation but allows easy removal for future inspection .
Regulative pruning shall be carried out in accordance with the Arboriculture Research Note PATH and Arboriculture Research Note as issued by the Arboricultural Advisory and Information Service .
Pruning cuts shall wherever possible be made at a fork or at the main stem .
All wounds shall be kept as small as possible .
The final pruning cut shall be made so that both the branch branch bark ridge and branch collar remain intact .
The Contractor shall carry out as part of tree pruning operations any of the following works as may be necessary on an individual tree i Removal of basal sucker growths and epicormic growth from the trunk at ground level up to the base of the trees natural crown .
ii Repair of minor bark wounds on the trunk and main branches by the removal of any dead damaged or loose bark back to undamaged tissue or to the line of newly forming callus growth .
In either case the size of wound shall be kept to a minimum .
iii Removal of any foreign objects from the tree where this can be done without inflicting any undue damage to the tree concerned .
iv Removal of reverted branches from cultivars of tree species .
v Severance of undesirable climbing plants at base of trunk .
Where crown lifting is directed in Appendix the lower branches and branchlets of the tree shall be removed to the height stated in Appendix in order to increase the clearance under the canopy of the tree .
Where crown thinning is required in Appendix a proportion of secondary and small live branch growth throughout the crown shall be removed to produce as far as possible an even density of foliage around a well spread and balanced branch structure .
Crossing weak duplicated and damaged branches shall be removed where this will not spoil the overall shape .
Where crown reduction or reshaping is required in Appendix the crown shall be reduced in size whilst preserving as far as possible a natural shape .
This may involve cutting back both main and subsidiary branches to a side bud or branch to leave a flowing line without stumps .
Tree Felling Where straight felling is required in Appendix the whole tree shall be felled to within mm of ground level where necessary with the assistance of a powered or hand winch .
Where sectional felling is required in Appendix the tree shall be felled in sections of a size appropriate to the location using ropes where necessary to lower the sections .
The height at which the stump shall be cut shall be as stated in Appendix either i as close to the ground level as possible or ii where the tree is growing in a hedge or fence line the stump shall be left level with the top of the hedge or fence or iii at any other height stated in Appendix .
The final cut shall leave the stump with a smooth level surface .
Where required in Appendix stump treatment shall be carried out within hours of felling .
A stumpkilling herbicide with colouring agent used in accordance with Clause shall be applied by means of drilling or frill girdling in the cambium zone of the cut stump .
Any regrowth from the cut stump shall be treated during the following season in accordance with sub Clause .
and Clause .
Where required in Appendix the complete root including buttress and surface roots arising from or near to its base shall be removed either by i stump grinding to a minimum depth of mm or ii stump grubbing by means of excavation or winching .
Following removal of stumps by any means the void shall be filled with topsoil to match existing levels in grassed areas .
In paved areas the material shall be removed down to formation level to allow full Amendment May Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Landscape and Ecology reinstatement of the paved area .
All arisings shall be disposed of as required in Appendix .
Thinning and Coppicing Thinning operations shall be undertaken by means that avoid the need for pruning or crown lifting of retained plants particularly to those on the outer edges .
Thinning shall be carried out throughout the planted areas identified in Appendix .
Unless otherwise stated in Appendix thinning shall favour the retention of the strongest trees and those that offer the longest future useful life .
Adequate spacing shall be created between the trees and shrubs to promote healthy future development of the crowns of the remaining trees .
Edge treatment shall favour the maximum retention of lower branches and an understorey of younger trees or shrubs where these are present .
All plants to be thinned shall be cut down to between mm of ground level parallel with the slope of the ground .
Plants to be coppiced shall be cut down to mm above ground level if being coppiced for the first time .
If coppiced previously the plants shall be cut back to the previous point of coppicing but with the cuts positioned outside the branch collar .
The final wound surface shall be smooth and angled to allow water run off .
Cut surfaces shall not be treated with herbicide .
Scrub Control in Grass No scrub control shall be carried out during the bird nesting season .
Where required in Appendix control of scrub species shall be carried out .
Species to be controlled shall be as specified in Appendix .
The tree and shrub species to be controlled shall have a stem diameter and maximum height or sizes as stated in Appendix .
Where required in Appendix scrub control is required on rock ledges and scree .
The following operations shall be carried out on specified species as required in Appendix i Where there are large areas of scrub to be controlled a translocated herbicide shall be applied to the specified species during a period of active growth in accordance with Clause .
After the herbicide application has been effective all dead vegetation shall be cut down to ground level and removed off Site .
ii Specified species shall be cut down to between and mm above ground level .
For stumps of sufficient diameter the Contractor shall furrow or frill girth of the stump and bark and apply a stumpkilling herbicide in accordance with Clause .
An approved vegetable dye shall be included to clearly indicate the stumps have been treated .
iii Specified species shall be cut down to mm above ground level and the plants allowed to regrow .
The Contractor shall then apply a translocated herbicide during a period of active growth in accordance with Clause .
This regrowth treatment is likely to be in the year following initial cutting .
iv Specified species shall be cut down to mm above ground level and removed off Site .
The plants will be allowed to regrow .
Management of Waterbodies The following operations shall be undertaken where required in Appendix .
All rubbish and debris shall be removed from the entire surface of the waterbody including any partially submerged items .
Inlets and outlets as detailed in Appendix shall be inspected twice per year usually in February and October and their condition reported to the Overseeing Organisation .
Weed Control Undesirable species or areas of vegetation to be subject to weed control shall be as described in Appendix .
Herbicide applied to weeds in or near waterbodies including banks adjacent to ditches shall be used in accordance with Clause and subClause .. Where required in Appendix weeds in the waterbodies shall be removed by handweeding in accordance with subClause .
or by mechanical means .
Silt Silt depth shall be inspected once per year in April and the depth and condition reported to the Overseeing Organisation .
Where required in Appendix silt shall be removed .
The depth of silt to be removed available deposition areas for dryingout requirements for disposal and access shall be as stated in Appendix .
Amendment May Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Landscape and Ecology Reedbeds and Marginal Plants Where required in Appendix reedbeds shall be inspected twice per year in February and October or at other times stated in Appendix and their condition reported to the Overseeing Organisation .
The timing and methodology of inspection and operations shall avoid affecting habitats of birds fish and invertebrates .
The presence of protected or rare species shall be reported to the Overseeing Organisation .
Special Ecological Measures The maintenance works specified under Clause shall be carried out for the period of time stated in Appendix .
Special Ecological Measures works shall be carried out in the seasons stated in Appendix .
Tunnels Fencing and Underpasses for Wildlife Tunnels ledges fencing and underpasses for wildlife shall be installed in the manner and locations detailed in Appendix .
Wildlife grilles shall be installed on the entrances to drains in the manner and locations detailed in Appendix .
Tunnels fencing underpasses ledges and grilles in the locations stated in Appendix shall be inspected twice per year in February and October and their condition reported to the Overseeing Organisation .
Any obstructions shall be removed from tunnels underpasses and ledges and the arisings removed off Site .
Any areas of standing water or poorly drained areas at the entrances to tunnels or underpasses shall be reported to the Overseeing Organisation and work carried out if necessary as instructed by the Overseeing Organisation .
Reflectors Reflectors shall be installed in the manner and locations detailed in Appendix .
Reflectors in the locations stated in Appendix shall be inspected once per month cleaned and repaired as necessary and any obstructing vegetation removed .
Artificial Nests Boxes Perches and other Wildlife Shelters In the locations stated in Appendix bat boxes dormice or bird nesting boxes or roosting perches shall be installed as detailed in Appendix .
Bat boxes or roosts dormice or bird nesting boxes and roosting perches in the locations stated in Appendix shall be inspected as specified in Appendix and their condition reported to the Overseeing Organisation .
The inspection shall include clearing out of any abandoned nests and the arisings removed off Site .
Only experienced operatives are to carry out this work and only licensed operatives are to work with the legallyprotected species listed in Appendix .
Bat boxes dormice or bird nesting boxes and roosting perches shall be repaired when necessary as detailed in Appendix or as instructed by the Overseeing Organisation .
Other Habitat Creation Measures Other habitat creation measures in the locations stated in Appendix shall be inspected as detailed in Appendix and their condition reported to the Overseeing Organisation .
The known locations of Protected Species or their habitats are noted in Appendix .
This information is confidential .
Where stated in Appendix the Contractor shall obtain a licence or use only licensed operatives for works in the vicinity of protected species .
F Amendment May SERIES maIntEnancE paIntIng of StEElwoRk contents Clause Title Page Introduction Surface Preparation General Requirements Surface Preparation Materials and Methods Surface Preparation Workmanship Standards Metal Coatings Testing of Metal Spray Coatings Paint and Similar Protective Coatings Surface Preparation and Protective Systems Testing of Paints Storage Requirements and Keeping Periods for Paints Procedure Trials Application of Paint Form HAP Maintenance Paint System Sheet Appendix Form HAP Paint Data Sheet Appendix Access Containment and Lighting Additional Requirements for the Protection of CCTV Masts Cantilever Masts Steel Lighting Columns and Bracket Arms manUal of contRact DocUmEntS foR HIgHwaY woRkS VolUmE SpEcIfIcatIon foR HIgHwaY woRkS Amendment May natIonal altERatIonS of tHE oVERSEEIng oRganISatIonS of ScotlanD walES anD noRtHERn IRElanD Scotland Clause Title Page SE Paint and Similar Protective Coatings S denotes a Clause which has a substitute National Clause for one or more of the Overseeing Organisations of Scotland Wales or Northern Ireland .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Maintenance Painting of Steelwork maIntEnancE paIntIng of StEElwoRk Introduction Surface preparation and the maintenance painting of steelwork shall be carried out in compliance with Clauses to using systems appropriate to the information given in Appendix Form HAP Maintenance Paint System Sheet parts to and Appendix if applicable as appropriate to the design accessibility and condition of the components .
The Manual of Paints for Structural Steelwork which is included in Standard BD DMRB .. provides data on paints and similar materials for use in the Overseeing Organisations contracts .
The Manual contains item numbers and a summary is also given in Table .
Subject and without prejudice to the Conditions of Contract the Contractor shall comply with any measures to contain people plant materials dust and debris described in Appendix .
Compliance with subClause of this Clause does not confer immunity from relevant legal requirements .
The appropriate level of surface preparation and the suitable protective system shall depend on reported results from the assessment of the existing protective system which is determined as described in Clause .
of BD DMRB Corrosion protection of steelwork shall comply with National Highways Sector Scheme A For corrosion protection of ferrous metals by industrial coatings described in Appendix A and be undertaken by a Contractor registered to the scheme by an approved UKAS accredited certification body .
Surface preparation general Requirements The general requirements are specified in subClauses .
to ..
The various materials and methods are specified in Clause .
The standards to be achieved are specified in Clause .
Definitions of terms used are given in Clause .
The particular requirements for surface preparation for the structures included in the Contract are specified in Appendix .
Areas contaminated by oil or grease shall be prepared by wet cleaning the affected areas as described in subClause .
prior to surface preparation by other specified methods .
Unless otherwise described in Appendix solvents shall not be used .
Clean water which does not leave any harmful residues on the surface shall be used for cleaning and rinsing .
Only cleaning agents which do not leave harmful residues on the surface after final rinsing shall be used for cleaning .
Surface preparation shall be continued until the required standard has been achieved .
The surfaces are required to be free from condensation oil grease dust residues and detrimental contamination such as chlorides and sulphides .
These shall be tested using the procedures of DD ENV ISO BS EN ISO BS EN ISO BS EN ISO BS EN ISO and BS EN ISO BS B .
After dry surface preparation of internal surfaces and before any wet cleaning all dust and debris shall be removed from accessible areas by sweeping and vacuum cleaning .
Immediately before application of each coat of paint the Contractor shall ensure that the surfaces i meet the required standard of preparation ii are free from harmful residues including mortar concrete dust grit and paint degradation products iii are free from detrimental contamination iv are free from moisture detrimental to the coating to be applied .
The edges of existing coatings adjacent to abraded or blast cleaned areas shall be bevelled back where practicable into sound and firmly adhering material .
Unless otherwise specified in Appendix fasteners shall be prepared and painted to the same standard as adjacent main surfaces .
After surface preparation by methods using water or when the steelwork has been exposed to the weather after surface preparation by other methods or when there are deck leaks areas containing riveted or bolted joints or built up sections shall be freed of any standing water which may be present in the nominal joint gaps compressed air or other approved methods shall be used .
When drying out has been completed or when surfaces are dry after surface preparation line gaps around the perimeter of joint or along plies shall be sealed effectively by successive applications of undercoat paint .
All wider gaps shall be sealed with a sealant compatible with the primer .
Amendment November Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Maintenance Painting of Steelwork The use of an inhibitor during wet blast cleaning or cleaning shall not be permitted .
Surface preparation materials and methods abrading Any encrusted rust foreign matter or paint which may be difficult to remove by abrading alone shall be dislodged by scraping aided by hand or power wire brushing .
This work shall be completed before abrading of the areas so affected .
Abrading shall be carried out using abrasive paper or other material or a flexible abrasive disc mounted on a power drive flexible pad or a power driven arbor or spindlemounted flexible abrasive flap wheel .
Abrading tools may be used to remove weld spatter .
Wet abrading may be employed for the preparation of finishes over sound undercoats over unsound systems over hot dip galvanizing or hot dip galvanizing .
Wet abrading shall not be allowed to come into contact with exposed thermally sprayed metal coatings unless the metal coating is to be entirely removed .
All equipment including tools abrasive sheets abrasive discs and abrasive wheels shall be of a type capacity and in a condition appropriate for the work .
The use of hard grinding wheels for abrading shall not be permitted .
A polished surface appearance caused by the polishing in of old paint rust or dirt shall not be acceptable .
Areas of corroded steel or unsound metal coatings which have been prepared by abrading down to St steel bright steel or bright metal coating as appropriate shall be protected by the primer and next coat of paint before any cleaning down or other preparation of adjacent surfaces specified in Appendix is undertaken .
Areas of unsound hot dip galvanizing which have been prepared down to bright steel by abrading shall be protected by the application of the primer and next coat of paint before cleaning down or other preparation of adjacent surfaces specified in Appendix is undertaken .
After surface preparation by wet abrading of hot dip galvanizing but prior to any cleaning down of adjacent painted or hot dip galvanised surfaces specified in Appendix any exposed areas of steel shall be dry abraded down to bright steel and protected by the primer and the next coat of paint including the stripe coat before cleaning down or other preparation of adjacent surfaces specified in Appendix is undertaken .
Amendment November Dry or wet cleaning Wet cleaning shall be carried out by scrubbing with a stiff bristle brush using water and a cleaning agent or a pressure washer .
Immediately after cleaning down the surfaces shall be thoroughly rinsed using clean cold water .
Dry cleaning shall be carried out by scrubbing with a dry stiff bristled brush .
Where the existing surfaces are affected by embedded metallic grit or other abrasive particles they shall be scraped to dislodge looser particles and then dusted off .
This work shall be carried out after any final rinsing and when the surface is dry .
Dry Blast cleaning using Dry airabrasive System Unless otherwise specified in Appendix chillediron grit complying with BS EN ISO BS E high carbon cast steel grit complying with BS EN ISO BS E with a hardness value greater than HV fused aluminium oxide complying with BS EN ISO nonmetallic abrasive such as almandite garnet to BS F ISO copper slag to BS EN ISO BS F or recycled glass complying with BS EN ISO shall be used .
Grades for metallic abrasives shall comply with the following profile see subclause .
grade Fine G or S Medium G or S Coarse G or S The particle size of metallic abrasive in plant or equipment shall not exceed the maximum for the relevant grade as specified above .
Before the start of blast cleaning and during blast cleaning the Contractor shall ensure that the abrasive is free from matter which could leave detrimental contamination as defined in subClause .
vii on the surfaces to be coated .
Metallic grit or aluminium oxide abrasive shall be used for dry blast cleaning of relatively small areas on site which are to be thermally sprayed metal coated such as at areas prepared to clean steel .
The Contractor shall ensure that the grade and particle shape of non metallic abrasives are adequate for the purpose intended .
Excepting for aluminium oxide nonmetallic abrasives shall not be recycled .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Maintenance Painting of Steelwork wet Blast cleaning using low pressure airwater abrasive System Unless otherwise specified in Appendix the airwater pressure at the nozzle shall not exceed .
kgfcm and shall be fully adjustable below this level .
The system shall incorporate a mechanical metering device remote controlled by the operator from the nozzle to regulate from zero to maximum the quantity of nonmetallic abrasive being fed into the airwater mixture .
During abrasive blast cleaning the airwaterabrasive shall be thoroughly mixed and the mixture shall be projected onto the surface to be cleaned through a single bore nozzletube .
The use of an inhibitor during wet blast cleaning or washing shall not be permitted .
wet Blast cleaning using High pressure water abrasive System or Ultra High pressure water System Unless otherwise specified in Appendix the water pressure shall not exceed kgfcm for high pressure or between and kgfcm for ultra high pressure .
The system shall incorporate a mechanical metering device controlled by the operator at the nozzle to regulate from zero to maximum the quantity of nonmetallic abrasive being fed into the water .
Within minutes of wet blast cleaning the whole of the cleaned surface shall be thoroughly washed using the blast cleaning equipment with air and water .
Any further deposits of abrasive on already rinsed surfaces shall be removed in a similar manner also within minutes of being deposited .
All accumulated deposits of abrasive and debris on other parts of the structure shall be removed by the same method before the end of the working day .
After washing the surfaces shall be free from all contamination .
Tests for freedom from detrimental contamination shall be made after the washing .
combined wetDry Blast cleaning Wet blast cleaning using the low pressure airwaterabrasive system in accordance with subClause .
and shall be followed at a minimal interval by dry blast cleaning in accordance with subClauses .
to of all the previously wet blast cleaned areas .
The specified standard of surface preparation shall have been achieved in full initially by wet blast cleaning and washing to achieve the required cleanliness before any later dry blast cleaning of the same areas to remove flash rusting or to restore the required surface profile .
other Requirements When surface preparation is to be carried out by dry blast cleaning and on adjacent surfaces by wet cleaning down andor abrading then unless otherwise dictated by traffic management requirements etc .
the wet cleaning down and any wet abrading shall be carried out first .
When surface preparation is to be carried out by wet blast cleaning any wet cleaning down andor wet abrading of adjacent surfaces may be carried out after the wet blast cleaning .
In such cases areas to be blast cleaned andor abraded shall be cleaned down in accordance with subClause .
and thoroughly rinsed using the blast cleaning equipment before any final preparation by dry blast cleaning or dry abrading is carried out .
Any prepared steel surfaces shall be protected from the effects of any further wet method of surface preparation by the application of a minimum microns dry film thickness of paint .
grinding Grinding wheels and discs shall be of the size shape and grade of coarseness appropriate to the particular operation .
The speed of revolution shall be appropriate for the work .
Grinding shall normally be carried out after surface preparation by other methods including cleaning down has been completed except where it is necessary to achieve a blast profile and this would necessitate blast cleaning after grinding .
Surfaces prepared by grinding to bright steel shall be protected by the application of the primer and the next coat of paint including any stripe coats before cleaning down or other preparation of adjacent surfaces specified in Appendix is undertaken .
Surface preparation workmanship Standards Definitions of terms in subClause .
describing coatings the extent of surface preparation and chemical cleanliness of surfaces are given below i unsound paint .
Paint showing signs of disruption rusting through having inadequate adhesion or covering rust scale loose rust loose mill scale or other detrimental products ii sound paint .
Paint which is sound down to a metal substrate Amendment May Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Maintenance Painting of Steelwork iii unsound metal coating .
A metal coating showing signs of disruption inadequate adhesion or penetration by rust or other corrosion products iv sound metal coating .
A metal coating which complies with Clause or a metal coating restored to these requirements by blast cleaning but with a reduced thickness v Visual cleanliness of a steel substrate prepared to a clean steel by blast cleaning Appearance There shall be a blast cleaning pattern overall .
The surface profile shall be free from mill scale rust and foreign matter when viewed by normal vision b Sa to BS EN ISO BS A and BS EN ISO BS A by blast cleaning Appearance The surface shall be free from all rust scale loose rust and loose mill scale c bright steel by abrading Appearance The surface shall be free from all surface rust mill scale and defects and shall have an overall bright appearance d St to BS EN ISO BS A and BS EN ISO BS A by abrading Appearance The surface shall be free from all rust scale loose rust and loose mill scale e Bright steel by grinding Appearance The surface shall be free of weld spatter shelling internal discontinuities and other surface defects leaving an overall bright appearance .
Rounding of sharp edges shall be to a radius of about mm vi visual cleanliness of a metal coating restored or prepared to a sound metal coating by blast cleaning Appearance The surface shall be free from corrosion products and embedded abrasive particles and shall have a bright appearance overall b bright metal coating by abrading Appearance The surface shall be free from surface corrosion and corrosion products and shall have a bright appearance overall vii freedom from harmful residues or contamination Surfaces shall only be deemed to be free from harmful residues or contamination after surface preparation when any such remaining matter shall not reduce the required durability of the specified protective system .
The following standards of surface preparation shall be achieved i areas containing existing sound finishing paint shall be freed of a any visible gloss which may prevent adequate adhesion of the next coat and b contamination ii areas of existing unsound paint coatings over a steel substrate shall be freed of a any unsound paint down to sound paint b any unsound paint down to clean steel c any unsound paint down to Sa or St quality steel d any unsound paint down to bright steel e all paint down to Sa or St quality steel f all paint down to clean steel and g contamination iii areas of existing unsound paint coatings over a metal coated steel substrate shall be freed of a any unsound paint down to sound paint or to sound metal coating b any unsound metal coating down to bright metal coating c any unsound metal coating down to clean steel d any unsound metal coating down to bright steel e all paint and unsound metal coating down to sound metal coating or to clean steel Amendment May Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Maintenance Painting of Steelwork f all paint and metal coating down to clean steel and g contamination iv areas of sound hot dip galvanizing exposed through a paint system during surface preparation shall be abraded to an extent necessary to ensure effectiveness of adhesion promoter andor adhesion of the primer v areas of unsound metal coating over a steel substrate shall be freed of a any unsound metal coating down to bright metal coating b any unsound metal coating down to sound metal coating c any unsound metal coating down to clean steel d any unsound metal coating down to bright steel e all metal coating down to clean steel and f contamination .
vi when either clean steel Sa or St quality steel or bright steel is exposed through a metal coating during surface preparation the standard shall be as defined in subClause .
as appropriate except for the profile of previously blast cleaned steel surfaces .
In the case of aluminium and zinc metal spray remnants of soundly adhering and clean aluminium or zinc may be retained .
Any sound metal spray which is contaminated by lead shall be completely removed .
The surface profile to be achieved by blast cleaning either Fine Medium or Coarse as appropriate shall be within the limits set by the Surface Profile Comparator for the Assessment of Abrasive Blast Cleaned Surfaces conforming to BS EN ISO BS C. Metal Coatings Hot Dip Galvanised Coatings Unless otherwise specified in Appendix structural members which were originally hot dipped galvanised and display signs of deterioration shall be replaced by newly hot dipped galvanised members or alternatively the surface shall be cleaned to bright metal and protected by the application of coatings .
Thermally Sprayed Metal Coatings Thermally sprayed metal coatings shall unless otherwise described in the Contract comply with BS EN and with the following i aluminium coating shall be of a material with minimum quality in accordance with type Al .
A of ISO .
Zinc coating shall have a composition in accordance with type Zn .
of ISO ii the thickness of either coating shall be not less than microns iii The strength of adhesion of thermally sprayed metal coatings shall not be less than the following Aluminium kgfcm Zinc kgfcm iv thermally sprayed metal coatings shall be applied continuously over each .m per gun or the area of the component whichever is the lesser until the specified thickness has been achieved v the application of thermally sprayed metal in separate layers shall not be permitted vi all surfaces to be thermally metal sprayed shall be blast cleaned and the standard shall be Sa quality to BS EN ISO BS A medium profile vii thermally sprayed metal coatings shall be denibbed .
Other Requirements When a metal coating is required on only part of a component it shall be applied before the rest of the component receives paint .
New items that are electroplated and that are under torque or tension conditions shall be stress relieved by heat treatment at appropriate temperature and time to prevent failure by hydrogen embrittlement .
Testing of Metal Spray Coatings At the start of the Works and subsequently at intervals scheduled in the Contract with the exception of coatings on steel in bearings curved surfaces repairs to mechanical damage local failure of thermally sprayed metal coating at site joints or areas restored on site the Contractor shall demonstrate by means of a tensile test in accordance with BS EN that the minimum adhesion requirement Amendment May Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Maintenance Painting of Steelwork is being attained as detailed in subClause .
iii .
In the excepted areas the Contractor shall demonstrate that the adhesion is satisfactory by means of grid tests in accordance with BS EN .
Areas affected by the tests shall be restored in accordance with Clause .
The tensile tests shall be carried out initially on flat panels mm x mm x mm which are of the same grade of steel as the parent material and which before blast cleaning had the same surface condition .
The panels shall be blast cleaned and thermally metal sprayed together with the parent material to the same standard and using the same technique .
The Contractor shall ensure that adhesion tests have been carried out satisfactorily before any further work continues .
If the adhesion requirement on any test panel is not met the Contractor shall carry out a further test on the parent material adjacent to the test panel position .
In the case of adhesion failure on the steelwork itself by either method of test unsound thermally sprayed metal coating shall be restored and the tests repeated .
If more than two local areas of faulty adhesion occur on any one component the whole of the thermally sprayed metal coating on the component shall be considered as having failed and it shall be restored .
Paint and Similar Protective Coatings The term paint shall be deemed to refer to protective coatings in general .
The paints permitted for use by the Overseeing Organisation in the Works are listed in the Manual of Paints for Structural Steelwork which is included in BD DMRB .. and which also contains details of the quality assurance scheme for paints and similar protective coatings .
All paints shall have a current BBA HAPAS Roads and Bridges Certificate or equivalent .
All paints shall be supplied in sealed containers of not more than litres capacity and these shall be used in order of manufacture and batch number .
Each container shall have a completely removable lid and be clearly marked on the side to show the name of the manufacturer registered description of the material including purpose e.g .
whether primer undercoat or finish colour Item No paint manufacturers reference number batch number and date of manufacture .
Where date of manufacture is coded the Contractor shall provide the code key .
In addition paints shall be supplied in sealed containers of no greater than litre capacity for testing purposes in accordance with Clause for A samples .
The Contractor shall ensure that the properties of the paints he has selected are compatible with the existing system and suitable for the atmospheric conditions on site including temperature and humidity and that he is able to apply the paints satisfactorily to all parts of the structure in these conditions .
Unless otherwise described in Appendix all paints forming any one protective system or overlapping systems shall be obtained from the same manufacturer as named by the Contractor in Appendix Form HAP Maintenance Paint System Sheet .
Surface Preparation and Protective Systems The particular methods of surface preparation are to be detailed in Appendix Form HAP Maintenance Paint System Sheet parts to .
Protective systems Note mdft minimum dry film thickness B apply by brush AS apply by airless spray HB High Build dft above m NB Normal Build dft between and m LB Low Build dft below m i Item numbers in the Protective Systems are listed in the Manual of Paints for Structural Steelwork which is included in BD DMRB .. and a summary is shown in Table .
ii Details of Protective Systems for Steelwork are given in Table .
Amendment May Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Maintenance Painting of Steelwork TABLE BD Quality Assurance Scheme for Paints and Similar Protective Coatings Annex A Manual of Paints for Structural Steelwork Current Paint Item Numbers Item Description Coat Type Build Applied by Zinc Phosphate Epoxy Ester PrimerUndercoat LB or NB B or AS singlecomponent MIO Modified Phenolic Undercoat LB B or AS single component MIO Modified Phenolic UndercoatFinish LB B or AS single component MIO Phenolic single component Undercoat LB B or AS MIO Phenolic single component UndercoatFinish LB B or AS Silicone Alkyd single component Finish LB B or AS Silicone Alkyd single component Undercoat LB B Zinc Phosphate Epoxy twopack Blast PrimerSealer NB B or AS B to small areas only Zinc Phosphate High Build Quick Blast Primer HB AS Drying Epoxy twopack B to small areas only MIO High Build Quick Drying UndercoatFinish HB AS Epoxy twopack Water based epoxy primer for blast Primer HB B or AS cleaned internal surfaces twopack Water based epoxy undercoatsheen UndercoatSheen Finish HB B or AS finish for internal use twopack High Build Aluminium Epoxy Surface tolerant HB B or AS twopack maintenance primer e.g .
for abraded surfaces High Build Epoxy twopack Surface tolerant HB B or AS maintenance undercoat Extended Cure Epoxy MIO twopack Primer Undercoat HB AS andor Finish B to small areas only High Build Glass Flake Epoxy Undercoat for blast HB AS stripe coats and twopack cleaned steel new small repairs only by brush construction High Build Glass Flake Polyester Undercoat for blast HB AS stripe coats and twopack cleaned steel new small repairs only by brush construction VinylVinyl Copolymer MIO Zinc Primer NB or HB B Phosphate singlecomponent VinylVinyl Copolymer Zinc Phosphate Primer NB or HB B singlecomponent VinylVinyl Copolymer MIO Zinc PrimerUndercoatFinish NB or HB B Phosphate singlecomponent VinylVinyl Copolymer Sheen Finish Finish NB or HB B singlecomponent Notes Colour reference shall be as per the manufacturers declared colour given with reference to BS andor BS C where appropriate .
Dry Film Thickness dft range shall be as per the manufacturers data sheet .
The minimum dry film thickness of the paint coats and paint system shall be as per the protective systems detailed in Table where given .
Amendment May Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Maintenance Painting of Steelwork TABLE BD Quality Assurance Scheme for Paints and Similar Protective Coatings Annex A Manual of Paints for Structural Steelwork Current Paint Item Numbers continued Item Description Coat Type Build Applied by Thixotropic Bitumen singlecomponent PrimerFinish HB B or AS Pitch Epoxy twopack Polyamide Cured UndercoatFinish HB B or AS High Build Epoxy twopack Finish HB B or AS Hydrocarbon Resin Modified T Wash Adhesion promoter for LB B hot dip galvanized steel Ultra low VOC adhesion primer To promote substrate LB B or AS singlecomponent adhesion properties of coating systems for hot dip galvanised steel aluminium and stainless steel surfaces Adhesion promoting singlecomponent To promote substrate LB B or AS adhesion properties of coating systems for hot dip galvanised steel aluminium and stainless steel surfaces Aluminium Epoxy twopack SealerPrimer LB B or AS Red Oxide Moisture Cured Polyurethane PrimerBlast Primer for LB B or AS singlecomponent maintenance or new works MIO Moisture Cured Polyurethane UndercoatFinish NB or HB B or AS Moisture Cured Polyurethane Semigloss Finish LB B singlecomponent NB AS Polyurethane twopack Gloss Finish LB B NB AS Polyurethane twopack Semigloss Finish NB B small areas by brush HB AS Organic Modified Polysiloxane Gloss Finish for new NB B twopack works or maintenance HB AS Grease Paint Primer B AS for difficult access areas Grease Paint UndercoatFinish HB B or AS Notes Colour reference shall be as per the manufacturers declared colour given with reference to BS andor BS C where appropriate .
Dry Film Thickness dft range shall be as per the manufacturers data sheet .
The minimum dry film thickness of the paint coats and paint system shall be as per the protective systems detailed in Table where given .
Amendment May Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Maintenance Painting of Steelwork TABLE Requirements for Bridges Parapets Bearings CCTV Masts Cantilever Masts Steel Lighting Columns and Bracket Arms and other Highway Structures Protective Systems Type Substrate Type Surface st Coat nd Coat rd Coat Minimum total dry preparation film thickness of the paint system microns I M High Steel Clean bright Sa or Item No .
Build Epoxy St quality steel twopack Min dry film thickness m Polyurethane twopack Aluminium metal spray zinc Bright or sound metal Item No .
or finish metal spray coating Min dry film thickness m Existing paint coats Sound finishing coat Item No .
Nil Nil or last undercoat Min dry film thickness m Other sound coats Item No .
Nil or Min dry film thickness m STRIPE COATS Item or .
Brush or airless spray .
One stripe coat in area prepared to clean steel or sound metal coating .
Applied over st coat PATCH COATS NIL NOTES .
When a light tint gloss finish is required an extra coat of Item shall be applied .
Item Polyurethane Finish may be used in lieu of Item to provide a semigloss finish alternatively Item Moisture Cure Polyurethane finish can provide a semigloss finish and is tolerant of surface moisture but not running water and low temperatures during application and curing. . Types I M and II M can be combined to allow paint maintenance to proceed when temperature falls and relative humidity increases and for night work .
HEALTH AND SAFETY Polyurethane twopack and Moisture Cured Polyurethane paints contain isocyanate and can be injurious to health if not used correctly .
An assessment of the risks and controls for their safe use shall be carried out before use .
Amendment May Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Maintenance Painting of Steelwork TABLE Requirements for Bridges Parapets Bearings CCTV Masts Cantilever Masts Steel Lighting Columns and Bracket Arms and other Highway Structures Protective Systems continued Type Substrate Type Surface st nd rd th Minimum total dry preparation Coat Coat Coat Coat film thickness of the paint system microns II M MC Steel Clean or bright steel Item No .
Polyurethanes Min dry film thickness m Sa or St quality Item No .
NA NA NA NA steel Min dry film thickness m Aluminium metal spray Bright or sound Item No .
zinc metal spray metal coating Min dry film thickness m Existing paint coats Sound finishing coat Item No .
or last undercoat Min dry film thickness m Other sound coats Item No .
Min dry film thickness m STRIPE COATS Item Brush or airless spray .
Two stripe coats the first applied over st coat the second coat applied over nd coat PATCH COATS NIL NOTES .
Item Polyurethane twopack gloss finish may be used in lieu of Item MC Polyurethane semigloss finish twopack Polyurethane gloss finishes are less tolerant of moisture and low temperatures during application and curing than MC Polyurethanes and shall therefore only be specified when conditions preclude the formation of moisture on surfaces and when the ambient temperature is likely to remain above oC during application and the curing period. . Types I M and II M can be combined to allow paint maintenance to proceed when temperature falls and relative humidity increases and for night work .
HEALTH AND SAFETY Moisture cured Polyurethane and Polyurethane twopack paints contain isocyanate and can be injurious to health if not used correctly .
An assessment of the risks and controls for their safe use shall be carried out before use .
Amendment May Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Maintenance Painting of Steelwork TABLE Requirements for Bridges Parapets Bearings CCTV Masts Cantilever Masts Steel Lighting Columns and Bracket Arms and other Highway Structures Protective Systems continued Type Substrate Type Surface st Coat nd Coat rd Coat Minimum total dry preparation film thickness of the paint system microns III M Hot dip galvanizing Bright or sound Item No .
or other Extended Cure metal coating adhesion or Epoxy promoter Polyurethanes Min dry film thickness m III M Hot dip galvanizing Bright or sound Item No .
alternative metal coating or Extended Cure Epoxy Min dry film thickness m Polyurethanes STRIPE COATS Item Brush or airless spray .
One stripe coat in area prepared to clean steel or sound metal coating .
Applied over st coat PATCH COATS NIL NOTES .
Some Item formulations have been developed for direct application to hot dipped galvanised surfaces with excellent adhesion without the need for an adhesion promoter to be checked with and guaranteed by paint manufacturer . .
When a light tint gloss finish is required an extra coat of Item shall be applied .
Item Moisture Cured Polyurethane Finish may be used in lieu of Item to provide a semigloss finish tolerant of surface moisture but not running water and low temperatures during application and curing .
HEALTH AND SAFETY Polyurethane twopack and Moisture Cured Polyurethane paints contain isocyanate and can be injurious to health if not used correctly .
An assessment of the risks and controls for their safe use shall be carried out before use .
Amendment May Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Maintenance Painting of Steelwork TABLE Requirements for Bridges Parapets Bearings CCTV Masts Cantilever Masts Steel Lighting Columns and Bracket Arms and other Highway Structures Protective Systems continued Type Substrate Type Surface st Coat nd Coat rd Coat Minimum total dry preparation film thickness of the paint system microns IV M Steel Clean bright or Sa Item No .
or or MCEpoxy or St quality steel Polyurethane Min dry film thickness m STRIPE COATS Item Brush or airless spray .
One stripe coat in area prepared to clean steel or sound metal coating .
Applied over st coat PATCH COATS NIL NOTE .
When a light tint gloss finish is required an extra coat of Item shall be applied .
Item Moisture Cured Polyurethane Finish may be used in lieu of Item to provide a semigloss finish tolerant of surface moisture but not running water and low temperatures during application and curing .
HEALTH AND SAFETY Polyurethane twopack and Moisture Cured Polyurethane paints contain isocyanate and can be injurious to health if not used correctly .
An assessment of the risks and controls for their safe use shall be carried out before use .
Amendment May Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Maintenance Painting of Steelwork Amendment May TABLE Requirements for Bridges Parapets Bearings CCTV Masts Cantilever Masts Steel Lighting Columns and Bracket Arms and other Highway Structures Protective Systems continued Type Substrate Type Surface st Coat nd Coat rd Coat Minimum total dry preparation film thickness of the paint system microns V M Steel Clean bright or Sa Item No .
Grease Paints or St quality steel Min dry film thickness m Aluminium metal spray zinc Bright or sound Item No .
Nil metal spray or hot dip metal coating galvanizing Min dry film thickness m Existing paint coats Sound finishing coat Item No .
Nil Nil or last undercoat or other sound coats Min dry film thickness m STRIPE COATS Item m mdft .
Brush One stripe coat in all areas over nd coat PATCH COATS Item Brush over nd coat The total dft of existing coats plus new coats including patch coats shall not be less than m .
Number of patch coats to suit .
Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Maintenance Painting of Steelwork Amendment May Testing of Paints Provision of Samples Unless otherwise described in Appendix the Contractor shall provide unopened litre samples known as A samples for quality assurance purposes for each type of paint to be used for the Works in accordance with this Clause .
In addition the Contractor shall supply at least ml samples known as B samples for application control purposes .
A and B samples are tested for paint composition andor properties against the original formulation issued by the paint manufacturer to the certifying body .
A Samples A samples are required where more than litres of paint for any one coat are supplied to a single Contract .
For twopack systems separate samples of the base and activator shall be despatched by the Contractor to the testing authority .
A samples are not required for footbridge steelwork or CCTV masts cantilever masts steel lighting columns and bracket arms .
The first A samples shall be taken from the first representative batch of each type of paint delivered to site .
If paint is to be supplied in tins of greater than litre capacity then for A sampling a minimum of four litre tins of paint taken from each batch to be sampled shall be provided by the paint manufacturer .
The A samples shall be selected from these litre tins .
Additional A samples of paints subject to testing under subClause of this Clause shall be provided by the Contractor depending on the volume of paint for each coat to be used in the Contract .
Additional samples shall be provided in accordance with the following i for Ready or Difficult Access steelwork .
Over litres a further set of samples for each part or whole litres .
The Contractor shall also provide an A sample ii of any replacement batch of paint subject to testing under subClause of this Clause iii of any returned paint described in subClause .
iv when the paint is showing unsatisfactory application characteristics under Clause .
Immediately after selection the A samples shall be despatched by the Contractor to the testing authority together with Appendix Form HAP .
Paint shall be supplied in sufficient time to allow for sampling delivery to the testing authority and testing before the start of application .
Except for procedure trails paint shall not be applied until the A sample from the paint to be applied has been tested and confirmed as being satisfactory for use .
B Samples For single component coatings the Contractor shall take B samples from painters kettles or from nozzles of airless spray guns directly into clean new ml tins which shall be filled and then sealed prior to despatch to the testing authority .
The Contractor shall take B samples for twopack systems as separate unmixed samples of the base and activator cure components .
The B samples shall be taken following the stirring of the individual components and immediately prior to mixing the two components for use in the Works .
The samples shall be decanted directly into clean new ml tins which shall be filled and immediately sealed prior to despatch to the testing authority .
B samples shall be taken as site spot checks with a minimum of say one batch in three being sampled .
Also for each set of A samples taken a further B set of samples is required to be submitted for testing .
B samples are required for footbridge steelwork and CCTV masts cantilever masts steel lighting columns and bracket arms even though A samples are not required .
Immediately after selection the B samples shall be despatched by the Contractor to the testing authority together with Appendix Form HAP .
For twopack systems separate tins containing the activator and the base shall be dispatched to the testing authority .
Provision of ml Tins Packing and Transport of A and B Samples The Contractor shall provide ml tins with lids and lid clips for B samples at the start of painting or before any procedure trials required by Clause .
The quantity of tins supplied shall be sufficient to avoid any delay in taking B samples throughout the work .
The Contractor shall ensure that the lids of all tins of sample paint are securely clipped down when they are despatched for testing .
Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Maintenance Painting of Steelwork Amendment May The Contractor shall be responsible for handling packing as necessary prompt despatch and transit of A and B samples including collection of samples from the testing authority for use or disposal as appropriate following satisfactory testing and reporting .
The Overseeing Organisation shall report back to the Supervising Firm as stated on Appendix Form HAP all results of the testing who shall then notify the Contractor of the results .
Storage Requirements and Keeping Periods for Paints On delivery to site paint shall be unloaded directly into one or more secure paint stores which shall be located approximately within metres of the painting area .
Insulation and means of heating and ventilation shall be provided as necessary to maintain the temperature of paint stores between C and C .
If at any time or place paint in tins painters kettles or airless spray containers is allowed to reach temperatures outside the C and C limits or the paint manufacturers recommended storage temperature the paint shall be discarded and not used for the Works .
Two pack products which produce an exothermic reaction when mixed may be allowed to exceed the specified higher temperature limit .
The Contractor shall also implement any additional storage restrictions recommended by the paint manufacturer .
Unless excepted in subClause of this Clause paint which has not been used within the shelf life recommended by the manufacturer or within months of the date of manufacture which ever is the lesser shall be discarded or returned to the manufacturer and not used in the Works .
Chemically cured or moisture cured paints shall not be used after the expiry of the pot life stipulated by the paint manufacturer .
They shall be discarded on expiry of the pot life or at the end of each working daynight whichever is the less .
All other paints in opened tins or open containers including painters kettles shall be returned to store and kept in sealed containers with not more than ullage .
Exceptionally components of twopack epoxy paints may have their keeping periods extended to months from the date of manufacture provided that the Contractor returns the paints to the paint manufacturer and ascertains that the manufacturer examines the contents of each tin and reconstitutes the paints as necessary so that such paints are equal in all respects to the paints described in the Contract .
The Contractor shall provide a Certificate of Conformity confirming that such paints have been inspected and where necessary reconstituted and conform in all respects to the Contract .
Each tin of reconstituted paint returned to site by the manufacturer shall have an additional label affixed stating Extended Shelf Life to date .
The previous date marking shall remain and not be obscured .
Testing in compliance with Clause shall apply to reconstituted paints .
Procedure Trials Unless otherwise described in Appendix at the start of the Works the Contractor shall carry out procedure trials on areas totalling between m and m employing the labour and equipment to be used in the Works .
The Contractor shall demonstrate his ability to carry out the specified methods of surface preparation to the standard required and to apply the paints he has selected in accordance with the specification .
The Contractor shall supply sufficient paint for the trials as required for the size of the test area .
The remaining surface preparation shall not be started until the first stage of the procedure trials specified in subClause of this Clause are confirmed as satisfactory .
Immediately following the satisfactory completion of the first stage of the procedure trials the Contractor shall carry out the second and third stages employing the labour and equipment to be used in the Works .
In order to avoid delay the trials may be carried out in three stages i surface preparation and primer ii undercoats iii finish .
Paint application of the various coats on the remaining parts of the structure shall not be started until the relevant stage of the procedure trials are confirmed as satisfactory .
Procedure trials shall be completed within a day period .
Any adjustment to the registered paint formulations shown to be required by the trials other than an adjustment to the solvent shall be agreed with the Overseeing Organisation and made at the paint manufacturers works .
The Contractor shall carry out further procedure trials whenever he employs replacement skilled labour or proposes to use equipment of a different type .
Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Maintenance Painting of Steelwork Amendment May Application of Paint The application of paint shall be supervised at all stages by the Contractors supervisory staff .
The companies contracted to apply protective coating systems to steel structures and their personnel shall be capable of carrying out the work properly and safely .
The personnel carrying out the work shall have the necessary skills andor qualifications .
Paint shall be supplied from the Contractors paint store to the painters ready for application the only adjustment of formulation permitted being as described in subClause ..
In exceptional circumstances any addition of solvent necessary to improve application shall be advised and if possible carried out by the paint manufacturer preferably in the paint process plant with adequate equipment and controlled measurements .
During the application of paint surfaces to be treated shall be safely accessible and well illuminated .
When using the coating materials the manufacturers technical data sheet shall be observed .
Prior to and during the application the coating materials shall be verified to ensure i conformity of the container label with the specified product description ii no skin formation iii any sediment present shall be easily redispersible with no irreversible settling iv usability under the given site conditions .
Paint shall be applied only to surfaces which have been prepared and cleaned as described in this Series .
Areas of adjacent surfaces which are not to be painted shall be masked before application of paints to the prepared and cleaned surfaces .
Accidental overspray on adjacent unpainted surfaces shall be removed immediately .
Unless otherwise described in Appendix a coat of paint in a system shall be applied by one of the following methods i brush B ii airless spray AS iii air assisted spray S. Paint shall not be applied under the following conditions i when the ambient temperature falls below C or the relative humidity rises above or for types of paints in subClause .
outside the temperatures and humidities recommended by the paint manufacturer ii during rain snow fog mist or in a dust laden atmosphere iii when the amount of moisture likely to be deposited on the surface by condensation or rain before or after painting may have a harmful effect on the paint iv when windborne dust may have a harmful effect on the paint .
Before starting the procedure trials described in Clause the Contractor shall make available details of the overall wet film thickness for each coat he proposes to apply .
He shall also make available information as to the total amount of paint he expects to use for each coat of each system during any Contract for which procedure trials are required .
The calculation of the amount of paint to be used shall be based on the volume solids plus an allowance for waste .
The following requirements on paint film thicknesses shall apply i wet film thickness gauges shall be used where practicable to check that the wet film thickness is not less than min dry film thickness mdft x volume solids ii during the application of a paint system the Contractor shall ensure that the progressive total thickness of the applied coats shall allow the specified minimum total dft of the system to be attained without exceeding overall the proposed wet film thickness referred to in subClause of this Clause by more than iii in no case shall the total dry film thickness of a paint system or the mdft of the last undercoat and finish be less than that specified in Appendix Form HAP Maintenance Paint System Sheet iv the local dry film thickness for any primer shall not exceed the specified mdft by more than and for other paints by more than .
Each coat of paint of a specified system shall have satisfactory adhesion .
Each applied specified paint coat shall be free from defects including cratering pinholing blistering rivelling sagging bittiness dry spray and cissing etc .
The presence of any of these defects shall be determined by unaided visual assessment .
The presence of pinholing or porosity shall be determined by low or highvoltage detectors at corners bolted joints and welds pinholing shall be exempted .
The Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Maintenance Painting of Steelwork Amendment May finished system shall have an even and uniform appearance with no defects and the finishing paint in visually sensitive areas shall be from the same batch .
The gloss level of the finishing paint shall be established before the procedure trials .
A painted tinplate reference panel mm x mm shall be provided by the Contractor for this purpose .
Unless otherwise specified patch painting described in Appendix shall only be applied over areas of an existing system which have been prepared to sound paint .
All coats in a system including the stripe coats see subClauses .
to but excepting repeat coats of the same patch paint shall be in contrasting colours to aid identification .
Before starting the procedure trials described in Clause the Contractor shall provide a reference panel coated with the steppedback paint system to indicate the contrast between each coat of paint .
Twopack chemically cured and moisture cured paints shall not be applied when the steel temperature falls below C above dew point andor C or when the steel or ambient temperatures are below those advised by the paint manufacturer nor shall such paints be applied when the temperatures are likely to fall below the advised temperatures during the curing period .
Stripe Coats Unless otherwise described in Appendix the stripe coats shall be applied by brush over all welds edges and all fasteners including washers and to all external corners except those of RHS members .
In areas prepared down to the substrate or to a metal coating the first stripe coat using second undercoat paint shall be applied over the primer or the first undercoat when a second stripe coat is specified it shall be separated from the first stripe coat by an undercoat .
The first stripe coat on fasteners treated with Item shall be applied by brush other stripe coats may be applied by brush or airless spray as appropriate .
In areas prepared down to sound paint the stripe coats shall be applied before the priming coat .
Stripe coats applied on existing paint coats shall be applied by brush .
The first stripe coat on fasteners treated with Item shall be applied by brush .
Wet cleaning as described in subClause .
shall be used to remove final traces of grease from fasteners before treatment with Item .
The Contractor shall enter the details of the stripe coats he has selected in Appendix Form HAP Maintenance Paint System Sheet giving the Item No .
colour and method of application .
Square solid infill bars shall after the second undercoat has been applied be given an extra coat of the thickest undercoat in lieu of stripe coat or coats .
Exposure times for prepared steel surfaces and for metal coated surfaces .
Clean steel prepared by dry blast cleaning or bright steel prepared by abrading or by grinding shall be primed within hours .
Clean steel prepared by wet blast cleaning only shall be primed within hours of being dry enough for painting .
Clean steel prepared by combined wetdry blast cleaning shall be primed within hours of dry blast cleaning .
Sa or St steel prepared by dry blast cleaning or abrading shall be overcoated within hours .
Sa steel prepared by wet blast cleaning or combined wetdry blast cleaning shall be primed within hours of being dry enough for painting or within hours of dry blast cleaning .
Steelwork which has been thermally metal spray coated at site shall be primed or sealed within hours and in any case before the surfaces have been affected by moisture .
Areas prepared down to bright or sound thermally sprayed metal coating shall be sealed or primed within hours of preparation by dry blast cleaning or abrading and in any case before the surfaces have been affected by moisture .
Hot dip galvanizing which has been abraded to bright metal prior to painting shall be primed within hours or within hours of being dry enough for treatment if wet abraded and overcoated within hours of priming .
Gaps at joints or plies shall be sealed in accordance with subClause .
either before or after the application of the primer as appropriate .
Paint Overcoating Times Unless otherwise specified in Appendix overcoating times shall be as follows i primers on steel or sealed thermally sprayed metal coating or first coats over Item or etch primed hot dip galvanizing shall be overcoated within hours and the next Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Maintenance Painting of Steelwork F Amendment May coat applied within days or as recommended by the paints manufacturer ii surfaces of existing paint coats which have been prepared to sound paint cleaned down only or abraded only to remove gloss shall be overcoated within days iii coats following those referred to in i and ii above shall be applied within days of each coat or as recommended by the paints manufacturer .
Form HAP Maintenance Paint System Sheet Appendix Form HAP Paint Data Sheet Appendix As soon as the Contract has been awarded the Contractor shall prepare and make available a copy of Appendix Form HAP Maintenance Paint System Sheet of which he shall have completed parts to together with relevant copies of Form HAP Paint Data Sheet Appendix .
Following any relevant approvals in accordance with the Contract Appendix Forms HAP Maintenance Paint System Sheet shall be adopted for the Works .
Access Containment and Lighting Without prejudice to the Conditions of Contract access for inspection shall be provided erected and maintained by the Contractor .
The access shall be adequate in all respects for inspection purposes .
Manual surface preparation and coating application work shall not be carried out when light intensity at the workface is less than lux .
When the natural light intensity falls below this level the Contractor shall install and maintain temporary lighting which shall provide a minimum light intensity of lux over at least .
m at the workface during the work and also for inspection when required Additional Requirements for the Protection of CCTV Masts Cantilever Masts Steel Lighting Columns and Bracket Arms Applicable Clauses Unless otherwise described in Appendix the work described in this Clause shall be carried out in compliance with Appendix and with Clauses to except that only one stripe coat in undercoat paint is required .
Volume Specification for Highway Works Series Maintenance Painting of Steelwork SF Amendment May SE Paint and Similar Protective Coatings The term paint in this specification shall be deemed to refer also to similar protective coatings including specialist coatings such as grease paints .
The paints permitted for use by the Overseeing Organisation in the Works are listed in the Manual of Paints for Structural Steelwork which is included in BD DMRB .. and which also contains details of the quality assurance scheme for paints and similar protective coatings .
All paints shall have a current BBA HAPAS Roads and Bridges Certificate or equivalent .
All paints shall be supplied in sealed containers of not more than litre capacity and these shall be used in order of delivery .
Each container shall be of the completely removable lid type and be clearly marked on the side to show the name of the manufacturer registered description of the material including purpose e.g .
whether primer undercoat or finish colour Item No paint manufacturers reference number batch number and date of manufacture .
Where date of manufacture is coded the Contractor shall provide the code key .
The Contractor shall ensure that the properties of the paints he has selected are suitable for the conditions on site including temperature and humidity and that he is able to apply the paints satisfactorily to all parts of the structure in these conditions .
Unless otherwise described in Appendix all paints forming any one protective system or overlapping systems shall be obtained from the same manufacturer as named by the Contractor in Appendix Form HAP Maintenance Paint System Sheet .
The requirements of Clause and their respective Tables shall apply in Scotland .
NATIONAL ALTERATIONS OF THE OVERSEEING ORGANISATION OF SCOTLAND SERIES INTRODUCTION Contents Clause Title Page Introduction National Alterations of the Overseeing Organisations of Scotland Wales and Northern Ireland Terms and Abbreviations Appendices Normative and Informative Reference Documents Schedule of Pages and Relevant Publication Dates Thickness of Material and Tolerances F Acknowledgements F MANUAL OF CONTRACT DOCUMENTS FOR HIGHWAY WORKS VOLUME SPECIFICATION FOR HIGHWAY WORKS Amendment May Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Introduction INTRODUCTION Introduction The Specification for Highway Works is published as Volume of the Manual of Contract Documents for Highway Works and in addition to this Introduction contains numbered Series and Lettered Appendices .
Reference shall be made to the Schedule of Pages and Relevant Publication Dates in the Contract to determine the publication date of each page of the Specification for Highway Works applicable to the Contract .
The current schedule is included here at Table .
National Alterations of the Overseeing Organisations of Scotland Wales and Northern Ireland Additional and Substitute specification requirements of Transport Scotland the Welsh Government and the Department for Regional Development a department of the Northern Ireland Executive are contained within Volume of the Manual of Contract Documents for Highway Works .
These Additional and Substitute Clauses are identified by the suffix TS NAW or NI respectively and are located immediately after the end of each Series or Lettered Appendix of the Specification .
The suffix SE is also used in Series for National Alterations for the Overseeing Organisation of Scotland .
Unless stated otherwise in contract specific Appendix these Clauses are deemed to be included in contracts administered by the above Overseeing Organisations .
Clauses with suffix SE TS NAW or NI are deemed to replace Clauses of equal number but without suffix .
Terms and Abbreviations Unless specifically defined otherwise the definitions of terms used in the Specification and associated documents are those in BS Building and Civil Engineering Vocabulary .
The term Overseeing Organisation means the Highways Agency Transport Scotland the Welsh Government or the Department for Regional Development depending on which is responsible for the Contract .
Unless otherwise stated systems of quantities and units are in accordance with BS ISO Quantities and Units .
Abbreviations listed in Table have the meanings shown therein .
Other abbreviations used in the Specification have meanings given in the relevant Clauses .
Appendices Appendices identified by the letters A to H contain standard information and requirements .
Numbered Appendices identified by digits e.g .
contain contract specific information and requirements .
The contract specific Numbered Appendices incorporated in the Contract are listed in contract specific Appendix .
Normative and Informative Reference Documents The following documents to which reference is made in the Specification are listed in Appendix F i British Standards ii British Standard Drafts for Development DD Documents iii European Standards iv International Standards Amendment May Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Introduction Amendment May v Publications of the Department for Transport and other Government Offices vi UK Overseeing Organisations publications including their predecessors publications vii Transport Research Laboratory Reports viii UK and EU Legislation ix Quality Management Schemes Publications x Miscellaneous .
Where Standards and other documents are incorporated into the Contract by reference the respective edition used shall be that which is current at the Contract Reference Document Date unless otherwise stated in the Specification .
The Contract Reference Document Date shall be as stated in the Preambles to the Specification or where no date is stated therein it shall be the tender invitation date .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Introduction Amendment May TABLE SCHEDULE OF PAGES AND RELEVANT PUBLICATION DATES SeriesAppendix Page Number Publication Date to to F to May February May to to to F WF N to NF to N May December to F February May November to to F May to F May to November F May NF May November November to November to to F S to SF W to WF N to NF February February to F N to NF February to F February to F May to F February NF to to F November August February May to WF August to F May to May November to N to NF November May NF November to November to F November and N May NF May to F May to F February to to to to F March to to to to to to to November to November Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Introduction Amendment May SeriesAppendix Page Number Publication Date to F December to F August to F S to SF August to F May November to F February March to F May F May May to May May F November November to May May to November March to November November May F November to to to F May November to May to May to F SF May to November Appendix A to F May Appendix B to F May Appendix C to F May Appendix D F May Appendix D NI NF May Appendix E F May Appendix F to F May Appendix G Not used Appendix H May Appendix H November Appendix H November Appendix H to F November TABLE SCHEDULE OF PAGES AND RELEVANT PUBLICATION DATES Cond .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Introduction TABLE Abbreviations Abbreviation Meaning AASHTO American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials AAV Aggregate Abrasion Value ACEC Aggressive Chemical Environment for Concrete Class AISI American Iron and Steel Institute AMD Amendment to British Standard ASR Alkali Silica Reaction ASTM American Society for Testing and Materials BBA British Board of Agrment BRE Building Research Establishment Ltd BS British Standard BSI British Standards Institution CAC Calcium Aluminate Cement CBM Cement Bound Material CBR California Bearing Ratio CHS Circular Hollow Section CIRIA Construction Industry Research and Information Association CP British Standard Code of Practice CPD Construction Products Directive CPF Controlled Permeability Formwork CPR Construction Products Regulation DC Design Chemical Class EEA European Economic Area EN European Standard ETA European Technical Assessment FTD Flat Traffic Delineator EU European Union HAC High Alumina Cement HAPAS Highway Authorities Product Approval Scheme HCD Highway Construction Details HMSOTSO Her Majestys Stationery OfficeThe Stationery Office HSE Health and Safety Executive ISO International Organization for Standardization MCV Moisture Condition Value MDPE Medium Density Polyethylene NA National Annex NG Notes for Guidance on the Specification for Highway Works NHSS National Highway Sector Scheme NR No Requirement PC Portland Cement PD Published Document British Standards Institution PRD Percentage Refusal Density PSV Polished Stone Value PVC Polyvinyl Chloride RA Recycled Aggregate RCA Recycled Concrete Aggregate RHS Rectangular Hollow Section SHW Specification for Highway Works SCC Self Compacting Concrete Amendment February Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Introduction Amendment February F Abbreviation Meaning SI Statutory Instrument SMC Saturation Moisture Content SRPC Sulfate Resisting Portland Cement TG Technical Guide TR Technical Report TRL formerly TRRL Transport Research Laboratory formerly Transport and Road Research Laboratory TSA Thaumasite Sulfate Attack TSRGD Traffic Signs Regulations and General Directions TSS Highways Agency Traffic Systems and Signs UKAS United Kingdom Accreditation Service PVCU Unplasticised Polyvinyl Chloride XLPE Crosslinked Polyethylene DC direct current dft dry film thickness ggbs ground granulated blast furnace slag mc moisture content mdft minimum dry film thickness of paint omc optimum moisture content pfa pulverisedfuel ash also known as fly ash Thickness of Material and Tolerances Unless stated to the contrary the thickness of material described shall mean the finished or compacted thickness .
The requirements for tolerances where necessary are incorporated in the Specification on the Drawings and by reference in the publications listed in Appendix F. Acknowledgements The Overseeing Organisations acknowledge the permission given by i The British Standards Institution for reprinting extracts from BS and BS .
SERIES PRELIMINARIES Contents Clause Title Page Temporary Accommodation and Equipment for the Overseeing Organisation Vehicles for the Overseeing Organisation Radio Communication System for the Overseeing Organisation Standards Quality Management and Acceptance Goods Materials Sampling and Testing Goods and Materials Design of Works by the Contractor Site Extent and Limitations on Use Operatives for the Overseeing Organisation Control of Noise and Vibration Information Boards Existing Ground Levels Setting Out Programme of Works Payment Applications Accommodation Works Privately and Publicly Owned Services or Supplies Traffic Safety and Management Temporary Highways for Traffic Routeing of Vehicles Recovery Vehicles and Operations for Breakdowns Tidal Flowing and Standing Water MANUAL OF CONTRACT DOCUMENTS FOR HIGHWAY WORKS VOLUME SPECIFICATION FOR HIGHWAY WORKS Amendment May Clause Title Page Progress Photographs Not used Health and Safety Restrictions Precautions and Monitoring Temporary Closed Circuit Television CCTV System for the Monitoring of Traffic Timber and Products Containing Wood Supplied Under the Contract NATIONAL ALTERATIONS OF THE OVERSEEING ORGANISATIONS OF SCOTLAND WALES AND NORTHERN IRELAND Clause Title Page Wales NAW Checking Bar Schedules WF NAW Dimensional Accuracy WF NAW Agreement on Measurements Involving Computer Equipment WF Northern Ireland NI Standards Quality Management and Acceptance N NI Setting Out N NI Traffic Safety and Management N denotes a Clause or Sample Appendix which has a substitute National Clause or Sample Appendix for one or more of the Overseeing Organisations of Scotland Wales or Northern Ireland .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Preliminaries PRELIMINARIES Temporary Accommodation and Equipment for the Overseeing Organisation The Contractor shall provide maintain service and remove all accommodation including contents access roads and hardstanding thereto as described in contract specific Appendix for the use of the Overseeing Organisation .
Equipment furnishings fittings and supplies shall be located as described in contract specific Appendix .
All temporary initial accommodation shall be ready for occupation on the date for commencement of the works and all other accommodation complete with contents access roads and hardstanding shall be ready for occupation and use by the Overseeing Organisation within four weeks of the date for commencement of the works unless otherwise stated in Appendix .
Where stated in contract specific Appendix the Contractor shall furnish and service accommodation made available by the Overseeing Organisation .
The Contractor shall organise the provision of all telephones mobiles andor land lines for the Overseeing Organisation as described in contract specific Appendix .
The Contractor shall undertake all liaison with telecommunications companies as required .
Where stated in contract specific Appendix the land lines shall be for the exclusive use of the Overseeing Organisation .
Any provision for data connections shall also be for the exclusive use of the Overseeing Organisation .
All accommodation shall be regularly cleaned for so long as it is in use and suitable arrangements be made for the disposal of any waste arising from use of such accommodation .
All equipment supplied by the Contractor shall be of a quality and precision appropriate to its proposed use and shall be delivered in a serviceable condition .
The Contractor shall maintain all such equipment in serviceable condition and replace if necessary any that becomes unserviceable .
The Contractor shall ensure that any equipment needing periodic calibration is calibrated on delivery annually andor at other times as and when required by the Overseeing Organisation .
Unless otherwise stated in contract specific Appendix equipment supplied by the Contractor shall comply with Government Buying Standards minimum mandatory requirements and EU Green Public Procurement core criteria .
When major components of the works are manufactured off the site the Contractor shall arrange to make available adequate and secure accommodation as described in contract specific Appendix at or adjacent to the place of and during the period of manufacture and testing .
Vehicles for the Overseeing Organisation The Contractor shall provide transport as described in contract specific Appendix for the exclusive use of the Overseeing Organisation for any purpose in connection with the works .
The vehicles shall be delivered and maintained in good roadworthy condition .
They shall have a current MOT Certificate where required be licensed for use on the public highway and shall have comprehensive insurance cover for any qualified driver authorised by the Overseeing Organisation together with any authorised passengers and the carriage of goods or samples .
The Contractor shall provide fuel oil and maintenance in conformity with the vehicle manufacturers recommendations and shall keep clean the vehicles inside and out on a regular basis as described in contract specific Appendix .
A suitable replacement shall be provided for any vehicle out of service for more than working hours .
The choice of vehicle type engine size and transmission shall reflect the acceleration and manoeuvrability required of that vehicle during normal working conditions .
Unless stated otherwise in contract specific Appendix all vehicles shall have all round visibility from the drivers position .
Where vans are identified in Appendix additional mirrors shall be fitted to eliminate blind spots .
Amendment May Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Preliminaries Unless otherwise stated in contract specific Appendix all vehicles shall have sign boards reading Highway Maintenance or where appropriate Motorway Maintenance in accordance with Diagram of Schedule Part V of the Traffic Signs Regulations and General Directions on the rear of the vehicle the lettering shall be the largest x height that can be accommodated from the range .mm to mm .
Unless otherwise stated in Appendix the vehicles shall have chevron markings and a roof mounted amber flashing light bar in accordance with Section O of Chapter Part Operations of the Traffic Signs Manual .
Unless otherwise stated in contract specific Appendix all vehicles provided for the use of the Overseeing Organisation shall be free from markings identifying any company associated with the Contract .
Radio Communication System for the Overseeing Organisation When required in contract specific Appendix the Contractor shall provide a radio communication system for the Overseeing Organisation as described therein within weeks of the date for commencement of the works unless a different date for provision is required in Appendix .
This would be in addition to any telephones or telecommunications equipment provided for in contract specific Appendix .
The system unless otherwise described in contract specific Appendix shall be entirely separate from any provision for a radio communication system provided by the Contractor for his own use except that any aerial installation may be shared .
The system shall have an operating range which ensures reception throughout the site .
The Contractor shall be responsible for obtaining any necessary radio licences .
The Contractor shall maintain the system dismantling and removing it at the end of the period stated in contract specific Appendix .
If the system is inoperative for any reason it shall either be repaired or a replacement provided within hours .
Standards Quality Management and Acceptance Standards and CE markings Where there is a requirement in this specification for compliance with any part of a British Standard or other technical specification that requirement may be met by compliance with a a standard or code of practice of a national standards body or equivalent body of any EEA state or Turkey b any international standard recognised for use as a standard or code of practice by any EEA state or Turkey c a technical specification recognised for use as a standard by a public authority of any EEA state or Turkey or d a European Technical Assessment issued in accordance with the procedure set out in regulation EU No provided that the relevant standard imposes an equivalent level of performance and safety provided for by the stated Standard or technical specification .
EEA State means a state which is a contracting party to the European Economic Area Agreement .
British Standard means any standard published by the British Standards Institution including adopted European or other international standards .
Electrical equipment to which directives EC or EC apply and which are produced for incorporation in a permanent manner in the works must have affixed to them CE marking attesting to their conformity to the provisions of the applicable directives .
Declarations of conformity required by the above directives must be provided to the Overseeing Organisation prior to installation or use or procurement or supply of the equipment .
Construction products which are produced for incorporation in a permanent manner in the works and are covered by a harmonised European standard or European Technical Approval or Assessment must have the product performance required by the specification for the intended use declared under the Declaration of Performance and Amendment December Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Preliminaries be CE marked in accordance with the relevant British adopted European standard or European Technical Approvals or Assessments and the regulation EU No .
Unless otherwise described in the specification the declared performance of the product shall meet the required performance of all the essential characteristics required by the specification .
Declarations of performance required by the above regulation shall be provided to the Overseeing Organisation prior to installation or use or procurement or supply of the product .
Quality Management Unless otherwise indicated in contract specific Appendix or as required in the Conditions of Contract the Contractor shall institute a quality management system complying with BS EN ISO and shall prepare a Quality Plan .
The Contractor shall demonstrate compliance with this requirement to institute a quality management system to the Overseeing Organisation one acceptable method for this demonstration is to evidence registration to BS EN ISO .
The Quality Plan shall incorporate the requirements of contract specific Appendix and the requirements of the quality management schemes listed in Appendix A applicable to the works in accordance with subClause of this Clause .
The Quality Plan shall be submitted to the Overseeing Organisation within the periods stated in contract specific Appendix for acceptance before any related work is commenced .
Where any work goods or materials to be used in the works are the subject of the quality management schemes listed in Appendix A the Contractor shall require the supplier of such items to prepare a Quality Plan and the Contractor shall submit it to the Overseeing Organisation .
Such Quality Plans shall comply with the requirements of contract specific Appendix and the individual requirements of the relevant Sector Scheme Documents for Quality Management in Highway Works see subClause .
Quality Plans shall indicate hold points as follows Contractors points where no further work shall hold points proceed without the written approval of a designated person of the Contractors management who shall be named in the Quality Plan .
Overseeing points where no further work shall Organisations proceed without the written approval of hold points a designated representative of the Overseeing Organisation .
The Contractor shall ensure the Quality Plans and associated quality documentation are made available to all parties involved with the works .
Quality Records For works goods or materials other than those which are CE marked the Contractor shall make available contemporary quality records to the Overseeing Organisation when requested .
This includes quality records such as those identified in BS EN ISO to demonstrate achievement of the required quality and the effectiveness of the quality system .
The Contractor shall require any member of the Contractors supply chain to make available such contemporary quality records when requested .
Following a request copies of all quality records shall be made available immediately to the Overseeing Organisation .
The Contractor shall report any nonconforming productservice to the Overseeing Organisation and shall require any member of the Contractors supply chain to immediately report any nonconforming productservice to the Contractor .
The Contractor shall immediately pass these reports to the Overseeing Organisation and undertake no further related work until remedial or other measures have been undertaken .
The Contractor shall submit the quality records required by this specification as indicated in Appendix H to the Overseeing Organisation .
No item of work shall be considered complete until these records have been received by the Overseeing Organisation .
Note Quality terms used in this Clause are as BS EN ISO .
Amendment May Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Preliminaries Quality Management Schemes Except as described in subClause .
where any work goods or materials to be used in the works are the subject of a quality management scheme listed in Appendix A only work goods or materials conforming with such a scheme shall be used and the organisations carrying out such work shall have current registration to the relevant schemes .
The Contractor shall in each case submit to the Overseeing Organisation a copy of the certificate of conformity affirming compliance with the scheme .
Where any work goods or materials to be used in the works are the subject of a quality management scheme listed in Appendix A and for which the goods or materials are CE marked products in accordance with the relevant standards exclusions to mandatory requirements as listed in Appendix A apply .
Where specific training and competency requirements are identified in any quality management scheme listed in Appendix A the Contractor shall provide copies of the relevant training andor competency assessments certificates andor registrationskill cards of the workforce to the Overseeing Organisation for acceptance prior to the commencement of relevant work .
The requirement for compliance with a registered quality management scheme listed in Appendix A shall be satisfied by compliance with an equivalent quality management scheme of any Member State of the European Economic Area or a State which is party to a relevant agreement with the European Union provided that the proposed scheme is designed to ensure in use levels of safety performance and fitness for purpose equivalent to those provided for by the scheme specified .
The proposed scheme will include third party assessment by bodies accredited in accordance with BS EN ISOIEC by the United Kingdom Accreditation Service UKAS or equivalent European Accreditation Organisation which is party to a multilateral agreement MLA with UKAS or any equivalent International Accreditation Forum IAF MLA signatory with a scope which includes the relevant standards .
This subClause applies also to works only in so far as the means of carrying out such works are indivisibly associated with the goods or materials for which an alternative quality management scheme is proposed .
Product Certification Schemes and CE Marked Products Works goods and materials other than those covered by the Construction Products Regulation falling under the standards listed in Appendix B are required to have attestation or third party accreditation to demonstrate compliance with the relevant standard .
This can be satisfied by one or more of the following i Compliance with a relevant product mark scheme demonstrating compliance as described in subClause below ii Demonstration of compliance as described in subClause below iii Demonstration of compliance using testing and calculation as described in subClause below .
Where works goods or materials are covered by the Construction Products Regulation EU No .
CPR their compliance with the specification shall be demonstrated by the product being CE marked the declared performance of the product given in the Declaration of Performance meeting the required performance of all the essential characteristics given in the specification and evidence being provided that demonstrates the product meets the requirements of the specification for aspects other than those covered by the essential characteristics where such evidence meets the requirements of options i or ii above .
Where option i or ii of subClause is used the product shall be certified as compliant with the specification and relevant standard or equivalent as described in subClause of this Clause by a Certification Body .
The Certification Body shall be accredited in accordance with BS EN or BS EN ISOIEC by the United Kingdom Accreditation Service UKAS or equivalent European Accreditation Organisation which is party to a multilateral agreement MLA with UKAS or any equivalent International Accreditation Forum IAF MLA signatory with a scope which includes the relevant standards .
Unless otherwise described in the specification assessment of the product shall be carried out to the level of attestation as determined in the relevant standard for the intended use of the product in the works and shall include confirmation that the product provides in use adequate levels of safety performance and fitness for purpose .
For products covered by the Low Voltage Directive EC and the Electromagnetic Compatibility Directive EC the safety aspects would be for aspects not covered by the relevant CE marking .
Amendment May Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Preliminaries The Contractor shall provide information on the product to the Overseeing Organisation for acceptance .
This information shall include certification attestation details and Certification Body details .
Where option iii of subClause is used it shall be demonstrated that the product is capable of performing as required using tests calculations or other means .
Such testing or other means shall have a minimum level of attestation as that determined by the relevant standard and be suitably extensive to provide information on all relevant parameters .
Testing shall be carried out by laboratories accredited to UKAS or equivalent Accredited Organisations as described in subClause ..
The testing or other means shall include confirmation that the product provides in use adequate levels of safety performance and fitness for purpose .
For products covered by the Low Voltage Directive EC and the Electromagnetic Compatibility Directive EC the safety aspects would be for aspects not covered by the relevant CE marking .
The Contractor shall provide information on the product to the Overseeing Organisation for acceptance .
This information shall include testing or calculation details and results certification and attestation details .
Product Acceptance Schemes Where there are references in the specification to particular industry product acceptance schemes such as British Board of Agrment Certificates Roads and Bridges Certificates HAPAS certificates CARES certificate or equivalent scheme these shall be taken as references to a product acceptance scheme that has the attributes given in subClause below .
The types of work goods or materials listed in Appendix C are required to be certificated by a product acceptance scheme prior to their inclusion in the works .
The works goods or materials shall be assessed against a set of guidelines and criteria by a Certification Body .
Certification to confirm the products successfully meet the guidelines and criteria shall be issued by a Certification Body .
The Contractor shall provide information on the product to the Overseeing Organisation for acceptance .
This information shall include the certification and when requested details of the scheme to confirm its compliance with the criteria given below and accreditation details of the organisation issuing the certification .
The scheme shall meet the following criteria a Product acceptance and certification specified in this subClause shall be structured and implemented to provide assurance to the Overseeing Organisation that the product when supplied for its intended use and installed or processed post manufacture in accordance with the manufacturers instructions will give the performance and level of safety required by the specification and be fit for purpose .
b The organisation certifying products and issuing the certificates must be accredited to the relevant Certification Body standard BS EN or BS EN ISOIEC for product certification or BS EN ISOIEC for site inspection by UKAS or equivalent European Accreditation Organisation which is party to a multilateral agreement MLA with UKAS or any equivalent International Accreditation Forum IAF MLA signatory with a scope which includes the relevant standards .
This shall include accreditation to manage and execute a certification scheme as defined in this subClause .
Accreditation must cover a scope of activity relevant to the construction installation maintenance and operation of highway infrastructure .
c The scheme must cover as appropriate i Manufacture and installation or post manufacture processing of those products for which a Declaration of Performance and consequent CE marking has not been made on the basis of any harmonised European Standard hEN or European Technical Assessment or ii Only the installation of a material or post manufacture processing where the manufacturer has made a Declaration of Performance of the material with consequent CE marking or iii Product characteristics not included in the required essential characteristics of a hEN or in a European Technical Assessment if such characteristics provide additional protection for the consumer e.g .
road user .
d The assessment and certification requirements for a product certified under the scheme must be developed ensuring due consideration is given to the requirements of the users of the product and those responsible for the highways on which such products will be used or installed .
Amendment May Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Preliminaries e The scheme must have a technical supervisory panel that provides technical oversight on the operation of the scheme and formally consents to the issue of assessment and certification requirements of the specialist groups developing the assessment and certification requirements .
This panel must include a balanced representation of key end users recognized industry experts and those responsible for the highways on which such products will be used or installed .
f The product certification must include requirements for the audit and quality control of the production and installation processes for the product where necessary taking account of the product having its performance declared under a CE mark .
Installer certification must include requirements for onsite surveillance of installation or post manufacturing processes .
g For every product it has certified under a product certification scheme an organisation must make open and publicly accessible details of the assessment and certification guidelines .
h Where different organisations have certified the same generic form of product they must be able to demonstrate to the Overseeing Organisation equivalence of performance of products certified under the different schemes or agree a common set of guidelines for the assessment and certification of the product .
i The competences of organisations certifying products shall be as the competency requirements for Technical Assessment Bodies given in Regulation EU No the Construction Products Regulation Annex IV Table with the additions given in Table .
Table Competency additions to Construction Product Regulation EU No .
Annex IV Table Competence Description of Competence Requirement .
Determining the specific installation or post manufacturing control Understand and evaluate the installation or post manufacturing processes of the specific product in order to identify appropriate measures ensuring consistent compliant delivery of the installed or post manufactured product .
A certification body shall have staff with appropriate technical knowledge of the relationship between the installationpost manufacturing processes and the product characteristics related to production control for installation or post manufacture . .
Constructive engagement Be prepared to engage constructively with highway infrastructure managers and other certifying bodies for resolution of issues .
Be able to resolve differences in the certified performance of products of the same generic type and where appropriate agree a common set of guidelines for the assessment and certification of such products .
European Technical Assessment ETA The requirements for works goods or materials to be subject to a product certification scheme or product acceptance scheme as discussed in sub Clauses to above may alternatively be met by a product being attested using a European Technical Assessment ETA issued in accordance with the procedure set out in Regulation provided that the relevant attestation imposes an equivalent level of safety performance and fitness for purpose provided for by the specification .
Statutory Type Approval The requirements for statutory type approval are embodied in the Traffic Signs Regulations and General Directions the Zebra Pelican and Puffin Pedestrian Crossings Regulations and General Directions and subsequent amending Regulations .
Traffic signs requiring such approval are listed in Appendix D. The Contractor shall submit written evidence to the Overseeing Organisation that the relevant statutory type approval has been obtained .
Where the Contractor has designed part of the works for which statutory type approval is required application to the Secretary of State shall be made through the Overseeing Organisation .
Amendment May Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Preliminaries Statutory Authorisation Statutory authorisation is required before any traffic signs are incorporated into the works where these are of a character andor are to be used in circumstances which have not been prescribed in the Traffic Signs Regulations and General Directions the Zebra Pelican and Puffin Pedestrian Crossings Regulations and General Directions or subsequent amending Regulations .
Where the Contractor has designed part of the works for which such authorisation is required applications in accordance with the Regulations shall be made through the Overseeing Organisation .
Type ApprovalRegistrationListing The types of works goods or materials which are required to have Type Approval or Registration prior to their acceptance for inclusion in the works are given in Appendix E with the exception that products that are covered by the Construction Products Regulation EU No .
CPR do not have to be listed prior to their acceptance for inclusion in the works .
For products not covered by CPR previously obtained type approval or registration can be used .
The Contractor shall submit to the Overseeing Organisation a copy of the type approval registration certificate .
Where previously obtained type approval or registration is not available the Contractor shall submit documentation to the Overseeing Organisation which demonstrates compliance with the relevant specification andor standards .
For products covered by the CPR the information required in Clause .
shall be provided by the Contractor in accordance with that subClause .
Provision of Information Where information and documentation regarding works goods or materials is required to be submitted to the Overseeing Organisation for acceptance the Contractor shall submit such documentation in a timescale to meet the requirements of the Contractors programme of works .
The Contractor shall liaise with the Overseeing Organisation to ensure that adequate time is allocated for the Overseeing Organisation to undertake the required assessments for acceptance .
The time allocated for acceptance shall not be less than four weeks .
Unless otherwise specified two copies of all information and documentation including valid certificates in respect of work goods or materials proposed by the Contractor shall be supplied to the Overseeing Organisation in English .
Where the Contractor proposes to use an equivalent standard quality management scheme product certification scheme industry product acceptance scheme or type approvalregistration to that specified the Contractor shall provide relevant information to enable the Overseeing Organisation to ascertain whether or not the proposal is equivalent to the specified requirement .
The information provided by the Contractor shall provide full disclosure and appropriate evidence regarding the works goods or materials concerned in order to fully demonstrate equivalent levels of safety performance and fitness for purpose .
For products within the scope of the Construction Products Regulation this documentation would be the relevant Declaration of Performance and associated CE mark for the intended specified use .
When required in contract specific Appendix three copies of detailed working and fabrication drawings in the format detailed in contract specific Appendix prepared by or on behalf of the Contractor shall be submitted for the Overseeing Organisations acceptance .
The minimum period for submission of the drawings prior to commencement of the related works shall be as stated in contract specific Appendix .
Such acceptance shall in no way relieve the Contractor of his responsibilities for the work under the Contract .
Goods Materials Sampling and Testing Goods and Materials The Contractor shall provide the Overseeing Organisation with details of the suppliers from whom he proposes to purchase the goods and materials necessary for the execution of the works prior to their inclusion in the works .
Unless otherwise detailed in contract specific Appendix the Contractor shall keep and maintain supply records of all works goods and materials incorporated into the works .
These shall include i suppliers details including namecompany name and address ii date of supply to site iii manufacturers information and safety information Amendment May Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Preliminaries iv details of where the goods are incorporated into the works .
These details shall be provided to the Overseeing Organisation by the Contractor upon request and at completion of the works .
Sampling and Testing The testing scheduled in contract specific Appendix including sampling and provision of the associated samples shall be undertaken by the Contractor .
The Contractor shall carry out each of the tests required in contract specific Appendix within an elapsed time from the taking of the respective samples which shall be reasonable in all the circumstances unless otherwise prescribed by the Overseeing Organisation .
The Contractor shall supply to the Overseeing Organisation within hours of the completion of each test a copy of the results .
The following operations are not included in contract specific Appendix i checking inspecting examining measuring except in connection with testing ii trials and demonstrations iii routine testing carried out by manufacturers and suppliers in compliance with a specified standard or specification iv testing of plant .
Where required in contract specific Appendix test certificates andor product certification complying with the provisions of the relevant standard or specification where applicable and certifying that the goods or materials meet the specified requirements shall be supplied to the Overseeing Organisation by the Contractor at least four weeks prior to the incorporation of the goods or materials in the works .
Where goods or materials are required to be CE marked or where the Contractor proposes to use CE marked goods or materials the Contractor shall supply the Overseeing Organisation with the CE marking information including any relevant instructions and safety information at least four weeks prior to the incorporation of the goods or materials in the works .
This information shall be in English .
Where required in contract specific Appendix tests and associated sampling shall be undertaken by testing laboratories accredited in accordance with BS EN ISOIEC .
The accreditation shall be by UKAS or equivalent European accreditation organisation which is party to a multilateral agreement MLA with UKAS or any other equivalent International Accreditation Forum MLA signatory with a scope that includes BS EN ISOIEC .
Where UKAS or equivalent laboratory accreditation is required the results shall be reported on an official UKAS or equivalent accredited laboratory test report or certificate .
Where goods or materials are accepted on the basis of an equivalent standard quality management scheme product certification scheme or product acceptance scheme as provided for in Clause testing and sampling as specified in or applicable to such an equivalent standard quality management scheme product certification scheme or product acceptance scheme is accepted and shall be substituted for those specified in contract specific Appendices and respectively .
The Contractor shall provide samples which shall include source samples of goods and materials and shall deliver these to the Overseeing Organisation as described in contract specific Appendix .
Unless otherwise stated in contract specific Appendix the Contractor shall arrange for the sampling of such goods and materials to be undertaken by qualified staff of testing laboratories holding UKAS or equivalent European Accreditation Organisation accreditation to BS EN ISOIEC for such sampling .
These samples shall be supplied in sufficient time for them to be tested for acceptability by the Overseeing Organisation taking into account the programme for the works .
Production samples shall be delivered in a condition which is representative of the materials state for the purpose of the test .
The Contractor shall provide for rates of sampling specified in contract specific Appendix .
These rates of sampling shall apply at the outset of each of the respective activities and for the duration of each of the activities .
Following an initial period of sampling the Contractor may apply to the Overseeing Organisation for a relaxation in these rates of sampling having demonstrated to the Overseeing Organisation an acceptable level of confidence in control .
Provided at any subsequent time when test results indicate the need for improved control in the opinion of the Overseeing Organisation the Contractor samples at the rate specified in contract specific Appendix .
Amendment May Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Preliminaries Where testing is undertaken by a supplier or manufacturer in accordance with the Contract other than for products which are CE marked the Contractor shall ensure that each supplier and manufacturer will admit the Overseeing Organisations representative to his premises during normal working hours for the purposes of inspecting selecting the samples and witnessing the testing .
Where testing or in use operation of works goods or materials which are CE marked identifies failure of the CE marked works goods or materials the Contractor shall make formal notification of the failure to the relevant Trading Standards office .
The Contractor shall copy such correspondence to the Overseeing Organisation .
Design of Works by the Contractor Permanent Works Design The Contractor shall design the works items or elements listed in contract specific Appendix A to comply with the design specifications and requirements therein .
Where the Contractor proposes to design a works item or element for which a choice of designs is offered and listed in Appendix B he shall comply with the design specification and requirements therein .
The Contractor shall follow the technical approval procedures given in the Technical Approval Scheme adopted by the Overseeing Organisation for which purposes the Contractor shall be deemed to be the designer .
Permanent Structures Unless otherwise stated in contract specific Appendix the Contractor shall follow the technical approval procedures given in BD DMRB Unless otherwise stated in contract specific Appendix the Contractor shall complete the Approval in Principle AIP form or Record of Design Principles and Record of Assessment Principles for each structure or element to be designed .
The Contractor shall complete any other documentation required for the Technical Approval procedures such as Departures from Standard .
The Contractor shall complete design and check certificates as required .
The Contractor shall forward the completed forms and certificates to the Overseeing Organisation for acceptance and onward transmission to the Technical Approval Authority .
The format of these and other submissions shall be agreed with the Overseeing Organisation where paper copies are required three copies shall be supplied to the Overseeing Organisation .
The Contractor shall make any necessary alterations to the AIP or other documentation as required and submit the revised documents to the Overseeing Organisation in the agreed format .
Unless otherwise stated in contract specific Appendix the Contractor shall allow six working weeks for the review of the documentation by the Technical Approval Authority .
Where revisions are required to the documentation the Contractor shall allow an additional four working weeks for review of the revised documents by the Technical Approval Authority .
Unless otherwise stated in contact specific Appendix three copies of the completed Issue for Construction IFC drawings shall be submitted to the Overseeing Organisation for acceptance .
The Contractor shall allow four working weeks for review and acceptance of the IFC drawings by the Overseeing Organisation .
The works detailed in the documentation shall not commence until acceptance by the Technical Approval Authority and the Overseeing Organisation has been notified to the Contractor .
Temporary Works Design The Contractor shall comply with the requirements of contract specific Appendix for the items of temporary works design listed therein .
Temporary Structures Equipment designed by the Contractor for temporary works including bridge lifting systems structures demolition support systems and platforms used over or adjacent to highway railway watercourse footpath or other public right of way or where failure could affect the integrity or safety of any persons or structure shall be considered as a temporary structure and subject to the requirements of this Clause .
Amendment December Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Preliminaries Amendment December Unless otherwise stated in contract specific Appendix the Contractor shall follow the technical approval procedures given in BD DMRB .. for which purposes the Contractor shall be deemed to be the Designer .
Works are to be designated as described in Section of BD DMRB The design specifications requirements and constraints for equipment to be designed by the Contractor shall be as stated in contract specific Appendix .
Where required the Contractor shall complete the Approval in Principle AIP or Record of Design Principles and Record of Assessment Principles for each item incorporating all equipment to be designed .
The Contractor shall complete any other documentation required for the Technical Approval procedures such as Departures from Standard .
The Contractor shall complete design and check certificates as required .
The completed forms and certificates shall be submitted by the Contractor to the Overseeing Organisation for onward transmission to the Technical Approval Authority .
The format of these and other submissions shall be agreed with the Overseeing Organisation where paper copies are required three copies shall be supplied to the Overseeing Organisation .
The Contractor shall make any necessary alterations to the AIP or other documentation as required and submit the revised documents to the Overseeing Organisation in the agreed format .
Unless otherwise stated in contract specific Appendix the Contractor shall allow six working weeks for the review of the documentation by the Technical Approval Authority .
Where revisions are required to the documentation the Contractor shall allow an additional four working weeks for review of the revised documents by the Technical Approval Authority .
Unless otherwise stated in contact specific Appendix three copies of the completed Issue for Construction IFC drawings shall be submitted to the Overseeing Organisation for acceptance and forwarding to the Technical Approval Authority .
The Contractor shall allow four working weeks for review and acceptance of the IFC drawings by the Overseeing Organisation .
The works detailed in the documentation shall not commence until acceptance by the Technical Approval Authority and the Overseeing Organisation has been notified to the Contractor .
Site Extent and Limitations on Use The extent of the site and any limitations on its use shall be as described in contract specific Appendix .
Operatives for the Overseeing Organisation The Contractor shall provide the Overseeing Organisation with and maintain continuity of operatives equal to the tasks and capable of performing the functions described in contract specific Appendix .
For site surveys and setting out operatives shall be experienced in assisting engineers in such work .
For laboratoryrelated duties operatives shall be capable of assisting laboratory staff in routine tasks .
Operatives provided under subClauses and of this Clause shall have valid driving licences and driving experience suitable for the vehicles supplied in accordance with contract specific Appendix .
Control of Noise and Vibration General The Contractor shall comply with the recommendations for practical measures to reduce noise set out in BS Noise and Vibration Control on Construction and Open Sites Parts and with any specific requirements stated in contract specific Appendix .
The Contractor shall comply with any specific requirements for the control of vibration stated in contract specific Appendices and Clause .
The Contractor shall carry out the measurement and monitoring of construction noise and vibration effects as detailed in contract specific Appendix .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Preliminaries Vibration The Contractor shall limit vibration levels arising from the site activities to the levels stated in contract specific Appendix .
Tracked plant shall be prohibited from travelling within m of buildings .
Unless otherwise detailed in contract specific Appendix the levels of vibration shall be monitored by the Contractor using an approved vibration meter plus a graphical level recorder a record of this shall be provided to the Overseeing Organisation within hours .
Vibration control stations will be at locations as detailed in contract specific Appendix .
Information Boards The Contractor shall within four weeks of the date for the commencement of the works provide and erect information boards at the locations and to the specification given in contract specific Appendix .
The Contractor shall ensure that they are kept clean and maintained in a safe and legible condition and remove them on completion of the works .
The design content and layout of information boards and any other project publicity material including any and all Overseeing Organisation logos and branding shall be in accordance with policy requirements of the Overseeing Organisation the contract employer and the highway authority and in accordance with contract specific Appendix .
For the Highways Agency these requirements shall be in accordance with the requirements stated in the document The Highways Agencys Visual Identity Specifications .
Existing Ground Levels The Contractor shall satisfy himself that the existing ground levels as described in contract specific Appendix are correct .
Should the Contractor wish to dispute any levels he shall submit to the Overseeing Organisation a schedule of the position of the levels considered to be in error and a set of revised levels .
The existing ground relevant to the disputed levels shall not be disturbed before the correct levels are determined .
Setting Out The Contractor shall unless otherwise stated in contract specific Appendix within weeks of the date for commencement of the works carry out a check of the coordinates and levels of all permanent ground markers and permanent bench marks described in Appendix and shall supply the Overseeing Organisation if requested with their position and level in order that they may be checked and revised if necessary .
The Contractor shall identify and bring to the attention of the Overseeing Organisation any markers that are missing .
The Contractor shall comply with any specific requirements for setting out described in contract specific Appendix .
The Contractor shall keep updated schedules and drawings of all bench marks which shall be based on Ordnance Datum at Newlyn used in the setting out and shall make these available to the Overseeing Organisation when required .
The Contractor shall ensure that where necessary in order to maintain his programme lines and levels are set out in such time as to enable Statutory Undertakers apparatus and other publicly or privately owned services or supplies to be installed altered or removed .
The Contractor shall survey and record existing details of items which he is required to remove and subsequently replace .
The level of survey information to be recorded is described in contract specific Appendix .
Amendment May Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Preliminaries Programme of Works Subject and without prejudice to the Conditions of Contract the programme which the Contractor submits to the Overseeing Organisation shall comply with the constraints imposed by the Contract and specific requirements stated in contract specific Appendix .
The Contractor shall update the programme as necessary .
The programme and subsequent revisions of the programme shall show the level of detail appropriate to each stage of the works and all activities and restraints each of which shall be given a short title .
All events shall be numbered .
When required in contract specific Appendix the Contractor shall also provide a masshaul diagram showing his intended earthworks movements and locations and capacities of anticipated plant and other resource input .
Payment Applications Unless otherwise described in the Contract the Contractor shall comply with the requirements described in contract specific Appendix concerning applications for payment .
Accommodation Works The Contractor shall undertake and complete the accommodation works as described in contract specific Appendix .
The Contractor shall give the Overseeing Organisation at least ten days notice of the date he intends to start work on individual plots for the benefit of each owner lessee or occupier .
Privately and Publicly Owned Services or Supplies The Contractor shall satisfy himself as to the exact position of Statutory Undertakers and other publicly and privately owned services or supplies affected by the works .
The Contractor shall during the progress of the works take all measures required by any Statutory Undertaker or the management of other publicly or privately owned services or supplies for the support and full protection of all such services or supplies .
Where privately or publicly owned services or supplies affected by the works are subject to alteration removal or addition the Contractor shall be responsible for all arrangements with the owners andor their agents for the execution and phasing of such works in accordance with his programme .
Details of such work preliminary arrangements made by the Overseeing Organisation andor any orders already placed are given in contract specific Appendix .
The Contractor shall take all measures required by the Overseeing Organisation for the location and protection of all cabling ducts and other devices which form part of the motorway or highway communications system or other systems of the Overseeing Organisation .
The Contractor shall comply with the requirements of NRTS National Roads Telecommunications Services and the technology maintenance agent in relation to motorway communications cables .
Where the communications system or other system will be affected by the works the Contractor shall ensure that an alternative system as described in contract specific Appendix is fully operational prior to interrupting the existing system any connections or disconnections to the existing system may only be undertaken by the Overseeing Organisations maintenance agent .
The Contractor shall be responsible for liaising with the Overseeing Organisations maintenance agent .
No services or supplies shall be interrupted without the written consent of the appropriate authority or owner and the Contractor shall provide a satisfactory alternative before interrupting any existing service or supply unless otherwise stated in contract specific Appendix .
Disconnected apparatus shall be removed by the Contractor only with the prior consent of the Authority concerned .
Amendment May Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Preliminaries Traffic Safety and Management General Unless otherwise stated in contract specific Appendix the Contractor shall plan design programme provide implement maintain and remove all traffic safety and management measures necessary for the completion of the works .
This shall include undertaking all necessary liaison with the police and highway authority responsible for each public highway affected by the works both before commencement and throughout the duration of the works .
The traffic safety and management measures shall be in accordance with the requirements and constraints stated in contract specific Appendix and the Contractor shall take into account the information contained in contract specific Appendix .
The traffic safety and management measures shall be in accordance with Chapter of the Traffic Signs Manual .
The Contractor shall inform the Overseeing Organisation of any details the Contractor has agreed with the police andor the highway authority .
All traffic safety and management operations shall be undertaken by a supplier registered to National Highway Sector Scheme with a scope of registration that includes reference to one or more of National Highways Sector Schemes AB C or D as appropriate to the works .
The Contractor shall unless otherwise stated in contract specific Appendix after consultation with the police and highway authorities concerned prepare and submit traffic safety and management proposals within the timescale described in contract specific Appendix to the Overseeing Organisation .
These shall show the proposed traffic safety and management measures including provision of safety zones .
If stated in Appendix the proposals shall include the provision of running lanes for the use of emergency vehicles within the site .
The Contractor shall make such changes to his proposals as may be necessary to meet the requirements of the Contract .
Thereafter the Contractor shall furnish and update such details and information as may be necessitated by the works .
If stated in contract specific Appendix the Contractor shall undertake the highway maintenance functions described therein and to the extent there described on the lengths of highway there specified until the issue of the appropriate certificate of completion .
Traffic signs shall comply with the appropriate Clauses in Series of the specification .
Where a temporary speed limit at road works has been imposed and the works have been temporarily terminated with the removal of traffic management measures the Contractor shall ensure that the temporary speed limit signs are covered or taken down for the duration of the cessation of the works .
Where the temporary speed limit signs are covered the covering material shall prevent the sign being visible through the cover in natural light and under vehicle headlamp or street lamp illumination at night be non light reflective and securely fastened .
Where the Contract provides that the Contractor shall not erect maintain or reposition traffic signs the Contractor shall not change in any manner the permanent or temporary traffic signs without instruction from the Overseeing Organisation and shall give such notice as is stated in contract specific Appendix to indicate when signs should be moved compatible with the progress of the works .
All traffic safety and management measures necessitated by the works shall be fully operational before the Contractor commences any work which affects the public highway or the use of it .
Any area of highway which has been closed because of the works shall not be reopened to traffic until all appropriate traffic safety and management measures have been completed and the highway is in a suitable condition for public use .
Where work is carried out on or adjacent to a highway open to traffic the Contractor shall ensure that vehicles and mobile plant under his control operating frequently or regularly on or adjacent to that highway in the execution of the works shall be conspicuous and comply with Section O General Vehicle Issues of Chapter Part Operations of the Traffic Signs Manual .
Where required in contract specific Appendix or where required for the execution of the works the Contractor shall provide temporary lighting in accordance with Clause .
Where required in contract specific Appendix or where required for the execution of the works the Contractor shall provide Temporary Emergency Telephones in accordance with Clause .
Amendment May Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Preliminaries The Contractor shall provide and suitably sign points of entry to and exit from the site for vehicles and plant engaged on the works .
The Contractor shall ensure that when any vehicle or item of plant is reversing within the site on or adjacent to a highway open to traffic it does so only under the supervision of a person designated for the purpose of regulating traffic within the site who shall be readily distinguishable from the remainder of the work force .
If an accident or breakdown occurs on a carriageway or hard shoulder open to traffic within or in the vicinity of the site the Contractor and operators of recovery vehicles provided in accordance with Clause shall act as requested by police officers or traffic officers acting under their statutory powers .
Where work is carried out on or adjacent to a highway open to traffic the Contractor shall ensure that the workforce and the site supervisory staff at all times wear high visibility warning clothing complying with BS EN .
Clothing shall be to Table Class or Class on motorways or other high speed roads and shall comply with the requirements of para .. b .
In addition on motorways or other high speed roads full length sleeves meeting the requirements of para .. shall be provided for coveralls and jackets .
The colour of the clothing shall normally be fluorescent yellow or fluorescent orangered complying with Table .
The retroreflective material used shall be to Level as defined at Table .
Clothing complying with other specifications may be used in accordance with Clause where they offer equivalent levels of performance in so far as the specification given is not inconsistent with the basic health and safety requirements set out in Annex of the Personal Protective Equipment Directive EEC .
The Contractor shall ensure that the person in charge of the workforce is readily distinguishable from the person designated in subClause of this Clause and from the remainder of the workforce .
Traffic Safety and Control Officer Unless otherwise stated in contract specific Appendix the Contractor shall appoint a suitably qualified Traffic Safety and Control Officer TSCO who shall make all arrangements necessary for traffic safety and control including the provision and operation of breakdown recovery vehicles .
The TSCO shall be experienced in the control of temporary traffic management operations and shall possess a National Highway Sector Scheme NHSS Traffic Safety and Control Officer Registration Card .
The Contractor shall provide the Overseeing Organisation with the names and contact details of the TSCO and any nominated deputies .
Unless otherwise described in contract specific Appendix the TSCO or a nominated deputy shall be on the Site at all times when traffic management is in operation and shall be readily available to deal with matters related to traffic safety and control including breakdown recovery vehicles .
Without prejudice to subClause above whilst within the limits of a temporary traffic management scheme the TSCO shall manage any traffic management related requests given by a Police Officer or Traffic Officer .
The TSCO shall liaise with he Overseeing Organisations traffic management control centres and other parties detailed in contract specific Appendix on traffic management related matters including requests and instructions .
Unless otherwise stated in contract specific Appendix the responsibilities of the Traffic Safety and Control Officer and of his nominated deputies shall include the following a Monitoring with the assistance of sufficient mobile personnel and of sufficient other suitable and appropriate aids the flow of traffic within the area of the site b Ensuring that within minutes of notification of the occurrence of an incident resulting in stationary vehicles on a highway open to the public the incident is reported to the vehicle recovery service when vehicle recovery is in operation c Recording and logging all incidents and all movements of recovery vehicles and when called all movements of the emergency services .
Where an incident is a shed load vehicle breakdown vehicle abandonment or traffic accident whether or not the latter involves personal injury .
Amendment May Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Preliminaries Statutory Orders Temporary Traffic Regulation Orders Unless otherwise detailed in contract specific Appendix the Contractor shall submit a formal application to the appropriate authority for any temporary traffic regulation orders or other statutory orders required to be made or notices required to be published in connection with his traffic safety and management proposals .
The Contractor shall comply with any procedural requirements given in contract specific Appendix .
The Contractor shall allow for the notice periods required for obtaining and implementation of any temporary traffic regulation orders or other statutory orders in the programme of works .
Where applications are to be made to the Overseeing Organisation the notice periods required shall be as given in contract specific Appendix .
Where applications for temporary traffic regulation orders or other statutory orders are made by the Overseeing Organisation prior to the commencement of the works the Contractor shall provide all necessary traffic safety and management measures to implement the orders .
Crossovers The Contractor shall design construct and maintain or if contract specific Appendix so provides shall construct and maintain the central reserve crossovers described in contract specific Appendix in accordance with the information stated therein .
Unless otherwise described in contract specific Appendix the Contractor shall remove those crossovers when no longer required and reinstate the central reserve to its original condition .
If the Contractor proposes to construct central reserve crossovers as part of his traffic safety and management proposals he shall submit such proposals to the Overseeing Organisation in advance in accordance with the requirements of subClause of this Clause .
Driver Information Signs Where required in contract specific Appendix the Contractor shall provide erect maintain and remove Driver Information Signs to diagrams and of the Traffic Signs Regulations and General Directions in accordance with subClause of this Clause and Chapter of the Traffic Signs Manual .
Information signs shall only be displayed within roadworks where they accurately reflect the work being undertaken or the reason for the inactivity .
Legends shall be selected as appropriate from those permitted and listed in Chapter of the Traffic Signs Manual unless stated otherwise in contract specific Appendix .
Sign shall indicate how long delays are possible .
This date shall be updated by the Contractor if necessary until the restrictions are removed .
Sign shall be located within roadworks when part of the road is coned off and the reason for this is not apparent from the carriageway for any period exceeding minutes or one hour if road capacity is maintained .
However signs located within roadworks shall only be used where they can be located at least metres beyond the downstream end of a taper and in a position which does not prejudice traffic safety .
If needed Information Signs shall be sited at the beginning and at one kilometre intervals through the works .
They shall not be placed where they may distract drivers negotiating traffic management provisions .
Signs shall either be sited for the duration of the works where it is safe and appropriate to do so or provision made to enable their use at short notice .
The Contractor shall provide adequate storage facilities clear of any safety zone .
Storage within the central reserve or in front of safety barriers shall not be permitted .
Temporary Automatic Speed Camera System TASCAR Where required in contract specific Appendix a Temporary Automatic Speed Camera System for the Enforcement of Mandatory Speed Limits at Roadworks TASCAR shall be provided in accordance with the following requirements and those given in contract specific Appendix .
The type of system and the number of speed monitoring sites and their locations shall be as specified in contract specific Appendix .
Amendment May Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Preliminaries The Contractor shall be responsible for the design installation commissioning maintenance and removal of the system .
This shall be undertaken using a suitably qualified Enforcement Equipment Supplier EES .
The EES shall make all arrangements necessary for the provision and operation of the TASCAR system .
The Contractor shall supply evidence of the EES qualifications to the Overseeing Organisation prior to the commencement of the works .
The equipment shall meet the requirements of the Speedmeter Handbook and have Home Office Type Approval HOTA for the purpose required .
The installation commissioning operation and maintenance of the system shall be undertaken in accordance with the requirements of the equipments HOTA .
All equipment and training necessary to bring the sites into operation shall be provided and installed by the Contractor this shall include but not be limited to all equipment poles housings and power supplies .
The quantities of equipment required shall be as specified in contract specific Appendix .
The Contractor shall ensure that the System is completely installed and fully operational from the time defined in contract specific Appendix and that it remains in operation for the duration of the Contract unless otherwise specified in Appendix and is removed on completion of the works .
The Contractor shall commission any necessary third party certification of the system and shall supply copies of the certification to the Overseeing Organisation .
Unless otherwise required by the equipments HOTA requirements the equipment and ancillary items shall be compatible with all permanent and temporary installations associated with the works .
The Contractor shall liaise with the relevant Enforcement Authority EA to determine how the system for the scheme shall integrate with the EAs existing facilities and operations .
The Contractor shall comply with the Overseeing Organisations procedures with respect to the liaison as described in contract specific Appendix .
The Contractor shall submit details of the system to the Overseeing Organisation four weeks in advance of its operation for approval .
The TASCAR equipment shall consist of a HOTA detection and measuring device and ancillary equipment that allows day and night operation .
If a trailer mounted system is supplied it shall be fitted with retractable demountable wheels .
The Contractor shall arrange for the provision of a mains electrical supply of adequate power capacity to all components of the system .
Alternatively he may provide an equivalent supply from a local electrical generator or generators which shall be used only for this purpose .
Such generators shall have electric start mechanisms and be adequately regulated as to voltage and frequency to suit the accuracy requirements of the equipment provided for TASCAR and be capable of running constantly for hours without refuelling at an output of not less than that required by the equipment at .
power factor or equivalent output .
All generators shall be housed in vandalproof containers and be securely locked .
One set of keys shall be provided to the EA .
Generators may only be used when they will not adversely affect the equipmentsystems operations or the equipments HOTA requirements .
The housing and poles for the TASCAR equipment must be as required for the specific HOTA for that equipment and shall include securitylocking mechanisms to prevent unauthorised access or operation .
The Contractor shall install the polesmastscabinets or trailers required at each individual speed monitoring location any installation shall be within highway limits .
At completion of the works the Contractor shall remove all TASCAR equipment and reinstate ground as described in contract specific Appendix .
The Contractor shall ensure that suitable access arrangements are in place at each speed monitoring site including vehicle hard standings walkways and steps where necessary to allow for general maintenance and servicing of the camera unit .
Where supplied suitable provisions shall be made for installing and recovering trailers .
The Contractor shall ensure that the camera poles are located in accordance with road restraint systems requirements detailed in TD .
The Contractor shall ensure that the site reference number is clearly indicated on both the installation and on the road surface within the field of view of the cameras .
Site reference numbers should be agreed with the EA .
Amendment May Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Preliminaries Any ducting provision loop or piezo installation shall be carried out in accordance with the relevant clauses of Series and of the Specification .
The Contractor shall be responsible for the commissioning of the TASCAR as a whole including secondary and in station checks .
The Contractor shall where required as part of the HOTA provide a secondary method of confirming the speed calculation .
The commissioning of the TASCAR shall be carried out in the presence of and for acceptance by the EA and shall be in accordance with any particular requirements in contract specific Appendix the commissioning shall only be complete when each site and where applicable the overall system is accepted as being operational by the EA .
The Contractor shall give notice to the Overseeing Organisation of his intention to carry out this work unless otherwise stated in contract specific Appendix this shall be not less than four days in advance of the intended time for the commissioning .
An Evidential Trail ET which meets all the requirements as stated in contract specific Appendix including commissioning certificates shall be provided by the Contractor to the Overseeing Organisation and shall include one pair of photographs or video images for acceptance by the EA as part of the commissioning and acceptance procedure of the system .
The Contractor shall ensure that all relevant requirements of the Evidential Trails for Enforcement Systems documents are achieved .
Cameras sited on the nearside of the carriageway shall be installed and commissioned prior to hour lane closures being put into operation .
Cameras sited in the central reserve shall be installed and commissioned not later than hours after installation of the contraflow .
Both sets of cameras shall then remain in continuous operation until a completion certificate has been issued for the whole of the works .
At the end of the period of operation required under the Contract the equipment shall remain the property of the Contractor .
Following commissioning the TASCAR Operator will be the EA .
The Contractor shall provide assistance to the EA for the repositioning of the speed monitoring equipment between the housings or switching of detection equipment between zones and servicing as and when requested by the EA .
Any repositioning during the works that requires that the equipment parameters are changed must be supported by the issue of a calibration certificate by the Contractor to the EA .
All evidential media from speed monitoring sites will remain the property of the EA .
The scheme ET documents shall be kept up to date by the Contractor .
The Contractor shall provide and install all necessary speed limit signing in connection with the operation of the TASCAR system any signing used shall either be prescribed or where necessary authorised .
The Contractor shall provide the EA through the Overseeing Organisation with a two hourly log showing the locations of all the speed limit and speed limit repeater signs relative to existing marker posts .
A repeater sign shall be positioned such that one is visible in each photograph .
Where there is a hour CCTV system installed that is monitoring ALL speed limit and repeater signs this log can be compiled remotely .
Where digital HOTA equipment is used the Contractor will provide either the communications service to transfer data and control the device or appropriate media such as WORM Write Once Read Many drives CDs memory sticks as appropriate and in quantities required by the EA for the use of the equipment for the duration of the works .
If HOTA mm wet film systems are used the film will be supplied to the EA by the Contractor typically at the rate of one film per day per live camera in operation plus ten which shall be supplied at the commencement of the works .
Temporary Highways for Traffic The provisions of this Clause apply to the construction of temporary highways for use by traffic they do not apply to any temporary access or accommodation works which the Contractor may construct for his sole use in the execution of the works or to existing highways used for diverted traffic .
Requirements for existing highways subject to temporary closure and associated diversion route signing are given in Clause .
Each temporary highway or part of highway for traffic shall be made operative in advance of any interference with the existing arrangements and shall be maintained to the standard stated in contract specific Appendix or if no standard is so stated in accordance with subClause of this Clause .
Amendment May Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Preliminaries Temporary Highways for Traffic Specified by the Overseeing Organisation The Contractor shall construct maintain remove and reinstate each temporary highway or part of highway for traffic specified in contract specific Appendix in accordance with the details stated therein .
Where stated in contract specific Appendix the Contractor shall design each temporary highway or part of highway for traffic including any temporary structures in accordance with the details stated therein .
Unless otherwise described in contract specific Appendix the Contractor shall remove each temporary highway for traffic as soon as it is no longer required .
Unless otherwise stated in contract specific Appendix the Contractor shall reinstate the ground over which the temporary highway is provided to its original condition .
Temporary Highways for Traffic Proposed by the Contractor If the Contractor proposes to construct a temporary highway or part of highway for traffic as part of his intended traffic safety and management measures he shall submit an outline of his proposals to the highway authority for their agreement and consultation with the police in accordance with the requirements of Clause .
The Contractor shall submit a formal application to the appropriate authority for any statutory orders required to be made or notices required to be published in connection with the temporary highway or part of highway .
Details of such applications shall be agreed with the Overseeing Organisation prior to their submission .
The Contractor shall comply with procedural requirements given in contract specific Appendix .
The Contractor shall allow for the notice periods required for obtaining and implementation of any statutory orders in the programme of works .
Where applications are to be made to the Overseeing Organisation the notice periods required shall be as given in contract specific Appendix .
The standard and siting of every temporary highway or part of highway for traffic shall be suitable in all respects for the class or classes of traffic using it and its width shall be not less than that of the existing way except where indicated in contract specific Appendix .
The Contractor shall inform the Overseeing Organisation of any details agreed with the highway authority for traffic signs lighting construction maintenance removal and reinstatement of any temporary highway or part of highway for traffic proposed by the Contractor .
Routeing of Vehicles The Contractor shall comply with the requirements described in contract specific Appendix in connection with routeing of site and delivery vehicles .
Recovery Vehicles and Operation for Breakdowns General When required by contract specific Appendix the Contractor shall provide and operate a vehicle breakdown recovery and removal service including storage .
This service shall recover broken down or accident damaged vehicles or vehicles that have been abandoned on the highway within the limits of the site .
The service shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of this Clause and contract specific Appendix it shall also comply with contract specific Appendix .
Vehicle recovery operations shall be carried out by organisations registered to National Highway Sector Scheme B for Vehicle Recovery at Highway Construction Sites and Vehicle Recovery and Removal on Control Roads B as listed in Appendix A .
The Contractor shall ensure that once a vehicle recovery organisation has been appointed changes shall only be made with the agreement of the Overseeing Organisation .
When planning and undertaking any recovery work the Contractor shall comply with the requirements of the Sector Scheme at all times if applicable .
The Contractor shall ensure that recovery vehicles are operated in accordance with all applicable statutory requirements and the recommendations and requirements contained in the following unless superseded by more specific requirements of this Clause or the Sector Scheme Amendment May Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Preliminaries Amendment May i Code of Practice on Health and Safety for Vehicle Recovery Operators published by the Association of Vehicle Recovery Operators ii PAS Safe Working of Vehicle Breakdown and Recovery Operators Management System Specification published by the British Standards Institution iii BS Safe Use of Cranes Recovery Vehicles and Equipment Code of Practice and iv BS Specification for recovery vehicles and vehicle recovery equipment .
The Contractor shall ensure that suitable insurances to cover all claims arising out of the operation of the recovery service are taken out and maintained in force for the duration of the works .
The Contractor shall submit copies of relevant certificates to the Overseeing Organisation not less than days prior to the commencement of recovery operations and within days of policy renewal thereafter .
Recovery Personnel The Contractor shall ensure that all recovery operations are carried out under the control of a competent Recovery Controller .
The Recovery Controller shall be an employee of the Vehicle Recovery Organisation and may be either part of the recovery vehicle crew or a separate trained recovery technician .
The Recovery Controller shall be responsible for the planning and implementation of a safe and efficient system of work for recovery of the casualty vehicle unless subject to specific requests from police officers or uniformed traffic officers acting under their statutory powers .
Without prejudice to subClause above whilst within the limits of a temporary traffic management scheme the Recovery Controller shall comply with any traffic management related instructions given by the Traffic Safety and Control Officer or his deputy in accordance with subClause ..
Elsewhere the Recovery Controller shall comply with the traffic management related instructions of the Overseeing Organisations Regional Control Centre .
The Contractor shall ensure that vehicle recovery technicians hold a relevant training certificate which meets the requirements of the Sector Scheme .
Such certificate shall certify successful completion of a course on breakdown recovery applicable to the type of breakdown recovery vehicles being operated .
The Sector Scheme requires the certificate to be in the form of an identity card containing such information and a photograph of the technician .
A copy of each certificate shall be provided to the Overseeing Organisation not less than days before the commencement of recovery operations .
The Contractor shall check the validity of the certificatescards on a regular basis including checking that the photograph matches with the card holders image at intervals not exceeding months and report his findings to the Overseeing Organisation .
The Contractor shall ensure by appropriate checks on a regular basis that all operatives involved with vehicle recovery are suitable to work with vulnerable motorists .
The Contractor shall report his findings to the Overseeing Organisation not less than days prior to the commencement of recovery operations and at regular intervals thereafter not exceeding months .
The Contractor shall ensure by appropriate checks that each technician has a valid driving licence covering the class of vehicle and trailer being driven .
The Contractor shall submit copies of all driving licences for operatives to the Overseeing Organisation not less than days prior to commencement of recovery operations .
The Contractor shall carry out regular monthly checks on driving licences and report his findings to the Overseeing Organisation .
The Contractor shall ensure that all technicians involved with vehicle recovery display an identity card which incorporates the name of the Contractor the name of the Vehicle Recovery Organisation and the name and a photograph of the holder .
This card must be available for inspection at all times and a copy must be submitted to the Overseeing Organisation prior to the commencement of the operative working .
In addition to any special provisions identified in the Contractors health and safety risk assessment for recovery operations the Contractor shall ensure that each recovery technician is provided with the following personal protective equipment as a minimum i a high visibility reflective safety jacket which prominently displays the word RECOVERY on the front and back .
It shall conform to BS EN and the specific requirements of subClause .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Preliminaries ii safety helmet to BS EN and chin strap where considered appropriate iii safety boots with steel reinforced toecaps and midsole conforming to BS EN ISO iv protective goggles conforming to BS EN and v protective gloves conforming to BS EN .
The Contractor may upgrade the specification of personal protective equipment at their own cost .
The Contractor shall ensure that all Personal Protective Equipment PPE is stored and maintained in good and clean condition .
The Contractor shall ensure that high visibility safety wear is replaced or cleaned as necessary throughout the duration of the Contract to maintain its conspicuity .
The Contractor shall ensure that the operatives shall be familiar with their vehicles and the equipment carried on board before commencing recovery operations .
Where appropriate they shall be trained to use any ancillary equipment carried on the vehicle including fire extinguishers and first aid equipment for personal use .
Recovery Operations Prior to the commencement of the works the Contractor shall consult with the local representative of the Chief Officer of Police andor the Overseeing Organisations Regional Control Centre to establish procedures including contact telephone numbers for i clearing shed loads and ii vehicle recovery which may be beyond the capabilities of the free recovery service .
The recovery service is to be provided between the Roadworks Ahead miles sign and the Road Works End sign unless otherwise stated in Sheet of contract specific Appendix .
The Contractor shall ensure that the recovery vehicles are only used to remove vehicles that are stationary due to mechanical breakdown accident damage or abandoned on the highway within the limits of the service .
The Contractor shall ensure that the recovery vehicle operatives comply with the provisions contained within Sheet of contract specific Appendix in connection with this service subject to specific requests from police officers and uniformed traffic officers acting under their statutory powers .
The recovery vehicles shall be stationed at the points either specified in Sheet of contract specific Appendix or otherwise agreed with the Overseeing Organisation subject to specific requests from police officers and uniformed traffic officers acting under their statutory powers .
The Contractor shall provide the facilities required by Sheet of contract specific Appendix and shall ensure that brokendown accident damaged or abandoned vehicles are not removed by the recovery vehicles other than to the locations described in Sheet of contract specific Appendix unless some other location has first been agreed with a police officer or uniformed traffic officer acting under their statutory powers .
The Contractor shall ensure that after depositing a brokendown accident damaged or abandoned vehicle at one of the designated locations the recovery vehicle returns immediately to its station described in Sheet of contract specific Appendix .
The Contractor shall ensure that recovery vehicle operatives at no time attempt to repair vehicles that have broken down .
The Contractor shall make no charge for this recovery service to the owner or driver of the recovered vehicle .
The Contractor shall ensure that the recovery vehicle operatives issue leaflets as described in Sheet of contract specific Appendix before the tow commences to the drivers of vehicles requiring assistance .
The Contractor shall submit weekly to the Overseeing Organisation i duplicate completed information sheets logging the assistance given by the recovery vehicles and ii duplicate completed log sheets which record daily checks made on each recovery vehicle .
These shall be on printed forms provided by the Contractor in accordance with the samples given in Sheets to of contract specific Appendix .
Amendment May Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Preliminaries Amendment May Communications systems In addition to the requirements of contract specific Appendix and Appendix and this subClause the Contractor shall provide and maintain dedicated equipment for communication with the Vehicle Recovery Organisation for the duration specified in the Contract as described in Sheet of contract specific Appendix .
Unless otherwise described in Sheet of contract specific Appendix the communication system shall also include the following i a secondary back up communications system between the recovery base stations and all recovery vehicles and ii an emergency telephone and line at the recovery base stations for the sole use of emergency calls .
Where possible the link between the recovery base stations and the police shall be by direct land line .
The communication system shall be fully established tested and operational before the Contractor commences the works .
The Contractor shall be responsible for providing all associated equipment and payment of fees to operate the system .
Requirements for Recovery Equipment The Contractor shall ensure that all recovery vehicles are maintained in such condition that the vehicles conform to appropriate current legislation including but not limited to the Road Vehicle Construction and Use Regulations Road Vehicle Lighting Regulations Road Transport Act and Road Traffic Act at all times .
All recovery vehicles shall have either a current goods vehicle test certificate or MOT certificate or other certificate of roadworthiness issued by a Vehicle and Operator Services Agency VOSA approved testing station and also weigh bridge certificate stating individual axle and gross vehicle loadings .
Copies of certificates shall be provided to the Overseeing Organisation not less than days prior to the commencement of recovery operations using the vehicle concerned .
Certificates shall be renewed annually on the due anniversary of the inspection and new certificates shall be provided to the Overseeing Organisation immediately following the inspection .
The Contractor shall make appropriate arrangements for any inspections required under the Sector Scheme to be carried out in a place of safety either on or off site for the duration of the contract .
Recovery vehicles shall not be replaced without the prior agreement of the Overseeing Organisation .
Photographs of each vehicle clearly showing vehicle registration number shall be provided to the Overseeing Organisation not less than days prior to the commencement of recovery operations using the vehicle concerned .
Any replacement vehicle shall normally be of the same vehicle class and category shall conform to the requirements of this Clause and shall have been inspected in accordance with any additional requirements of the Sector Scheme if applicable .
Recovery vehicles shall prominently display the name and telephone number of the Vehicle Recovery Organisation and be of conspicuous colour e.g .
white yellow or orange and marking to emphasise the length and outline of the vehicle .
Suitable retroreflective markings not less than mm wide shall be applied along the full length of the sides of the vehicle .
Colours and usage of retroreflective markings must comply with the Road Vehicle Lighting Regulations .
High visibility chevron markings comprising of alternate strips of red retroreflective material and yellow nonretroreflective material of not less than mm width each inclined at to the horizontal shall be applied to the rear of the vehicle .
The chevrons shall cover as much of the rearfacing portion of the vehicle as possible without obscuring windows vehicle lighting or registration plates .
Red retroreflective tape shall be applied to all rear facing edges of open doors and equipment lockers .
The vehicle and all retroreflective markings shall be maintained in good and clean condition .
Each recovery vehicle shall display a sign with the legend FREE RECOVERY TO END OF ROAD WORKS .
This sign shall be securely mounted on the recovery vehicle in such position as to be clearly visible from the driving seat of a car at a distance of m from the rear of the recovery vehicle .
This sign shall at all times be clean and legible and shall not be obstructed .
A lighting board shall be secured to the rear of the vehicle being towed .
The board shall be clearly visible to other drivers of vehicles approaching from the rear .
It shall be maintained in good working order and shall be cleaned after use to maintain its conspicuity .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Preliminaries Amendment May Recovery vehicles shall be equipped with sufficient chains wire rope and shackles for the safe recovery of any fully laden vehicle within the appropriate class of recovery e.g .
heavy or light .
All chains wire ropes tow poles and shackles shall comply with relevant British standards and be fully certified by an independent competent person to comply with all current legislation .
All lifting equipment shall be accompanied by a valid proof loading certificate be suitably marked with the SWL and be free from snags excess stretching and wear .
Copies of all certificates shall be supplied to the Overseeing Organisation not less than days prior to the commencement of recovery operations using the vehicle concerned .
All equipment shall be suitably marked so as to be identifiable and provide an audit trail for inspection purposes .
All walkways at height on the recovery vehicle shall be fitted with hand rails and non slip tread systems .
Access steps shall be provided on the nontrafficked passenger side of the vehicle .
Equipment shall be stored on the passenger side of the vehicle as far as is practicable .
Where insufficient seating capacity is available in the recovery vehicle for transport of passengers the Contractor shall ensure that suitable arrangements are made to transport passengers to the setting down location .
When carrying child passengers the Contractor shall ensure that a child restraint seat appropriate to the age of the child is used .
The Contractor shall ensure that each light recovery vehicle has a crew including at least one trained technician and that each heavy recovery vehicle has a crew including at least two trained technicians .
Prior to commencement of the recovery service the Contractor shall provide method statements for Heavy and Light Recovery to be agreed by the Overseeing Organisation .
The method statement shall include a detailed list of the equipment carried on each Recovery vehicle .
The list may be used for audit by independent third party as required by the Overseeing Organisation .
Heavy recovery vehicles A heavy recovery vehicle shall comply with the following as a minimum i It shall be a recovery vehicle with not less than three axles capable of removing a loaded vehicle of tons total train weight i.e .
Category Special Types in accordance with Road Traffic Act Section and Road Vehicles Authorisation of Special TypesGeneral Order .
It must be able to maintain a minimum road speed of mph on a level road when fully loaded and pull away or hold back the complete train weight when towing a maximum weight vehicle either up or downhill without wheel slip or loss of traction .
Axle loadings shall be within permissible legal loadings for the vehicle at all times .
ii It shall be fitted with two power winches of not less than .
tons each on bottom layer safeguarded by pressure relief devices as appropriate .
Each winch shall have no less than m of cable .
All equipment shall be poweroperated with SWL indicated on both the winch and fixings .
Operating leversbuttons shall be clearly marked for operational use with key functions duplicated on a remote control unit .
Emergency stop controls shall be provided .
iii Without prejudice to subClause of this Clause it shall carry the following recovery equipment as a minimum a no .
full set of forks for use with underlift .
b no .
tool kit including both  and  inch socket sets with AFMetric sized sockets .
c no .
tonne bottle jacks .
d no .
volt engine starter pack .
e no .
crowbar .
f no .
sledge hammer lbs minimum .
g All lines and fittings necessary for connection of the air braking system on the casualty vehicle to the air braking system on the recovery vehicle .
h no .
wheel chocks suitable for use with an HGV .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Preliminaries Amendment May i no .
suitable lengths of wood block skidding .
j no .
screw pin bow shackles minimum SWL tonnes .
k no .
mm diameter G chains with grab hooks m minimum length .
l no .
mm diameter G chains with grab hooks m minimum length .
m no .
mm diameter G chains with grab hooks m minimum length .
n no .
mm diameter G chains with grab hooks m minimum length .
o no .
mm ratchet straps m minimum length with soft eyes .
p no .
tonne SWL nylon straps with sewn eyes no less than m long and mm wide .
q no .
snatch blocks per winch each with a SWL of twice that of the winch .
Snatch block sheaves shall have a minimum diameter of times the diameter of the winch cable .
iv It shall carry and use when necessary equipment designed and manufactured for the purpose of locking the steering of the brokendown or accidentdamaged vehicle in order to tow it safely in a reverse direction .
v It shall carry equipment to enable the recovery crew to remove the drive line or shafts of the broken down or accidentdamaged vehicle .
vi It shall have seating for not less than two recovery operatives .
The Contractor shall make suitable arrangements for the safe transport of passengers from the recovered vehicle to the setting down location .
vii It shall be fitted with and where appropriate operatives trained to use the following ancillary equipment as a minimum a no .
full cab width amber warning lightbar minimum no .
active light sources visible through degrees from road level and complying with the Road Vehicle Lighting Regulations and the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe UNECE Regulation on Special Warning Lamps.Vehicle electrics must be capable of running the lightbar for a minimum of minutes with the ignition key removed .
b no .
fully adjustable work lights to illuminate both the sides and rear of the vehicle .
c no .
fire extinguishers litre nett aqueous film forming foam in accordance with ADR marked with date of last inspectiontest .
d no .
HSE approved person first aid kit marked with expiry date .
e no .
traffic cones minimum mm height .
f no .
mm diameter Keep Right Arrow traffic sign complying with diagram of the current Traffic Signs Regulations and General Directions .
g no .
rear lighting board incorporating a duplicate of the recovery vehicle registration plate and On Tow legend in lettering of not less than mm on conspicuously coloured background to conform with the size colour and type illustrated in the Road Vehicles Lighting Regulations .
The board shall be fitted with lights reflectors and indicators and sufficient cable to reach the rear of any vehicle recovered .
h no .
ADR HAZCHEM chart .
i no .
spillage containment kit including oildiesel absorbent granules minimum kg in sealed container .
j no .
intrinsically safe battery operated torch with spare batteries .
k no .
broom and shovel .
The number of the required heavy recovery vehicles shall be as stated in Sheet of contract specific Appendix .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Preliminaries Amendment May Light Recovery Vehicle A light recovery vehicle shall comply with the following as a minimum i It shall be capable of removing by means of a slide bed andor underlift at least one vehicle weighing kg including a vehicle with permanent four wheel drive and shall be fitted with a suitable towing hitch for the safe recovery of all forms of trailers including caravans boat trailers and horse boxes etc .
It must be able to maintain a minimum road speed of mph on a level road when fully loaded and pull away or hold back the complete train weight when towing a maximum weight vehicle either up or downhill without wheel slip or loss of traction .
Axle loadings shall be within permissible legal loadings for the vehicle at all times .
ii It shall be fitted with at least one power winch of not less than .
tonnes capacity on bottom layer safeguarded by pressure relief devices as appropriate .
The winch shall have no less than m of cable .
All equipment shall be poweroperated with SWL indicated on both the winch and fixings .
Operating levers buttons shall be clearly marked for operational use with key functions duplicated on a remote control unit .
Emergency stop controls shall be provided .
iii Slide bed vehicles shall have tonne SWL lashing points fitted every half a metre on each side of the bed the last being no more than cm from the end of the bed .
There shall be a return anchorage point of minimum kg SWL fitted to or alongside the winch .
Suitable anchorage points shall also be provided at points on the bed to enable side pulls to be performed .
iv Without prejudice to subClause of this Clause it shall carry the following recovery equipment as a minimum a no. . tonne straight tow pole .
b no .
tool kit including both  and  inch socket sets with AFMetric sized sockets .
c no .
tonne minimum capacity trolley jack .
d no .
volt engine starter pack .
e no .
crowbar .
f no .
wheel chock suitable for use with a light commercial size vehicle .
g no .
suitable lengths of wood block skidding .
h no. . tonne SWL screw pin bow shackles .
i no .
mm G chains m minimum length with grab hooks .
j no .
tonnes SWL mm webbing straps m minimum length with soft eyes .
k no .
transporter straps m minimum length .
l no .
underlift frame straps .
m no .
snatch block per winch each with a SWL of twice that of the winch .
n Snatch block sheaves shall have a minimum diameter of times the diameter of the winch cable .
o no .
wheel skates .
v When specified in Sheet of contract specific Appendix it shall be capable of recovering motor cycles using a damage free motorcycle liftingrecovery frame or dolly andor lorry mounted crane as appropriate to the condition of the casualty motorcycle .
vi It shall have seating capacity for up to five adult passengers in addition to the recovery operatives with access from the passenger side of the cab .
The Contractor shall make suitable arrangements for the safe transport of additional passengers from the recovered vehicle to the setting down location .
When carrying child passengers the Contractor shall ensure that a child restraint seat appropriate to the age of the child is used .
vii It shall be fitted with and where appropriate operatives trained to use the following ancillary equipment as a minimum Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Preliminaries a no .
full cab width amber warning lightbar minimum no .
active light sources and no .
independent reflectors fitted transversely visible through degrees from road level and complying with the Road Vehicle Lighting Regulations and Economic Commission for Europe ECE Regulation on Special Warning Lamps .
Vehicle electrics must be capable of running the lightbar for a minimum of minutes with the ignition key removed .
b no .
fully adjustable work lights to illuminate both the sides and rear of the vehicle .
c no .
fire extinguishers No .
kg nett dry powder No .
litre nett aqueous film forming foam marked with date of last inspectiontest .
d no .
HSE approved person first aid kit marked with expiry date .
e no .
traffic cones minimum mm height .
f For underlifts no .
rear lighting board incorporating a duplicate of the recovery vehicle registration plate and On Tow legend in lettering of not less than mm on conspicuously coloured background to conform with the size colour and type illustrated in the Road Vehicles Lighting Regulations .
The board shall be fitted with lights reflectors and indicators and sufficient cable to reach the rear of any vehicle recovered .
g no .
spillage containment kit including oildiesel absorbent granules minimum kg in sealed container .
h no .
ADR HAZCHEM chart .
i no .
intrinsically safe battery operated torch with spare batteries .
j no .
broom and shovel .
viii It shall carry and use when necessary equipment designed and manufactured for the purpose of locking the steering of the brokendown or accidentdamaged vehicle in order to tow in a reverse direction .
The number of the required light recovery vehicles shall be as stated in Sheet of contract specific Appendix .
Impact Protection Vehicles Where specified in Sheet of contract specific Appendix the Contractor shall provide dedicated Impact Protection Vehicles IPVs to protect recovery operations in the live carriageway .
The Contractor shall ensure that IPVs comply with the requirements of Section O of Chapter Part Operations of the Traffic Signs Manual and that any nonprescribed traffic signs mounted on the vehicle meet the requirements of the Traffic Signs Regulations and General Directions particularly with respect to authorisation andor type approval .
The Contractor shall ensure that IPV drivers hold a relevant training certificate which meets the requirements of the Sector Schemes AB C and D as detailed in Appendix A. Accommodation The contractor shall ensure that any accommodation caravans or cabins provided in connection with the recovery service complies with all appropriate legislation including health safety and welfare requirements .
The Contractor shall ensure that any accommodation sited within the highway is afforded appropriate protection from errant vehicles is conspicuously coloured with retroreflective markings on the sides facing traffic and is prominently marked with the name of the Vehicle Recovery Organisation .
Where the recovery service is located on the hardshoulder the Contractor shall make arrangements for private vehicles to be parked off site and operatives transported to site by an appropriate vehicle complying with subClause ..
Unless stated otherwise in Sheet of contract specific Appendix where it is proposed to construct or site temporary facilities for recovery services outside the highway boundary the Contractor shall be responsible for planning permission waste arrangements and any statutory charges or other costs associated with the facilities e.g .
ground rent .
Amendment May Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Preliminaries Tidal Flowing and Standing Water The Contractor shall take measures and carry out any operation necessary for dealing with tidal flowing or standing water within the site .
Progress Photographs The Contractor shall arrange as described in contract specific Appendix to have record photographs of the works taken at the times andor intervals stated in contract specific Appendix .
The format of the photographs and the media used for submission to the Overseeing Organisation shall be as described in contract specific Appendix .
Unless otherwise stated in contract specific Appendix the photographs shall be taken by a professional photographer .
All prints shall be marked on the reverse side with the date taken identification reference number and brief description of the work or features including chainage and direction of view .
The copyright of all photographs shall be vested in the Employer and the photographs shall be delivered to the Overseeing Organisation within week of the photographs being taken .
The photographs shall not be used for any purpose whatsoever without the Overseeing Organisations approval .
Not Used Health and Safety Restrictions Precautions and Monitoring In addition to all other health and safety requirements the Contractor shall implement the requirements described in contract specific Appendix to protect the workforce members of the public and persons visiting the site from risks arising from the hazards defined therein .
Where described in contract specific Appendix the Contractor shall also comply with the specific monitoring requirements described therein .
The monitoring requirements as described in contract specific Appendix are in addition to contract specific monitoring requirements described elsewhere in the specification .
In addition to all other information required the Contractor shall provide copies of CE marking information for all CE marked works goods or materials used in the works for inclusion in the Health and Safety File .
This information shall include as appropriate the Declaration of Conformity or Declaration of Performance and all safety information .
Temporary Closed Circuit Television CCTV System for the Monitoring of Traffic General Where required in contract specific Appendix the Contractor shall design provide install maintain operate and at the completion of the requirement remove the temporary CCTV system as specified in this Clause .
Where associated work is subject to a Quality Management Scheme listed in Appendix A such work shall be undertaken by organisations registered to the relevant schemes .
The Contractor shall be responsible for obtaining any licences power supplies and approvals required including structural approvals prior to the installation of any equipment .
The system shall be designed such that the whole of the works area including both carriageways and hardshoulders is covered at all times .
There shall be sufficient overlap between the areas covered by adjacent cameras such that there are no blind spots .
Supplementary cameras shall be provided in accordance with subClause of this Clause .
Where specified in contract specific Appendix the Contractor shall interface the temporary CCTV system with the permanent CCTV system and ensure that it does not cause any interference to or interruption of effective operation and functionality of any other element of the existing or permanent CCTV system or motorway communications equipment and network .
Amendment May Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Preliminaries The Contractor shall restore each site to its original condition following the removal of cameras and other temporary equipment .
Cameras The temporary CCTV system shall provide coverage of the works area specified in subClause using cameras that are fixed in their direction of view .
The orientation of all cameras on each carriageway shall be the same .
Where specified in contract specific Appendix the Contractor shall design provide install maintain operate and at the completion of the requirement remove supplementary cameras at the locations specified in contract specific Appendix .
These supplementary cameras shall have pan tilt and zoom facilities providing an unimpaired view of traffic in all directions .
The cameras and their location shall take account of the sun and lighting such that their effectiveness is not reduced by glare over a hour period .
Cameras shall be of a type that provides hours per day operation .
Camera Supports The Contractor shall be responsible for the design provision construction maintenance operation and at the end of the requirement removal of all necessary supporting structures and associated safety barriers paving steps and hand rails .
Maintenance The minimum requirements for maintenance shall be i any faults shall be repaired or the equipment replaced within hours of any fault or failure ii the whole system including cameras monitors and video recording equipment shall be in full working order for no less than hours in any day period .
The cameras shall be located such that they can be removed replaced and maintained without the need for traffic management .
Monitoring The Contractor shall provide train and maintain suitable staff for the monitoring of the works area covered by the temporary CCTV system .
The Contractor shall provide maintain and at the end of the requirement remove suitable temporary accommodation for monitoring equipment and staff .
The monitoring staff shall be competent in the use of the system and shall be responsible for the reporting of breakdowns and faults to the Contractor .
The monitoring staff shall maintain a daily log of all incidents within the roadworks area .
This log shall be available for inspection by the Overseeing Organisation and the police at all times .
The monitoring staff shall report all incidents immediately to the Contractors Traffic Safety and Control Officer .
The Contractor shall provide a suitable communications system for use by the monitoring staff .
Where an incident is a shed load vehicle breakdown vehicle abandonment or traffic accident whether or not the latter involves personal injury or any other incident which causes a change to traffic flow or a potential for personal injury .
The monitoring equipment shall include video recording equipment with sufficient capacity and recording media for the duration of the requirement .
The system shall be such that the image on the monitor and any video recording taken from it shall provide a legible image of the registration plate of any stationary vehicle within metres of the camera .
All monitor images shall include the date time and unique camera reference .
The Contractor shall provide install operate maintain and at the completion of the requirement remove a dedicated communication link to the Regional Control Centre Police Control Office or other control centre as detailed in contract specific Appendix .
Amendment May Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Preliminaries Timber and Products Containing Wood Supplied Under the Contract All Timber and woodderived products for supply or use in the works shall be independently verifiable and either from a Legal and Sustainable source or a FLEGTlicensed or equivalent source .
The Contractor shall submit documentary evidence to demonstrate this to the Overseeing Organisation prior to its inclusion or use in the works .
The verification and evidence shall comply with the criteria in this Clause .
Management of the forest or plantation shall be audited at intervals confirming ongoing good forest management and by organisations with appropriate forest management experience that are independent of the organisation that holds timber harvest andor management rights for that forest .
The Overseeing Organisation will accept evidence from any of the following three categories a Category A evidence Certification under a scheme recognised by the UK government as meeting the criteria set out in the document entitled UK Government Timber Procurement Policy Criteria for Evaluating Certification Schemes Category A Evidence The edition current on the day the contract is awarded shall apply .
Acceptable schemes must ensure that at least by volume or weight is from a Legal and Sustainable source with the balance from a legal source .
b Category B evidence Documentary evidence other than Category A evidence and FLEGT evidence that provides assurance that the source is sustainable .
In this context sustainable is defined in the document entitled UK Government Timber Procurement Policy Framework for Evaluating Category B evidence The edition current on the day the contract is awarded shall apply .
Such Category B evidence may include for example independent audits and declarations by the Contractor or his suppliers .
Where Category B evidence is to be relied on the Contractor is required to notify the Overseeing Organisation of the source or sources of all virgin timber and woodderived products supplied .
Source in this context means the forest or plantation where the trees were grown and all subsequent places of delivery through the supply chain prior to receipt of the timber or woodderived product on site .
The Contractor shall separately identify virgin timber and woodderived products supplied from forests and plantations that are claimed to be subject to sustainable timber production and shall submit to the Overseeing Organisation documentation in respect of such wood to confirm that the criteria for sustainable timber production set out in this specification have been met .
c FLEGT evidence from either or both of the following categories Evidence of timber and woodderived products being exported from a timberproducing country that has signed a bilateral Forest Law Enforcement Governance and Trade FLEGT Voluntary Partnership Agreement VPA with the European Union and which have been licensed for export by the producing countrys government .
This may also include timber and woodderived products that have been independently verified as meeting all the producing countrys requirements for a FLEGT licence where a VPA has been entered into but the FLEGT licensing system is not fully operational or equivalent evidence from a country that has not entered into a VPA which demonstrates that all of the requirements equivalent to FLEGTlicensed timber have been met .
Amendment May F Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Preliminaries NATIONAL ALTERATIONS OF THE OVERSEEING ORGANISATION OF WALES NAW Checking Bar Schedules The Contractor shall check the bar schedules and make any corrections necessary .
Checking shall be commenced sufficiently in advance of ordering steel reinforcement to allow for corrections and approvals .
The Contractor shall be fully responsible for correctness of the schedules and the Overseeing Organisation does not accept any liability whatsoever for any errors therein .
The schedules corrected as necessary shall be the basis of admeasurement .
NAW Dimensional Accuracy Before commencing any part of the works the Contractor shall check that all coordinates levels and dimensions shown in the Contract Documents are correct .
He shall check and satisfy himself that the various parts fit satisfactorily together and in relation to existing physical features .
Checking shall be commenced sufficiently in advance of construction to allow for corrections .
The Contractor shall be fully responsible for correctness and the Overseeing Organisation does not accept any liability whatsoever for any errors therein .
NAW Agreement on Measurements Involving Computer Equipment If applicable all measurements relating to the works which involve the use of computer equipment whether in the taking of the measurements or in the storage of results of the measurements and will have a bearing on valuations payment and specification compliance shall where practicable be jointly undertaken by the Overseeing Organisation and Contractors staff .
The results of the measurement as produced by or stored in the respective computer equipment shall be complied to and certified as being correct by both parties .
If joint measurement is not possible independent check measuring shall be carried out and certifying countersignatures shall be attached to the original measure and the checkmeasure .
If compatible computerised datastorage systems are employed by both the Overseeing Organisation and the Contractor agreement on the correctness of the data can be based on data files transferred between the parties in the form of computer disks or by direct transfer .
Countersignatures must however be attached to printed copies of the data which must be filed for record purposes .
Amendment May WF Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Preliminaries Amendment December N NATIONAL ALTERATIONS OF THE OVERSEEING ORGANISATION OF NORTHERN IRELAND NI Standards Quality Management and Acceptance Standards and CE markings Where there is a requirement in this specification for compliance with any part of a British Standard or other technical specification that requirement may be met by compliance with a a standard or code of practice of a national standards body or equivalent body of any EEA state or Turkey b any international standard recognised for use as a standard or code of practice by any EEA state or Turkey c a technical specification recognised for use as a standard by a public authority of any EEA state or Turkey or d a European Technical Assessment issued in accordance with the procedure set out in regulation EU No provided that the relevant standard imposes an equivalent level of performance and safety provided for by the stated Standard or technical specification .
EEA State means a state which is a contracting party to the agreement on an European Economic Area signed at Oporto on the nd of May as adjusted or amended .
British Standard means any standard published by the British Standards Institution including adopted European or other international standards .
Electrical equipment to which directives EC or EC apply and which are produced for incorporation in a permanent manner in the works must have affixed to them CE marking attesting to their conformity to the provisions of the applicable directives .
Declarations of conformity required by the above directives must be provided to the Overseeing Organisation prior to installation or use or procurement or supply of the equipment .
Construction products which are produced for incorporation in a permanent manner in the works and are covered by a harmonised European standard or European Technical Approval or Assessment must have the product performance required by the specification for the intended use declared under the Declaration of Performance and be CE marked in accordance with the relevant British adopted European standard or European Technical Approvals or Assessments and the regulation EU No .
Unless otherwise described in the specification the declared performance of the product shall meet the required performance of all the essential characteristics required by the specification .
Declarations of performance required by the above regulation shall be provided to the Overseeing Organisation prior to installation or use or procurement or supply of the product .
Quality Management Unless otherwise indicated in contract specific Appendix or as required in the Conditions of Contract the Contractor shall institute a quality management system complying with BS EN ISO and shall prepare a Quality Plan .
The Contractor shall demonstrate compliance with this requirement to institute a quality management system to the Overseeing Organisation one acceptable method for this demonstration is to evidence registration to BS EN ISO .
The Quality Plan shall incorporate the requirements of contract specific Appendix and the requirements of the quality management schemes listed in Appendix A applicable to the works in accordance with subClause of this Clause .
The Quality Plan shall be submitted to the Overseeing Organisation within the periods stated in contract specific Appendix for acceptance before any related work is commenced .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Preliminaries Amendment May N Where any work goods or materials to be used in the works are the subject of the quality management schemes listed in Appendix A the Contractor shall require the supplier of such items to prepare a Quality Plan and the Contractor shall submit it to the Overseeing Organisation .
Such Quality Plans shall comply with the requirements of contract specific Appendix and the individual requirements of the relevant Sector Scheme Documents for Quality Management in Highway Works see subClause .
Quality Plans shall indicate hold points as follows Contractors points where no further work shall hold points proceed without the written approval of a designated person of the Contractors management who shall be named in the Quality Plan .
Overseeing points where no further work shall Organisations proceed without the written approval of hold points a designated representative of the Overseeing Organisation .
The Contractor shall ensure the Quality Plans and associated quality documentation are made available to all parties involved with the works .
Quality Records For works goods or materials other than those which are CE marked the Contractor shall make available contemporary quality records to the Overseeing Organisation when requested .
This includes quality records such as those identified in BS EN ISO to demonstrate achievement of the required quality and the effectiveness of the quality system .
The Contractor shall require any member of the Contractors supply chain to make available such contemporary quality records when requested .
Following a request copies of all quality records shall be made available immediately to the Overseeing Organisation .
The Contractor shall report any nonconforming productservice to the Overseeing Organisation and shall require any member of the Contractors supply chain to immediately report any nonconforming productservice to the Contractor .
The Contractor shall immediately pass these reports to the Overseeing Organisation and undertake no further related work until remedial or other measures have been undertaken .
The Contractor shall submit the quality records required by this Specification as indicated in Appendix H to the Overseeing Organisation .
No item of work shall be considered complete until these records have been received by the Overseeing Organisation .
Note Quality terms used in this Clause are as BS EN ISO .
Quality Management Schemes Except as described in subClause .
where any work goods or materials to be used in the works are the subject of a quality management scheme listed in Appendix A only work goods or materials conforming with such a scheme shall be used and the organisations carrying out such work shall have current registration to the relevant schemes .
The Contractor shall in each case submit to the Overseeing Organisation a copy of the certificate of conformity affirming compliance with the scheme .
Where any work goods or materials to be used in the works are the subject of a quality management scheme listed in Appendix A and for which the goods or materials are CE marked products in accordance with the relevant standards exclusions to mandatory requirements as listed in Appendix A apply .
Where specific training and competency requirements are identified in any quality management scheme listed in Appendix A the Contractor shall provide copies of the relevant training andor competency assessments certificates andor registrationskill cards of the workforce to the Overseeing Organisation for acceptance prior to the commencement of relevant work .
The requirement for compliance with a registered quality management scheme listed in Appendix A shall be satisfied by compliance with an equivalent quality management scheme of any Member State of the European Economic Area or a State which is party to a relevant agreement with the European Union provided that the proposed scheme is designed to ensure in use levels of safety performance and fitness for purpose equivalent to those provided for by the scheme specified .
The proposed scheme will include third party assessment by bodies accredited in accordance with BS EN ISOIEC by the United Kingdom Accreditation Service UKAS or equivalent European Accreditation Organisation which is party to a multilateral agreement MLA with UKAS or Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Preliminaries Amendment May N any equivalent International Accreditation Forum IAF MLA signatory with a scope which includes the relevant standards .
This subClause applies also to works only in so far as the means of carrying out such works are indivisibly associated with the goods or materials for which an alternative quality management scheme is proposed .
Product Certification Schemes and CE Marked Products Works goods and materials other than those covered by the Construction Products Regulation falling under the standards listed in Appendix B are required to have attestation or third party accreditation to demonstrate compliance with the relevant standard .
This can be satisfied by one or more of the following i Compliance with a relevant product mark scheme demonstrating compliance as described in subClause below ii Demonstration of compliance as described in subClause below iii Demonstration of compliance using testing and calculation as described in subClause below .
Where works goods or materials are covered by the Construction Products Regulation EU No .
CPR their compliance with the specification shall be demonstrated by the product being CE marked the declared performance of the product given in the Declaration of Performance meeting the required performance of all the essential characteristics given in the specification and evidence being provided that demonstrates the product meets the requirements of the specification for aspects other than those covered by the essential characteristics where such evidence meets the requirements of options i or ii above .
Where option i or ii of subClause is used the product shall be certified as compliant with the specification and relevant standard or equivalent as described in subClause of this Clause by a Certification Body .
The Certification Body shall be accredited in accordance with BS EN or BS EN ISOIEC by the United Kingdom Accreditation Service UKAS or equivalent European Accreditation Organisation which is party to a multilateral agreement MLA with UKAS or any equivalent International Accreditation Forum IAF MLA signatory with a scope which includes the relevant standards .
Unless otherwise described in the specification assessment of the product shall be carried out to the level of attestation as determined in the relevant standard for the intended use of the product in the works and shall include confirmation that the product provides in use adequate levels of safety performance and fitness for purpose .
For products covered by the Low Voltage Directive EC and the Electromagnetic Compatibility Directive EC the safety aspects would be for aspects not covered by the relevant CE marking .
The Contractor shall provide information on the product to the Overseeing Organisation for acceptance .
This information shall include certification attestation details and Certification Body details .
Where option iii of subClause is used it shall be demonstrated that the product is capable of performing as required using tests calculations or other means .
Such testing or other means shall have a minimum level of attestation as that determined by the relevant standard and be suitably extensive to provide information on all relevant parameters .
Testing shall be carried out by laboratories accredited to UKAS or equivalent Accredited Organisation as described in subClause ..
The testing or other means shall include confirmation that the product provides in use adequate levels of safety performance and fitness for purpose .
For products covered by the Low Voltage Directive EC and the Electromagnetic Compatibility Directive EC the safety aspects would be for aspects not covered by the relevant CE marking .
The Contractor shall provide information on the product to the Overseeing Organisation for acceptance .
This information shall include testing or calculation details and results certification and attestation details .
Product Acceptance Schemes Where there are references in the Specification to particular industry product acceptance schemes such as British Board of Agrment Certificates Roads and Bridges Certificates HAPAS certificates CARES certificate or equivalent scheme these shall be taken as references to a product acceptance scheme that has the attributes given in subClause below .
The types of work goods or materials listed in Appendix C are required to be certificated by a product acceptance scheme prior to their inclusion in the works .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Preliminaries Amendment May N The works goods or materials shall be assessed against a set of guidelines and criteria by a Certification Body .
Certification to confirm the products successfully meet the guidelines and criteria shall be issued by a Certification Body .
The Contractor shall provide information on the product to the Overseeing Organisation for acceptance .
This information shall include the certification and when requested details of the scheme to confirm its compliance with the criteria given below and accreditation details of the organisation issuing the certification .
The scheme shall meet the following criteria .
a Product acceptance and certification specified in this subClause shall be structured and implemented to provide assurance to the Overseeing Organisation that the product when supplied for its intended use and installed or processed post manufacture in accordance with the manufacturers instructions will give the performance and level of safety required by the specification and be fit for purpose .
b The organisation certifying products and issuing the certificates must be accredited to the relevant Certification Body standard BS EN or BS EN ISOIEC for product certification or BS EN ISOIEC for site inspection by UKAS or equivalent European Accreditation Organisation which is party to a multilateral agreement MLA with UKAS or any equivalent International Accreditation Forum IAF MLA signatory with a scope which includes the relevant standards .
This shall include accreditation to manage and execute a certification scheme as defined in this subClause .
Accreditation must cover a scope of activity relevant to the construction installation maintenance and operation of highway infrastructure .
c The scheme must cover as appropriate i .
Manufacture and installation or post manufacture processing of those products for which a Declaration of Performance and consequent CE marking has not been made on the basis of any harmonised European Standard hEN or European Technical Assessment or ii .
Only the installation of a material or post manufacture processing where the manufacturer has made a Declaration of Performance of the material with consequent CE marking or iii .
Product characteristics not included in the required essential characteristics of a hEN or in a European Technical Assessment if such characteristics provide additional protection for the consumer e.g .
road user .
d The assessment and certification requirements for a product certified under the scheme must be developed ensuring due consideration is given to the requirements of the users of the product and those responsible for the highways on which such products will be used or installed .
e The scheme must have a technical supervisory panel that provides technical oversight on the operation of the scheme and formally consents to the issue of assessment and certification requirements of the specialist groups developing the assessment and certification requirements .
This panel must include a balanced representation of key end users recognized industry experts and those responsible for the highways on which such products will be used or installed .
f The product certification must include requirements for the audit and quality control of the production and installation processes for the product where necessary taking account of the product having its performance declared under a CE mark .
Installer certification must include requirements for on site surveillance of installation or post manufacturing processes .
g For every product it has certified under a product certification scheme an organisation must make open and publicly accessible details of the assessment and certification guidelines .
h Where different organisations have certified the same generic form of product they must be able to demonstrate to the Overseeing Organisation equivalence of performance of products certified under the different schemes or agree a common set of guidelines for the assessment and certification of the product .
i The competences of organisations certifying products shall be as the competency requirements for Technical Assessment Bodies given in Regulation EU No the Construction Products Regulation Annex IV Table with the additions given in Table .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Preliminaries Amendment May N Table Competency additions to Construction Product Regulation EU No .
Annex IV Table Competence Description of Competence Requirement .
Determining the specific installation or post manufacturing control Understand and evaluate the installation or post manufacturing processes of the specific product in order to identify appropriate measures ensuring consistent compliant delivery of the installed or post manufactured product .
A certification body shall have staff with appropriate technical knowledge of the relationship between the installation post manufacturing processes and the product characteristics related to production control for installation or post manufacture . .
Constructive engagement Be prepared to engage constructively with highway infrastructure managers and other certifying bodies for resolution of issues .
Be able to resolve differences in the certified performance of products of the same generic type and where appropriate agree a common set of guidelines for the assessment and certification of such products .
European Technical Assessment ETA The requirements for works goods or materials to be subject to a product certification scheme or product acceptance scheme as discussed in sub Clauses to above may alternatively be met by a product being attested using a European Technical Assessment ETA issued in accordance with the procedure set out in Regulation provided that the relevant attestation imposes an equivalent level of safety performance and fitness for purpose provided for by the Specification .
Not used .
Departmental Authorisation Departmental authorisation is required before any traffic signs are incorporated into the works where these are of a character andor are to be used in circumstances which have not been prescribed in the Traffic Signs Regulations Northern Ireland the Zebra Pelican and Puffin Pedestrian Crossings Regulations Northern Ireland and subsequent amending Regulations .
Where the Contractor has designed part of the works for which such authorisation is required application shall be made to the Overseeing Organisation .
The types of works goods or materials which are required to have Type Approval or Registration prior to their acceptance for inclusion in the works are given in Appendix E with the exception that products that are covered by the Construction Products Regulation EU No .
CPR do not have to be listed prior to their acceptance for inclusion in the works .
For products not covered by CPR previously obtained type approval or registration can be used .
The Contractor shall submit to the Overseeing Organisation a copy of the type approval registration certificate .
Where previously obtained type approval or registration is not available the Contractor shall submit documentation to the Overseeing Organisation which demonstrates compliance with the relevant specification andor standards .
For products covered by the CPR the information required in Clause .
shall be provided by the Contractor in accordance with that subClause .
Provision of Information Where information and documentation regarding works goods or materials is required to be submitted to the Overseeing Organisation for acceptance the Contractor shall submit such documentation in a timescale to meet the requirements of the Contractors programme of works .
The Contractor shall liaise with the Overseeing Organisation to ensure that adequate time is allocated for the Overseeing Organisation to undertake the required assessments for acceptance .
The time allocated for acceptance shall not be less than four weeks .
Unless otherwise specified two copies of all information and documentation including valid certificates in respect of work goods or materials proposed by the Contractor shall be supplied to the Overseeing Organisation in English .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Preliminaries Amendment May N Where the Contractor proposes to use an equivalent standard quality management scheme product certification scheme industry product acceptance scheme or type approvalregistration to that specified the Contractor shall provide relevant information to enable the Overseeing Organisation to ascertain whether or not the proposal is equivalent to the specified requirement .
The information provided by the Contractor shall provide full disclosure and appropriate evidence regarding the works goods or materials concerned in order to fully demonstrate equivalent levels of safety performance and fitness for purpose .
For products within the scope of the Construction Products Regulation this documentation would be the relevant Declaration of Performance and associated CE mark for the intended specified use .
When required in contract specific Appendix three copies of detailed working and fabrication drawings in the format detailed in contract specific Appendix prepared by or on behalf of the Contractor shall be submitted for the Overseeing Organisations acceptance .
The minimum period for submission of the drawings prior to commencement of the related works shall be as stated in contract specific Appendix .
Such acceptance shall in no way relieve the Contractor of his responsibilities for the work under the Contract .
NI Setting Out The Contractor shall unless otherwise stated in contract specific Appendix within weeks of the date for commencement of the works carry out a check of the coordinates and levels of all permanent ground markers and permanent bench marks described in contract specific Appendix and shall supply the Overseeing Organisation if requested with their position and level in order that they may be checked and revised if necessary .
The Contractor shall identify and bring to the attention of the Overseeing Organisation any markers that are missing .
The Contractor shall comply with any specific requirements for setting out described in contract specific Appendix .
The Contractor shall keep updated schedules and drawings of all bench marks which shall be based on Ordnance Datum of Belfast Mean Sea Level used in the setting out and shall make these available to the Overseeing Organisation when required .
The Contractor shall ensure that where necessary in order to maintain his programme lines and levels are set out in such time as to enable Statutory Undertakers apparatus and other publicly or privately owned services or supplies to be installed altered or removed .
The Contractor shall survey and record existing details of items which he is required to remove and subsequently replace .
The level of survey information to be recorded is described in contract specific Appendix .
NI Traffic Safety and Management General Unless otherwise stated in contract specific Appendix the Contractor shall plan design programme provide implement maintain and remove all traffic safety and management measures necessary for the completion of the works .
This shall include undertaking all necessary liaison with the police and highway authority responsible for each public highway affected by the works both before commencement and throughout the duration of the works .
The traffic safety and management measures shall be in accordance with the requirements and constraints stated in contract specific Appendix and the Contractor shall take into account the information contained in contract specific Appendix .
The traffic safety and management measures shall be in accordance with Chapter of the Traffic Signs Manual .
The Contractor shall inform the Overseeing Organisation of any details the Contractor has agreed with the police andor the highway authority .
All traffic safety and management operations shall be undertaken by a supplier registered to National Highway Sector Scheme with a scope of registration that includes reference to one or more of National Highways Sector Schemes AB C or D as appropriate to the works .
The Contractor shall unless otherwise stated in contract specific Appendix after consultation with the police and highway authorities concerned prepare and submit traffic safety and management proposals within the timescale described in contract specific Appendix to the Overseeing Organisation .
These shall show the Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Preliminaries proposed traffic safety and management measures including provision of safety zones .
If stated in contract specific Appendix the proposals shall include the provision of running lanes for the use of emergency vehicles within the site .
The Contractor shall make such changes to his proposals as may be necessary to meet the requirements of the Contract .
Thereafter the Contractor shall furnish and update such details and information as may be necessitated by the works .
If stated in contract specific Appendix the Contractor shall undertake the highway maintenance functions described therein and to the extent there described on the lengths of highway there specified until the issue of the appropriate certificate of completion .
Traffic signs shall comply with the appropriate Clauses in Series of the Specification .
Where a temporary speed limit at road works has been imposed and the works have been temporarily terminated with the removal of traffic management measures the Contractor shall ensure that the temporary speed limit signs are covered or taken down for the duration of the cessation of the works .
Where the temporary speed limit signs are covered the covering material shall prevent the sign being visible through the cover in natural light and under vehicle headlamp or street lamp illumination at night be non light reflective and securely fastened .
Where the Contract provides that the Contractor shall not erect maintain or reposition traffic signs the Contractor shall not change in any manner the permanent or temporary traffic signs without instruction from the Overseeing Organisation and shall give such notice as is stated in contract specific Appendix to indicate when signs should be moved compatible with the progress of the works .
All traffic safety and management measures necessitated by the works shall be fully operational before the Contractor commences any work which affects the public highway or the use of it .
Any area of highway which has been closed because of the works shall not be reopened to traffic until all appropriate traffic safety and management measures have been completed and the highway is in a suitable condition for public use .
Where work is carried out on or adjacent to a highway open to traffic the Contractor shall ensure that vehicles and mobile plant under his control operating frequently or regularly on or adjacent to that highway in the execution of the works shall be conspicuous and comply with Section O General Vehicle Issues of Chapter Part Operations of the Traffic Signs Manual .
Where required in contract specific Appendix or where required for the execution of the works the Contractor shall provide temporary lighting in accordance with Clause .
Where required in contract specific Appendix or where required for the execution of the works the Contractor shall provide Temporary Emergency Telephones in accordance with Clause .
The Contractor shall provide and suitably sign points of entry to and exit from the site for vehicles and plant engaged on the works .
The Contractor shall ensure that when any vehicle or item of plant is reversing within the site on or adjacent to a highway open to traffic it does so only under the supervision of a person designated for the purpose of regulating traffic within the site who shall be readily distinguishable from the remainder of the work force .
If an accident or breakdown occurs on a carriageway or hard shoulder open to traffic within or in the vicinity of the site the Contractor and operators of recovery vehicles provided in accordance with Clause shall act as requested by police officers or traffic officers acting under their statutory powers .
Where work is carried out on or adjacent to a highway open to traffic the Contractor shall ensure that the workforce and the site supervisory staff at all times wear high visibility warning clothing complying with BS EN .
Clothing shall be to Table Class or Class on motorways or other high speed roads and shall comply with the requirements of para .. b .
In addition on motorways or other high speed roads full length sleeves meeting the requirements of para .. shall be provided for coveralls and jackets .
The colour of the clothing shall normally be fluorescent yellow or fluorescent orangered complying with Table .
The retroreflective material used shall be to Level as defined at Table .
Clothing complying with other specifications may be used in accordance with Clause where they offer equivalent levels of performance in so far as the specification given is not inconsistent with the basic health and safety requirements set out in Annex of the Personal Protective Equipment Directive EEC .
The Contractor shall ensure that the person in charge of the workforce is readily distinguishable from the person designated in subClause of this Clause and from the remainder of the workforce .
Amendment May N Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Preliminaries Amendment May N Traffic Safety and Control Officer Unless otherwise stated in contract specific Appendix the Contractor shall appoint a suitably qualified Traffic Safety and Control Officer TSCO who shall make all arrangements necessary for traffic safety and control including the provision and operation of breakdown recovery vehicles .
The TSCO shall be experienced in the control of temporary traffic management operations and shall possess a National Highway Sector Scheme NHSS Traffic Safety and Control Officer Registration Card .
The Contractor shall provide the Overseeing Organisation with the names and contact details of the TSCO and any nominated deputies .
Unless otherwise described in contract specific Appendix the TSCO or a nominated deputy shall be on the site at all times when traffic management is in operation and shall be readily available to deal with matters related to traffic safety and control including breakdown recovery vehicles .
Without prejudice to subClause above whilst within the limits of a temporary traffic management scheme the TSCO shall manage any traffic management related requests given by a Police Officer or Traffic Officer .
On Highways Agency roads the TSCO shall liaise with the Overseeing Organisations Regional Control Centre on traffic management related matters including requests and instructions .
Unless otherwise stated in contract specific Appendix the responsibilities of the Traffic Safety and Control Officer and of his nominated deputies shall include the following a Monitoring with the assistance of sufficient mobile personnel and of sufficient other suitable and appropriate aids the flow of traffic within the area of the site b Ensuring that within minutes of notification of the occurrence of an incident resulting in stationary vehicles on a highway open to the public the incident is reported to the vehicle recovery service when vehicle recovery is in operation c Recording and logging all incidents and all movements of recovery vehicles and when called all movements of the emergency services .
Where an incident is a shed load vehicle breakdown vehicle abandonment or traffic accident whether or not the latter involves personal injury .
Statutory Orders Temporary Traffic Regulation Orders Unless otherwise detailed in contract specific Appendix the Contractor shall submit a formal application to the appropriate authority for any temporary traffic regulation orders or other statutory orders required to be made or notices required to be published in connection with his traffic safety and management proposals .
The Contractor shall comply with any procedural requirements given in contract specific Appendix .
The Contractor shall allow for the notice periods required for obtaining and implementation of any temporary traffic regulation orders or other statutory orders in the programme of works .
Where applications are to be made to the Overseeing Organisation the notice periods required shall be as given in contract specific Appendix .
Where applications for temporary traffic regulation orders or other statutory orders are made by the Overseeing Organisation prior to the commencement of the works the Contractor shall provide all necessary traffic safety and management measures to implement the orders .
Crossovers The Contractor shall design construct and maintain or if contract specific Appendix so provides shall construct and maintain the central reserve crossovers described in contract specific Appendix in accordance with the information stated therein .
Unless otherwise described in contract specific Appendix the Contractor shall remove those crossovers when no longer required and reinstate the central reserve to its original condition .
If the Contractor proposes to construct central reserve crossovers as part of his traffic safety and management proposals he shall submit such proposals to the Overseeing Organisation in advance in accordance with the requirements of subClause of this Clause .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Preliminaries Amendment May N Driver Information Signs Where required in contract specific Appendix the Contractor shall provide erect maintain and remove Driver Information Signs to diagrams and of the Traffic Signs Regulations and Northern Ireland in accordance with subClause of this Clause and Chapter of the Traffic Signs Manual .
Information signs shall only be displayed within roadworks where they accurately reflect the reason for the inactivity .
Legends shall be selected as appropriate from those permitted and listed in Chapter of the Traffic Signs Manual unless stated otherwise in contract specific Appendix .
Sign shall indicate how long delays are possible .
This date shall be updated by the Contractor if necessary until the restrictions are removed .
Sign shall be located within roadworks when part of the road is coned off and the reason for this is not apparent from the carriageway for any period exceeding minutes or one hour if road capacity is maintained .
However signs located within roadworks shall only be used where they can be located at least metres beyond the downstream end of a taper and in a position which does not prejudice traffic safety .
If needed Information Signs shall be sited at the beginning and at one kilometre intervals through the works .
They shall not be placed where they may distract drivers negotiating traffic management provisions .
Signs shall either be sited for the duration of the works where it is safe and appropriate to do so or provision made to enable their use at short notice .
The Contractor shall provide adequate storage facilities clear of any safety zone .
Storage within the central reserve or in front of safety barriers shall not be permitted .
Temporary Automatic Speed Camera System TASCAR Where required in contract specific Appendix a Temporary Automatic Speed Camera System for the Enforcement of Mandatory Speed Limits at Roadworks TASCAR shall be provided in accordance with the following requirements and those given in contract specific Appendix .
The type of system and the number of speed monitoring sites and their locations shall be as specified in contract specific Appendix .
The Contractor shall be responsible for the design installation commissioning maintenance and removal of the system .
This shall be undertaken using a suitably qualified Enforcement Equipment Supplier EES .
The EES shall make all arrangements necessary for the provision and operation of the TASCAR system .
The Contractor shall supply evidence of the EES qualifications to the Overseeing Organisation prior to the commencement of the works .
The equipment shall meet the requirements of the Speedmeter Handbook and have Home Office Type Approval HOTA for the purpose required .
The installation commissioning operation and maintenance of the system shall be undertaken in accordance with the requirements of the equipments HOTA .
All equipment and training necessary to bring the sites into operation shall be provided and installed by the Contractor this shall include but not be limited to all equipment poles housings and power supplies .
The quantities of equipment required shall be as specified in contract specific Appendix .The Contractor shall ensure that the System is completely installed and fully operational from the time defined in contract specific Appendix and that it remains in operation for the duration of the Contract unless otherwise specified in contract specific Appendix and is removed on completion of the works .
The Contractor shall commission any necessary third party certification of the system and shall supply copies of the certification to the Overseeing Organisation .
Unless otherwise required by the equipments HOTA requirements the equipment and ancillary items shall be compatible with all permanent and temporary installations associated with the works .
The Contractor shall liaise with the relevant Enforcement Authority EA to determine how the system for the scheme shall integrate with the EAs existing facilities and operations .
The Contractor shall comply with the Overseeing Organisations procedures with respect the liaison as described in contract specific Appendix .
The Contractor shall submit details of the system to the Overseeing Organisation four weeks in advance of its operation for approval .
Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Preliminaries The TASCAR equipment shall consist of a HOTA detection and measuring device and ancillary equipment that allows day and night operation If a trailer mounted system is supplied it shall be fitted with retractable demountable wheels .
The Contractor shall arrange for the provision of a mains electrical supply of adequate power capacity to all components of the system .
Alternatively he may provide an equivalent supply from a local electrical generator or generators which shall be used only for this purpose .
Such generators shall have electric start mechanisms and be adequately regulated as to voltage and frequency to suit the accuracy requirements of the equipment provided for TASCAR and be capable of running constantly for hours without refuelling at an output of not less than that required by the equipment at .
power factor or equivalent output .
All generators shall be housed in vandalproof containers and be securely locked .
One set of keys shall be provided to the EA .
Generators may only be used when they will not adversely affect the equipmentsystems operations or the equipments HOTA requirements .
The housing and poles for the TASCAR equipment must be as required for the specific HOTA for that equipment and shall include securitylocking mechanisms to prevent unauthorised access or operation .
The Contractor shall install the polesmastscabinets or trailers required at each individual speed monitoring location any installation shall be within highway limits .
At completion of the works the Contractor shall remove all TASCAR equipment and reinstate ground as described in contract specific Appendix .
The Contractor shall ensure that suitable access arrangements are in place at each speed monitoring site including vehicle hard standings walkways and steps where necessary to allow for general maintenance and servicing of the camera unit .
Where supplied suitable provisions shall be made for installing and recovering trailers .
The Contractor shall ensure that the camera poles are located in accordance with road restraint systems requirements detailed in TD .
The Contractor shall ensure that the site reference number is clearly indicated on both the installation and on the road surface within the field of view of the cameras .
Site reference numbers should be agreed with the EA .
Any ducting provision loop or piezo installation shall be carried out in accordance with the relevant clauses of Series and of the Specification .
The Contractor shall be responsible for the commissioning of the TASCAR as a whole including secondary and in station checks .
The Contractor shall where required as part of the HOTA provide a secondary method of confirming the speed calculation .
The commissioning of the TASCAR shall be carried out in the presence of and for acceptance by the EA and shall be in accordance with any particular requirements in contract specific Appendix the commissioning shall only be complete when each site and where applicable the overall system is accepted as being operational by the EA .
The Contractor shall give notice to the Overseeing Organisation of his intention to carry out this work unless otherwise stated in contract specific Appendix this shall be not less than four days in advance of the intended time for the commissioning .
An Evidential Trail ET which meets all the requirements as stated in contract specific Appendix including commissioning certificates shall be provided by the Contractor to the Overseeing Organisation and shall include one pair of photographs or video images for acceptance by the EA as part of the commissioning and acceptance procedure of the system .
The Contractor shall ensure that all relevant requirements of the Evidential Trails for Enforcement Systems documents are achieved .
Cameras sited on the nearside of the carriageway shall be installed and commissioned prior to hour lane closures being put into operation .
Cameras sited in the central reserve shall be installed and commissioned not later than hours after installation of the contraflow .
Both sets of cameras shall then remain in continuous operation until a Completion Certificate has been issued for the whole of the works .
At the end of the period of operation required under the Contract the equipment shall remain the property of the Contractor .
Following commissioning the TASCAR Operator will be the EA .
The Contractor shall provide assistance to the EA for the repositioning of the speed monitoring equipment between the housings or switching of detection equipment between zones and servicing as and when requested by the EA .
Any repositioning during the works that requires that the equipment parameters are changed must be supported by the issue of a calibration certificate by the Contractor to the EA .
Amendment May N Volume Series Specification for Highway Works Preliminaries All evidential media from speed monitoring sites will remain the property of the EA .
The scheme ET documents shall be kept up to date by the Contractor .
The Contractor shall provide and install all necessary speed limit signing in connection with the operation of the TASCAR system any signing used shall either be prescribed or where necessary authorised .
The Contractor shall provide the EA through the Overseeing Organisation with a two hourly log showing the locations of all the speed limit and speed limit repeater signs relative to existing marker posts .
A repeater sign shall be positioned such that one is visible in each photograph .
Where there is a hour CCTV system installed that is monitoring ALL speed limit and repeater signs this log can be compiled remotely .
Where digital HOTA equipment is used the Contractor will provide either the communications service to transfer data and control the device or appropriate media such as WORM Write Once Read Many drives CDs memory sticks as appropriate and in quantities required by the EA for the use of the equipment for the duration of the works .
If HOTA mm wet film systems are used the film will be supplied to the EA by the Contractor typically at the rate of one film per day per live camera in operation plus ten which shall be supplied at the commencement of the works .
Amendment May NF
