Standard Specifications for Construction Vermont Agency of Transportation Vermont Agency of Transportation Standard Specifications for Construction No .
________ This Page Intentionally Left Blank Questions or Comments Should you have any questions comments or suggestions regarding the Specifications presented in this book please contact the Vermont Agency of Transportation Contract Administration by email at AOT.ConstructionContractingInquiryvermont.gov Electronic Availability Electronic copies of this publication may be viewed or downloaded at no charge from the Vermont Agency of Transportation PreContract and Specifications Unit website at the following address httpvtrans.vermont.govhighwayconstructmaterialconstruct servicesprecontractspecifications This Page Intentionally Left Blank PREFACE This edition of the Standard Specifications for Construction was adopted in April in compliance with V.S.A . .
The provisions of these Specifications shall apply on all construction contracts entered into by the Vermont Agency of Transportation .
Variations from these Specifications will not be permitted except as provided for by Supplemental Specifications or Project Special Provisions included in the specified contract .
Plans and estimates are approved by the Agency with the understanding that the work covered by such Plans and estimates is to be performed or contracted in accordance with these Specifications and any Supplemental Specifications and Project Special Provisions included in the contract .
When preparing the contract for execution reference shall be made to these Specifications by title and date of adoption .
The standard set of Specifications as filed at the Vermont State Library and at the office of the Secretary Vermont Agency of Transportation shall cover all work approved .
Copies of these Specifications may be obtained from the Vermont Agency of Transportation National Life Drive Montpelier Vermont .
Jo Secretary of Transportation This Page Intentionally Left Blank i TABLE OF CONTENTS Division General Provisions Section Definitions and Terms .
Abbreviations .
Definitions .
Intention of Terms Section Bidder Requirements and Conditions .
Interpretation of Quantities in Bid Proposal .
Examination of Plans Specifications Proposal Forms Site of Work and Subsurface Information .
Familiarity with Laws Ordinances and Regulations .
Errors andor Inconsistencies in Contract Documents Section Taxes and Insurance .
Construction Equipment Tax .
Withholding of Taxes .
State Sales Tax .
Insurance Requirements Section Scope of Work .
Intent of Contract .
Alteration of Plans or Character of Work .
Extra Work .A Maintenance of Vehicular Traffic .B Maintenance and Protection of Rail Traffic and Infrastructure .
Removal and Disposal of Structures and Obstructions .
Use of Materials Found in the Project Limits Authorization Payment .
Final Cleanup Following Completion of Project .
Differing Site Conditions Section Control of the Work .
Authority of the Engineer .
Chief Engineer to be Referee .
Plans and Working Drawings .
Conformity with Plans and Allowable Deviations .
Coordination of Contract Documents .
Cooperation by Contractor .
Cooperation with Utilities .
Cooperation Between Contractors .
Construction Stakes .
Authority and Duties of Resident Engineer Engineer .
Authority and Duties of Inspectors .
Inspection of Work .
Removal of Unacceptable and Unauthorized Work .
Sunday Night and Holiday Work .
Convict Labor .
Load Restrictions .
Maintenance of Project During Construction .
Failure to Maintain Project Cost .
Final Inspection and Acceptance ii .
Claims for Adjustment .
Payrolls .
Environmental Regulation .
Erosion Prevention and Sediment Control .
Pollution Control .
OffSite Activity Areas .
Opening OffSite Activity Areas .
Maintaining OffSite Activity Areas .
Closing OffSite Activity Areas .
Payment for Erosion Prevention and Sediment Control .
Value Engineering Section Control of Material .
Source of Supply and Quality Requirements .
Local Material Sources .
Samples and Tests .
Plant Inspection .
Storage of Materials .
Handling Materials .
Unacceptable Materials .
Explosive and Flammable Materials .
Stockpiling of Materials Section Legal Relations and Responsibility to the Public .
Laws to be Observed .
Permits Licenses and Taxes .
Patented Devices Material and Processes .
FederalAid Provisions .
Sanitary Provisions .
Plant Pest Control Requirements .
Public Convenience and Safety .
Traffic Control Devices .
Responsibility for Use of Flaggers .
This Subsection Reserved .
Use of Explosives .
Protection and Restoration of Property .
Protection and Restoration of Utilities and Services .
Protection of Historical and Archaeological Sites .
Forest Protection .
Responsibility for Damage Claims .
Opening Sections of Project to Traffic .
Contractors Responsibility for Work .
No Personal Liability of Public Officials .
No Waiver of Legal Rights .
Furnishing RightofWay .
Buy America Provisions .
Defense of Lawsuits Challenge to Jurisdiction and Waiver of Immunity .. . Interest Section Prosecution and Progress .
Subletting or Assignment of Contract .
Notice to Proceed iii .
Prosecution and Progress of the Work .
Limitations of Operations .
Character of Workers Methods and Equipment .
Wages and Conditions of Employment .
Labor and Rental Preference .
Meeting Personnel Requirements .
Temporary Suspension of the Work .
Suspensions of Work Ordered by the Engineer .
Determination of Extension of Contract Time for Completion .
Failure to Complete Work on Time .
Termination of Contract .
Termination of Contract for Convenience .
Termination of Contractors Responsibility .
Delays Compensable and NonCompensable Section Measurement and Payment .
Measurement of Quantities .
Purchases of Materials Based Upon Agency Measurements .
Scope of Payment .
Significant Changes in the Character of Work .
Compensation for Altered Plans or Quantities .
Extra and Force Account Work .
Eliminated Items .
Partial and Final Payments .
Final Pay Quantity Division Earthwork Section Clearing Section Demolition and Disposal of Buildings Section Excavation and Embankments Section Excavation for Structures Section Drilling and Blasting Section Cofferdams Section Cold Planing Section This Section Reserved Section This Section Reserved Section Milled Rumble Strips Section This Section Reserved Division Subbase and Base Courses Section Subbase Section This Section Reserved Section Full Depth Reclamation FDR Division Surface Courses and Pavement Section Aggregate Surface Course Section Aggregate Shoulders Section Aggregate Shoulders RAP with RAS iv Section Surface Treatment Materials Section Bituminous Concrete Pavement Section Bonded Wearing Course Section This Section Reserved Section This Section Reserved Section Material Transfer Vehicle MTV Section Cold Mixed Recycled Bituminous Pavement Section Bituminous Crack Sealing Section This Section Reserved Division Structures Section Performance Based Structural Concrete Section Shoring Superstructures Section This Section Reserved Section Furnishing Equipment for Driving Piling Section Piling Section Structural Steel Section Reinforcing Steel Section Shear Connectors Section Longitudinal Deck Grooving Section Prestressed Concrete Section This Section Reserved Section This Section Reserved Section This Section Reserved Section Water Repellent Silane Section This Section Reserved Section Expansion Devices Section Sheet Membrane Waterproofing Section This Section Reserved Section Lumber and Timber Section This Section Reserved Section Joint Sealer Section Bridge Railings Section This Section Reserved Section Maintenance of Structures and Approaches Section Temporary Bridge Section Removal of Structures and Bridge Pavement Section This Section Reserved Section Bridge Bearing Devices Section This Section Reserved Section This Section Reserved Section Precast Concrete Section Structural Concrete Section This Section Reserved Section ContractorFabricated Precast Concrete Structure Section Prefabricated Bridge Unit Superstructure Section This Section Reserved Section PreExcavation of Abutment Piles Section This Section Reserved v Section This Section Reserved Section This Section Reserved Section Structural Concrete Repair Section This Section Reserved Section This Section Reserved Division Incidental Construction Section Culverts and Storm Drains Section Masonry Section Drop Inlets Catch Basins and Manholes Section Underdrains Section Roadway Patrol Maintenance Section Equipment Rental Section Dust and Ice Control Section This Section Reserved Section Stone Fill and Riprap Section This Section Reserved Section Curbs and Gutters Section Mailboxes Section Sidewalks Section Markers Section Fences Section Traffic Barriers Section Insulation Board Section This Section Reserved Section This Section Reserved Section Sleeves for Utilities Section This Section Reserved Section This Section Reserved Section Sanitary Sewer Systems Section Water Systems Section Uniformed Traffic Officers and Flaggers Section Field Office Section Railroad Flaggers Section Critical Path Method CPM Schedule Section Employee Traineeship Section MobilizationDemobilization Section This Section Reserved Section Traffic Control Section This Section Reserved Section Retroreflective Pavement Markings Section This Section Reserved Section Geotextile Fabric Section This Section Reserved Section Turf Establishment Section This Section Reserved Section Erosion Prevention and Sediment Control Section This Section Reserved Section Planting Trees Shrubs and Vines vi Section This Section Reserved Section This Section Reserved Section This Section Reserved Section This Section Reserved Section This Section Reserved Section This Section Reserved Section Traffic Signs Section Delineators Section Overhead Traffic Sign Supports Section Traffic Control Signals Section Street Lighting Section Travel Information Signs Section This Section Reserved Section This Section Reserved Section This Section Reserved Section This Section Reserved Section This Section Reserved Division Materials Section General Section Hydraulic Cement Section Bituminous Materials Section Soils and Borrow Materials Section Aggregates Section Masonry Units Section Stone for Masonry Riprap and Other Purposes Section Joint Materials Section Paints Stains and Traffic Marking Materials Section Lumber and Timber Section Culverts Storm Drains and Sewer Pipes Nonmetal Section Culverts Storm Drains and Sewer Pipes Metal Section Cribbing Materials Section Reinforcing Steel Strand and Welded Wire Reinforcement Section Structural Steel Section Miscellaneous Metals Section Epoxy Resin Materials Section Geotextiles Section Concrete Curing Materials and Admixtures Section Protective Coatings and Waterproofing Materials Section Fencing Materials Section Guardrail Guide Posts and Barriers Section Curb Materials Section Piling Section Bearing Pads for Structures Section Railing Materials Section Insulating Materials Section Water Lines and Appurtenances Section This Section Reserved Section Disinfectants vii Section Water Section Calcium Chloride Section This Section Reserved Section Traffic Signs Section Delineators Section Traffic Control Signals Section Highway Illumination Section Landscaping Materials Section Concrete Repair Materials viii This Page Intentionally Left Blank DIVISION GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION DEFINITIONS AND TERMS .
ABBREVIATIONS .
Wherever the following abbreviations are used in these Specifications or on the Plans they are to be construed the same as the respective expressions represented A Amperes A Arch Section ABS AcrylonitrileButadieneStyrene ACL VTrans Advanced Certification List ADA Americans with Disabilities Act AAN American Association of Nurserymen AAR Association of American Railroads AASHTO American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials ACI American Concrete Institute AGC Associated General Contractors of America AI Asphalt Institute AIA American Institute of Architects AISC American Institute of Steel Construction AISI American Iron and Steel Institute AITC American Institute of Timber Construction Amps Amperes AMRL AASHTO Materials and Reference Laboratory ANR Vermont Agency of Natural Resources ANSI American National Standards Institute APEL AASHTO Product Evaluation List APL VTrans Approved Products List AREA American Railway Engineering Association AREMA American Railway Engineering and MaintenanceofWay Association ASCE American Society of Civil Engineers ASD Allowable Stress Design ASLA American Society of Landscape Architects ASME American Society of Mechanical Engineers ASR AlkaliSilica Reactivity ASTM American International Standards Worldwide AWPA American Wood Protection Association AWS American Welding Society AWWA American Water Works Association BTU British Thermal Unit CAAP Corrugated Aluminum Alloy Pipe CCRL Cement and Concrete Reference Laboratory CF FT ft Cubic Foot Feet CFR or C.F.R .
Code of Federal Regulations CIP Cast Iron Pipe CPEP Corrugated Polyethylene Pipe CPM Critical Path Method CPPP Corrugated Polypropylene Pipe CRSI Concrete Reinforcing Steel Institute CSP Corrugated Steel Pipe CVEP Conceptual Value Engineering Proposal CWHSSA Contract Work Hours and Safety Standards Act CWR Continuous Welded Rail CWT Hundredweight see Subsection .g for details CY YD yd Cubic Yards DI Drop Inlet DIP Ductile Iron Pipe DN Diameter Nominal for Metric Pipes DL Dollar DTA District Transportation Administrator DVEP Detailed Value Engineering Proposal EA Each EPA United States Environmental Protection Agency EPSC Erosion Prevention and Sediment Control ES End Section Section and Section FAA Federal Aviation Administration U.S. Department of Transportation FHWA Federal Highway Administration U.S. Department of Transportation FPQ Final Pay Quantity FRA Federal Railroad Administration U.S. Department of Transportation FSS Federal Specifications and Standards General Services Administration FTA Federal Transit Administration U.S. Department of Transportation g Grams Gal or gal Gallons GMRR Green Mountain Railroad HDPE High Density Polyethylene Hz Hertz in Square Inches ISEA International Safety Equipment Association ISO International Standards Organization ITE Institute of Transportation Engineers KG or kg Kilograms kips Thousand PoundsForce kPa Kilopascals kW Kilowatts lbf PoundForce Lbs or lbs Pounds LF Linear Foot Feet LRFD Load and Resistance Factor Design LS Lump Sum LU Lump Unit LVRT Lamoille Valley Rail Trail MASH Manual for Assessing Safety Hardware Mbps Megabits per second MC Medium Curing MM Mile Marker mm Millimeters MP Mile Post MS Medium Set MFBM Thousand Feet Board Measure see Subsection .i for details MGAL Thousand Gallons MNL Manual MSM VTrans Materials Sampling Manual MUTCD Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways MVRT Missisquoi Valley Rail Trail N.A.B.I .
Not A Bid Item NBFU National Board of Fire Underwriters NCHRP National Cooperative Highway Research Program NDS National Design Specification NDT Nondestructive Testing NEC National Electric Code NECR New England Central Railroad NEPCOAT North East Protective Coating Committee NEMA National Electrical Manufacturers Association NEPA National Environmental Policy Act NETC New England Transportation Consortium NHS National Highway System NIST National Institute of Standards and Technology NPS Nominal Pipe Size NSBA National Steel Bridge Alliance NSPE National Society of Professional Engineers NTPEP National Transportation Product Evaluation Program OSPC OnSite Plan Coordinator OSA OffSite Activity OSHA Occupational Safety and Health Administration OTM Other Track Material Pa Pascals PCA Portland Cement Association PCC Portland Cement Concrete PCCSP Polymeric Coated Corrugated Steel Pipe PCF Pounds per Cubic Foot PCI PrecastPrestressed Concrete Institute PI Paved Invert PSI or psi Pounds per Square Inch PVC Polyvinyl Chloride QA Quality Acceptance QAP Quality Assurance Program QC Quality Control RAP Recycled Asphalt Pavement RAS Recycled Asphalt Shingles RCP Reinforced Concrete Pipe RC Rapid Curing RS Rapid Set ROW or R.O.W RightOfWay SAE Society of Automotive Engineers SF FT ft Square Foot Feet SL Smooth Lined SSPC The Society for Protective Coatings SY YD yd Square Yards TL Test Level NCHRP Report UL Underwriters Laboratories Inc. USC or U.S.C .
United States Code UTO Uniformed Traffic Officers V Volts VAOT AOT or VTrans Vermont Agency of Transportation VCP Vitrified Clay Pipe VOSHA Vermont Occupational Safety and Health Act VSA or V.S.A .
Vermont Statutes Annotated VTR Vermont Railway W Watt WACR Washington County Railroad WHD Wage and Hour Division U.S. Department of Labor YD or yd Yards ºC Degrees Celsius ºF Degrees Fahrenheit MΩ Megaohm µm Micrometer µW Microwatt Ω Ohm All standard recognized abbreviations may be used in connection with the Contract. . DEFINITIONS .
Wherever in these Specifications or in other Contract Documents the following terms or pronouns in place of them are used the intent and meaning shall be interpreted as follows AASHTO PRODUCT EVALUATION LIST The APEL management system is the web databasecentral repository for evaluation reports from the testing of innovative patented andor proprietary engineered transportation products conducted either through APEL or by state departments of transportation .
ACCEPTANCE DATE Date noted in the Completion and Acceptance memorandum on which designated responsible Agency personnel have accepted the completeness and quality of all material incorporated in and work performed to complete the Projects .
ACT OF GOD An Act of God means an earthquake flood cyclone or other cataclysmic phenomena of nature beyond the ability of a prudent Contractor to foresee and make preparation to defend against damage .
ADVANCED CERTIFICATION LIST A list of products compiled by the Agency that have been approved for use based on an annual certification submitted by the manufacturer or supplier .
Only materials that require a Type A Certification per the Agencys Materials Sampling Manual can be included on this list .
AGENCY Agency of Transportation State of Vermont VAOT AOT or VTrans .
AGGREGATE Inert material such as sand gravel crushed gravel broken stone or crushed stone or a combination thereof .
APPROVED PRODUCTS LIST A listing of products and materials that have been evaluated by VTrans for applicable Specifications and have been deemed satisfactory for use on Agency Projects without additional certification requirements .
AUTHORIZATION TO PROCEED Written notice confirming that the Contract has been successfully executed and the Contractor may progress Contract work .
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE a Contractors An individual registered with the Office of Contract Administration having the legal authority to sign Contract Documents on behalf of the Contractor .
b Agencys The Chief Engineers Authorized Representatives responsible for engineering supervision of the construction Project .
BASE COURSE The layer or layers of specified or selected material of designed thickness on a subbase to support a surface course .
BITUMINOUS CONCRETE FIELD UNIT SUPERVISOR The Agencys Authorized Representative of the Materials Testing and Certifications Section responsible for the evaluation and approval of various aspects of bituminous concrete pavement detailed in these Specifications and supervision of Plant Inspectors utilized at hot mix asphalt plants .
BIWEEKLY Occurring once every two weeks .
BOARD The Transportation Board of the State of Vermont or its successor .
BORROW AREA All borrow pits gravel pits quarries sand pits and similar sources of materials used in the construction of the Project .
BRIDGE a Highway Bridge A structure including supports erected over a depression or an obstruction such as water a highway or a railroad having a passageway for carrying traffic or other moving loads and having a clear span of more than feet feet on NonFederalAid Projects measured along the center of the roadway between abutments spring lines of arches extreme ends of openings for multiple boxes or multiple pipes where the clear distance between openings is less than of the smaller contiguous opening .
Highway Bridge Length The dimension of a structure measured along the center of the roadway between backs of abutment backwalls or between the ends of a bridge floor whichever is greater .
Highway Bridge Width The clear dimension of a structure measured at right angles to the center of the roadway between the inner faces of parapet or railing .
b Railroad Bridge Any structure with a deck regardless of length which supports one or more railroad tracks or any other under grade structure with an individual span length of feet or more located at such a depth that it is affected by live loads .
Railroad Bridge Length The dimension of a structure measured along the center of the railroad between backs of abutment backwalls or between the ends of a bridge floor whichever is greater .
Railroad Bridge Width The clear dimension of a structure measured at right angles to the center of the railroad between the inner faces of parapet or railing .
CALENDAR DAY Any day shown on the calendar beginning and ending at midnight .
CHANGE ORDER A written agreement made and entered into by and between the Contractor and the Agency covering work not otherwise provided for in the Contract revisions in or amendments to the terms of the Contract an increase to the original quantities as set forth in the original Contract or conditions specifically described in these Specifications as requiring a Change Order .
Change Orders constitute amendments to the original Contract once properly signed and executed .
CHANNEL A natural or artificial water course .
CHIEF ENGINEER See DIRECTOR OF THE HIGHWAY DIVISION .
CHIEF OF RIGHTOFWAY The Agencys Authorized Representative to perform all liaison and negotiations between private property owners and Utility companies to ensure the Uniform Relocation Assistance and Real Property Acquisition Policies Act is met and conflicting Utility facilities are relocated to accommodate transportation Projects .
CLAIM a Contractors Claim A Claim by the Contractor for adjustment or dispute under Subsection .. b Damage Claim A Claim by an individual or entity for damage to property or for personal injury .
c Labor and Materials Claim A Claim by a Subcontractor supplier or other entity covered by V.S.A .
for monies Claimed to be due and payable .
CLEAR ZONE The Roadside border area starting at the edge of the traveled way available for use by errant vehicles .
Specified clear zones are as shown in the Plans .
COLLUSION A secret agreement among two or more persons companies or organizations for a deceitful or fraudulent purpose .
CONCRETE ENGINEER See STRUCTURAL CONCRETE ENGINEER .
CONDUIT A tube used for carrying holding and protecting electrical or other Utilities .
CONSTRUCTION AREA The entire portion of a Project site within the RightofWay and Easement limits during construction .
CONSTRUCTION EASEMENT See EASEMENT .
CONSTRUCTION ENGINEER The Authorized Representative of the Agency responsible for engineering supervision once the Contract has been signed and until Project completion and final acceptance .
CONSTRUCTION ENVIRONMENTAL ENGINEER The Agencys Authorized Representative of the Construction Section that provides guidance and technical assistance to Resident Engineers and Contractors on environmental compliance issues .
CONSTRUCTION MANAGER See CONSTRUCTION ENGINEER .
CONSTRUCTION OPERATIONS A visible presence at the Project site that may impact traffic or environmental resources .
CONSTRUCTION SAFETY TECHNICIAN The Agencys Authorized Representative of the Construction Section who provides guidance and technical assistance to Resident Engineers and Contractors on safety issues .
CONSTRUCTION SEASON The period from April th through December st inclusive .
CONSTRUCTION SERVICES ENGINEER The Authorized Representative of the Construction and Materials Bureau who provides expertise in matters of Specifications policy procedures and Contract finals .
CONSTRUCTION STRUCTURES ENGINEER The Agencys Authorized Representative of the Construction Section that provides guidance and technical assistance to Resident Engineers and Contractors on structural issues .
CONTRACT The written agreement between the Agency and the Contractor setting forth the obligations of the parties relative to the performance of the work .
The Contract includes the Contract agreement Contract Bonds Project permits Project Special Provisions Contract Plans General Special Provisions Standard Drawings Supplemental Specifications the Standard Specifications for Construction and any Supplemental Agreements or supporting documents that are required to complete the work in an acceptable manner .
CONTRACT BONDS The approved forms of security signed notarized and furnished by the Contractor and the Contractors Surety or Sureties guaranteeing complete performance of the Contract compliance with the Contract and the payment of all legal debts pertaining to the construction of the Project or work .
CONTRACT COMPLETION DATE The calendar date specified in the Contract and as adjusted by Change Order when applicable by which the Contractor shall achieve Substantial Completion .
CONTRACT DOCUMENTS See CONTRACT .
CONTRACT DURATION The number of Working Days or Calendar Days prescribed in the Contract to complete the work .
CONTRACT ITEM A specific unit of work for which a price is provided in the Contract .
CONTRACTOR The individual partnership firm corporation any acceptable combination thereof or a joint venture which is a party to the Contract with the Agency which is undertaking the performance of the work under the terms of the Contract and acting directly or through its agents or employees .
The term Contractor means the prime Contractor as differentiated from a Subcontractor .
All Contractors must be registered with the Vermont Secretary of State .
The Contractor will act in an independent capacity and not as officers or employees of the State .
CONTRACT PLANS The Contract drawings that show the location character and dimensions of the work including layouts profiles crosssections and other details .
CPM PROGRESS SCHEDULE A schedule that must depict work activities in a timebased logic diagram format showing the relationship with preceding and succeeding activities with the Critical Path clearly indicated .
CRITICAL PATH The Critical Path is the sequence of Project activities with the longest total duration which must be completed on time for the Project to be finished by the Contract Completion Date .
DETOUR A temporary route to carry traffic .
DIRECTOR OF CONSTRUCTION AND MATERIALS BUREAU The Authorized Representative of the Agency responsible for oversight of the Construction Materials Testing and Certification and Geotechnical Engineering Sections .
DIRECTOR OF HIGHWAY DIVISION The Authorized Representative of the Agency appointed by the Vermont Secretary of Transportation to administer the Highway Division .
DIRECTOR OF POLICY PLANNING AND INTERMODAL DEVELOPMENT DIVISION The Authorized Representative of the Agency appointed by the Vermont Secretary of Transportation to administer the Policy Planning and Intermodal Development Division .
DISTRICT TRANSPORTATION ADMINISTRATOR The Authorized Representative of the Agency for a maintenance district subdivision of the State who is responsible for maintenance of State transportation facilities .
DRAINAGE The system of pipes drainage ways ditches and structures by which surface or subsurface waters are collected and conducted away from the Project area or a transportation facility .
EARTH See SOIL EARTH .
EASEMENT A right acquired to use or control property outside of the established RightofWay limits for a designated purpose .
EMBANKMENT That portion of a filled area situated between the previously existing ground level and the subgrade roadbed .
ENCROACHMENT Use of highway or railroad RightofWay or Easement unlawfully andor without authority or permission .
ENGINEER See RESIDENT ENGINEER .
ENGLISH Other than when referring to the English language the U.S .
Customary Units of Measurement .
EQUIPMENT All machinery instruments tools vehicles and apparatuses together with the necessary supplies for upkeep and maintenance for the proper construction and acceptable completion of the work .
EXTRA WORK An item of work not provided for in the Contract as awarded but determined to be essential to the satisfactory completion of the Contract .
Extra Work shall be performed at agreed upon prices or on a Force Account basis as provided in the Contract .
EXTRA WORK ORDER A form used to provide for the performance of work or furnishing of materials involving Extra Work .
FEDERAL AVIATION ADMINISTRATION The agency within the U.S. Department of Transportation Washington D.C. with authority concerning airports and aviation .
FEDERAL HIGHWAY ADMINISTRATION The agency within the U.S. Department of Transportation Washington D.C. with authority concerning highways .
FEDERAL RAILROAD ADMINISTRATION The agency within the U.S. Department of Transportation Washington D.C. with authority concerning railroads .
FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION The agency within the U.S. Department of Transportation Washington D.C. with authority concerning public transit .
FINAL ESTIMATE A compilation of item quantities prepared upon completion of the Contract stating the whole amount of work done by the Contractor and the final amount to be paid under the Contract .
FINALS ENGINEER The Authorized Representative of the Construction and Materials Bureau responsible for handling all issues related to finalizing a Contract .
FORCE ACCOUNT Prescribed work paid for on the basis of actual costs including appropriate Extra Work as defined in Subsection .. FOULING The condition arising when the location of an individual or an item of equipment is in such proximity to a railroad track that the individual or equipment could be struck by a moving train or on track equipment and as defined by the Operating Railroad .
GAGE The distance between the heads of railroad rails measured at a point inches below the top of the railroad rail .
Standard gage measures feet inches .
GENERAL SPECIAL PROVISIONS Additions and revisions to the Standard Specifications for Construction approved pursuant to the Specification approval process .
GEOLOGIST The Agencys Authorized Representative who provides expertise pertaining to the field of geology such as bedrock and unbound aggregates as specified in the Contract Documents .
GEOTECHNICAL ENGINEERING MANAGER The Agencys Authorized Representative who provides guidance and technical assistance relating to soils and aggregates and geotechnical and geological engineering .
GRADE SEPARATION A crossing of two or more transportation facilities at different elevations .
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS AND WASTE COORDINATOR The Agencys Authorized Representative who provides guidance and technical assistance to Resident Engineers and Contractors on hazardous materials and waste issues .
HIGHWAY See ROADWAY .
HOLIDAYS The Contractor shall observe the following holidays New Years Day January st Martin Luther King Jr. Day Third Monday in January Presidents Day Third Monday in February Town Meeting Day First Tuesday in March Memorial Day Last Monday in May Independence Day July th Bennington Battle Day August th Labor Day First Monday in September Columbus Day Second Monday in October Veterans Day November th Thanksgiving Day Fourth Thursday in November Day After Thanksgiving Day After Thanksgiving Christmas Day December th If a holiday falls on a Sunday the following Monday shall be considered the holiday if a holiday falls on a Saturday the Friday immediately preceding shall be considered the holiday .
INSPECTOR An Authorized Representative of the Engineer assigned to make detailed inspections of Contract performance .
LABORATORY The Agencys Materials Section Central Laboratory or any other testing laboratory which may be designated by the Engineer .
LIQUIDATED DAMAGES The charge assessed to the Contractor pursuant to the Contract because the Contractor did not achieve Substantial Completion within the Contract time or by the Contract Completion Date .
Liquidated Damages are not a penalty but an assessment of damages that are impossible or difficult to determine with accuracy .
LOAD TICKET A ticket accompanying a load of material and indicating the gross weight of the load less the tare weight of the delivery vehicle and other information as specified andor as required by the Engineer .
MASS The words mass and weight are used interchangeably .
Mass must be converted to force before computing structural reactions shears moments or internal stresses .
MATERIALS Any substances specified for use in the construction of the Project and its appurtenances .
MATERIALS MANAGER The Authorized Representative of the Agency responsible for the acceptance testing and certification of materials incorporated in Contracts .
MATERIALS SECTION The section of the Agency of Transportation responsible for maintaining and administering the Agencys Quality Assurance Program Materials Acceptance Program and Independent Assurance Program .
Officially named the Materials Testing and Certification Section .
MEDIAN Unless different in context the portion of a divided highway separating opposing traveled ways .
NATIONAL TRANSPORTATION PRODUCT EVALUATION PROGRAM The national evaluation and auditing program for manufactured products .
NONPARTICIPATING Designates work in which the cost is not shared by the Federal andor State Government .
NOTICE TO PROCEED Written notice to the Contractor stipulating the date on which the Contractor can begin construction operations subject to other Contract requirements .
OPERATING RAILROAD The entity with operating rights on a public or privately owned railroad .
OTHER TRACK MATERIAL Other railroad track material includes but is not limited to spikes nuts bolts tie plates tie plugs railroad anchors joint bars and other ancillary components necessary for the construction of a track .
OTM does not include ties or ballast .
PAY ITEM See CONTRACT ITEM .
PAVEMENT STRUCTURE The combination of subbase base course and wearing course placed on a subgrade to support the traffic load and distribute it to the roadbed .
PLANS See CONTRACT PLANS .
PLANT INSPECTOR An Authorized Representative of the Agency assigned to perform detailed inspections of methods and materials at plants including bituminous concrete and structural steel assembly plants .
PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER A qualified registered Professional Engineer licensed in the State of Vermont or eligible to practice engineering in the State of Vermont under the transient practice provisions of V.S.A .
Chapter .
PROFILE GRADE The trace of a vertical plane intersecting the top surface of the proposed wearing surface usually along the longitudinal centerline .
Depending on the context profile grade means either the elevation at one or more points or the gradient of such trace .
PROGRAM MANAGER The Agencys Authorized Representative responsible for the design aspects of Projects .
PROJECT The specific portions of the transportation facility infrastructure on which work is to be performed under one or more Contracts .
PROJECT MANAGER The Authorized Representative of the Chief Engineer or the Director of Policy Planning and Intermodal Development Division responsible for the development of Project design and management of Project costs .
PROJECT SPECIAL PROVISIONS Additions and revisions to the Standard Specifications for Construction Supplemental Specifications and General Special Provisions applicable to the Contract as well as other provisions specific to the Contract .
Also referred to as Special Provisions .
PUNCH LIST List of items which are minor adjustments repairs or corrections to work that shall be completed prior to the acceptance of the Project .
QUALITY ASSURANCE PROGRAM The program that prescribes the practices for acceptance of material in construction and maintenance .
RAILBANKING A railbanked line is an inactive line from which the tracks may or may not have been removed which has been approved for railbanking and interim trail use by the Surface Transportation Board under the Federal Trails Act U.S.C .
d or by the Vermont Secretary of Transportation under Vermonts own railbanking statute V.S.A. . RAILROAD The area within the limits of construction that is used for the movement of trains and that may include track ties ballast subbase and OTM .
REGIONAL CONSTRUCTION ENGINEER The Authorized Representative of the Agency for a construction regional subdivision of the State who is responsible for administering and overseeing construction Contracts .
RESIDENT ENGINEER The Authorized Representative of the Agency and the Chief Engineer who is responsible for engineering supervision of one or more specific Projects .
REVIEWED FOR CONFORMANCE A review of a Working Drawing for compliance with the requirements of a Specification .
RIGHTOFWAY The land or property or interests therein devoted to transportation purposes .
ROADBED See SUBGRADE .
ROADSIDE The area adjoining the outer edge of the traveled way or shoulder of a highway .
Extensive median areas between the roadways of a divided highway may also be considered Roadside .
ROADWAY The area within the limits of construction that is used for the movement of vehicular and pedestrian traffic and that may include the traveled way shoulder and sidewalk .
SAFETY OFFICER a Contractors An individual designated by the Contractor charged to assure that all construction operations under the Contract are performed safely and according to all VOSHA regulations .
b Agencys The Agencys authorized Occupational Safety Coordinator .
SECRETARY The appointed head of the Agency of Transportation of the State of Vermont .
SHOULDER The portion of the roadway contiguous with the traveled way for accommodation of stopped vehicles for emergency use and for lateral support of base and surface courses .
SIDEWALK That portion of the roadway primarily constructed for the use of pedestrians .
SLOPES The inclined areas extending from the shoulders to the previously existing surface of the ground .
SOIL EARTH Sediments or other unconsolidated accumulations of solid particles produced by the chemical and physical disintegration of rocks and which may or may not contain organic matter .
SPECIALTY ITEM Work that requires highly specialized knowledge ability or equipment not ordinarily available in contracting organizations qualified to bid on the Contract as a whole in general Specialty Items are limited to minor components of the overall Contract .
SPECIFICATIONS The compilation of provisions and requirements for the performance of prescribed work including the Standard Specifications for Construction Supplemental Specifications General Special Provisions Project Special Provisions and other requirements included in the Contract .
STAGING AREA Any areas that the Contractor uses for storage of materials and equipment or for general use and access for Contract operations .
STANDARD DRAWINGS Agency approved drawings used for typical repetitive use showing details to be used where appropriate .
STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS or STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS FOR CONSTRUCTION This book entitled the Standard Specifications for Construction as approved for general application and repetitive use in Agency construction Contracts .
STATE Unless different in context the State of Vermont acting through its Agency of Transportation and Authorized Representatives .
STRUCTURAL CONCRETE ENGINEER The Agencys Authorized Representative of the Materials Testing and Certification Section responsible for the evaluation and approval of various aspects of cast inplace Portland cement concrete and precast concrete as detailed in these Specifications .
Also responsible for supervision of Plant Inspectors utilized at concrete plants and for the evaluation of Portland cement concrete mix designs .
STRUCTURAL EMBANKMENT AREA The crosssectional area of an embankment situated between the lines projected downward from the outer edges of the subgrade on a . vertical to horizontal or VH slope to the intersection with the previously existing ground .
STRUCTURAL STEEL FABRICATION ENGINEER The Agencys Authorized Representative of the Structures Engineering Section responsible for the supervision of Inspectors utilized for steel fabrication and for the evaluation of field welding procedures and qualifications .
STRUCTURES ENGINEER The Agencys Authorized Representative responsible for structural engineering supervision of the Project .
Sometimes referred to as the Structures Program Manager .
SUBBASE The layer or layers of specified or selected material of designated thickness placed to support a base andor surface course .
SUBCONTRACTOR An individual or legal entity to whom or which the Contractor sublets part of the work .
SUBGRADE The graded surface prepared as a foundation for the pavement structure and shoulders of a transportation facility .
SUBSTANTIAL COMPLETION DATE The date when in the opinion of the Engineer all Contract Items with the exception of the Contractors demobilization and punch list type items have been completed .
SUBSTRUCTURE All of that part of a structure below the bearings of simple and continuous spans skewbacks of arches and tops of footings of rigid frames included are backwalls wingwalls and wing protection railings .
SUPERINTENDENT The Contractors Authorized Representative in responsible charge of the work .
SUPERSTRUCTURE All that part of a structure supported by the substructure except approach slabs .
SUPPLEMENTAL AGREEMENT See CHANGE ORDER .
SUPPLEMENTAL SPECIFICATIONS Specifications that have yet to be incorporated into the current Standard Specifications for Construction book .
SURETY The individual partnership firm or corporation or any acceptable combination thereof other than the Contractor executing the bond or bonds furnished by the Contractor .
Surety companies must be authorized to do business in the State of Vermont See V.S.A . .
SURFACE COURSE See WEARING COURSE .
TRAVELED WAY The portion of the roadway for the movement of vehicles exclusive of shoulders sidewalks and auxiliary lanes .
UNIT PRICE The Contract price for one unit of work as defined by the Contract .
UTILITY The privately publicly or cooperatively owned lines facilities and systems for producing transmitting or distributing communications power electricity light heat gas oil crude products water steam waste stormwater not connected with highway drainage and other similar commodities including publicly owned fire and police signal systems and street lighting systems which directly or indirectly serve the public or any part thereof .
The term Utility shall also mean the Utility company inclusive of any wholly owned or controlled subsidiary .
WEARING COURSE The uppermost component of a pavement structure .
WASTE AREA Any area where excess material or materials unsuitable for construction are disposed .
WEIGHT See MASS .
WEIGHTS AND MEASURES The Division of Weights and Measures of the Vermont Agency of Agriculture Food and Markets .
WORK The furnishing of all labor materials equipment and incidentals necessary or convenient to the successful completion of the Project and carrying out of the duties and obligations imposed by the Contract .
WORKING DAY Weekdays during the Construction Season during which construction operations may proceed .
If the Contractor works on Saturdays Sundays holidays or during the Seasonal Closure Period those days will be considered Working Days .
WORKING DRAWINGS Supplemental design sheets or similar data which the Contractor is required to submit to the Agency as stated in Subsection ..
WRITTEN ORDER A statement in writing from the Resident Engineer to the Contractor that a Authorizes or directs work to be done that is not part of the Contract including method of payment .
b Informs the Contractor of work that is not being accomplished according to the Plans and these Specifications and directs corrective action .
c Documents quantities to be paid for designated Contract Items .
d Directs that safety environmental or other requirements or measures be followed .
e Directs that certain work or all work be stopped or discontinued .
f Brings to the Contractors attention any other information or concerns that the Engineer may wish to emphasize . .
INTENTION OF TERMS .
a ByTo the Engineer .
In order to avoid cumbersome and confusing repetition of expressions in these Specifications whenever anything is or is to be done if as when or where contemplated required determined directed specified authorized ordered given designated indicated considered necessary deemed necessary permitted reserved suspended established approval approved disapproved acceptable unacceptable suitable accepted satisfactory unsatisfactory sufficient insufficient rejected or condemned it shall be read and understood as if the expression were followed by the words by the Engineer or to the Engineer .
b As OrderedDirected by the Engineer .
When the phrases as ordered by the Engineer as directed by the Engineer or similar phrases are used in the Contract they shall be understood to provide the Engineer latitude to meet field conditions but in no case shall these phrases be construed to permit changing the intent of the Contract Documents .
c Furnish and Provide .
Furnish provide and words of similar meaning when used in relation to the Contractor shall mean at the Contractors expense unless otherwise specifically provided in a Contract Item .
d Headings and Captions of Sections Subsections and Paragraphs .
All headings and captions are inserted for convenience and identification only and are in no way intended to define limit or expand the scope and intent of the Contract .
e Approval ofOrdered byConsent of Engineer .
As they appear in these Specifications phrases like approval of the Engineer as ordered by the Engineer with the consent of the Engineer and any similar phrase indicating the acceptance or direction by the Engineer shall not supersede any requirement of the Contract that the Contractor meet all Contractual obligations including but not limited to compliance with permit conditions and applicable laws rules regulations ordinances and bylaws .
f ConstructionInterpretation of Contract Documents .
The Contract and its provisions shall not be construed or interpreted for or against the Agency because the Agency drafted or caused its representatives to draft its provisions .
SECTION BIDDER REQUIREMENTS AND CONDITIONS .
INTERPRETATION OF QUANTITIES IN BID PROPOSAL .
The estimates of quantities of work to be performed andor materials to be furnished as shown on the proposal are approximate and are provided only as a basis of calculation upon which the award of the Contract is to be made .
Except as otherwise provided the Agency disclaims responsibility and shall not be held responsible for the estimates of quantities whether they be less than equal to or greater than the quantities used in the actual performance of the work .
The Contractor shall not plead misunderstanding or deception because of the estimates of quantities or of the character location or other conditions pertaining to the estimates of quantities .
The Agency in its sole discretion reserves the right to increase or decrease any or all of the estimated quantities of work or to omit any of them as deemed necessary . .
EXAMINATION OF PLANS SPECIFICATIONS PROPOSAL FORMS SITE OF WORK AND SUBSURFACE INFORMATION .
a General .
Each and every bidder shall examine carefully the site of the work contemplated and the relevant Plans Specifications and proposal forms .
It is the responsibility of each and every bidder to investigate and become aware of The conditions to be encountered The character quality and quantities of the work to be performed The materials to be furnished and The requirements of the Plans Specifications proposal and all other proposal documents .
b Subsurface Investigations .
To assist in the design for a Project the Agency normally investigates subsoils foundation conditions and potential sources of material for character quality andor quantity by various means including borings test pits samples tests and classifications .
Information concerning any investigations normally appears on the Plans or in the proposal .
Disclaimer .
Boring logs and other subsurface information on the Plans in the proposal or otherwise provided to bidders were obtained with reasonable care and recorded in good faith by the Agency .
This subsurface information has been collected for the use of the Agency only to assist the Agency in developing a design suitable for the subsurface conditions in the area of the foundation for the structure andor for preparation of the Engineers estimate .
This subsurface information is made available to prospective bidders as a public document relating to a Project .
Such information is not intended to provide prospective bidders with a subsurface analysis for purposes of bid preparation .
It is up to the prospective bidder to conduct whatever subsurface investigation may inform its bid preparation .
The Agency disclaims any liability for Claims based upon a prospective bidders reliance on the subsurface information provided by the Agency unless following Contract award the Contractor can establish by clear and convincing evidence that the subsurface information provided by the Agency was inadequate to support the structure as designed .
No Responsibility or Warranty by the Agency .
Soil classifications have been made from laboratory tests of soil samples extracted andor collected .
Rock and soil descriptions engineering properties or classifications are from visual inspection and tests of rock cores andor soil samples .
Observed water levels andor water conditions indicated are as recorded at the time of exploration and may vary considerably with time according to the prevailing rainfall and other factors .
The information provided may not represent existing conditions .
The Agency is not responsible for the information .
The Agency does not warrant in any way the completeness or accuracy of the information .
Disclosure of the information is not a substitute for personal investigations interpretations andor judgments by each prospective bidder .
It is the responsibility of each prospective bidder andor Subcontractor to satisfy itself through its own independent investigations concerning the conditions and materials to be encountered .
c Contractors Obligation to Convey Information .
It is the Contractors responsibility to convey any and all information relative to Contract requirements to any proposed suppliers fabricators or Subcontractors . .
FAMILIARITY WITH LAWS ORDINANCES AND REGULATIONS .
a General .
By submitting a bid an entity certifies that it is familiar with all Federal State and local laws ordinances and regulations which affect in any way the materials equipment haul roads used in or upon the work the conduct of the work and the persons engaged or employed in performance of the work to be performed pursuant to a Contract .
b Duty to Report .
Inconsistency or Conflict with Federal State or Local Law Ordinance or Regulation .
By submitting a bid an entity certifies that it shall immediately report in writing to the Chief of Contract Administration any provision in the Plans proposal Specifications or proposal that the bidderContractor believes is in conflict with or inconsistent with any Federal State or local law ordinance or regulation .
Differing Site Conditions .
By submitting a request for a proposal Form CA a prospective bidder certifies that if during its investigation of the work in the process of preparing its bid it discovers or encounters subsurface or latent physical conditions at a Project site differing materially from those indicated in the proposal or unknown physical conditions of an unusual nature differing materially from those ordinarily encountered and generally recognized as inherent in the work provided for in the proposal it shall notify in writing the Chief of Contract Administration of the specific differing conditions immediately upon discovering or encountering the differing site conditions .
Failure to Notify .
A prospective bidder further certifies that if it fails to notify the Chief of Contract Administration of any differing site conditions as described above it shall waive any and all rights that it might have to additional compensation from the Agency for additional work as a result of the differing site conditions and that it shall not bring a Claim for additional compensation because of the differing site conditions .
c No Claim or Defense of Ignorance or Misunderstanding .
By submitting a Request for Contract Specific Prequalification Form CA a bidder certifies that no Claim or defense of ignorance or misunderstanding concerning Federal State or local laws ordinances or regulations will be employed by a bidder or considered by the Agency in Claims litigation alternative dispute resolution procedures or other matters concerning the proposal for which the bid is submitted . .
ERRORS ANDOR INCONSISTENCIES IN CONTRACT DOCUMENTS .
a Duty to Report .
By submitting a Request for Proposal Form CA a bidder certifies that it shall report in writing to the Chief of Contract Administration any error or inconsistency discovered in the Plans proposal Specifications or proposal documents immediately upon discovery of the error or inconsistency .
b Errors and Inconsistencies Not Used Against the State .
By submitting a Request for Proposal Form CA a bidder certifies that it shall assert no Claim cause of action litigation or defense against the State unless notice was provided to the State in writing of any error or inconsistency found in the Plans proposal Specifications or proposal documents immediately upon discovery of such error or inconsistency .
Failure to provide such notice to the Agencys Chief of Contract Administration in writing within hours of such discovery constitutes reasonable grounds for disallowance andor waiver of any Claim or demand by the prospective bidder based in whole or in part directly on the existence of such error or omission .
SECTION TAXES AND INSURANCE .
CONSTRUCTION EQUIPMENT TAX .
The Contractor shall pay all construction equipment tax assessed under V.S.A .
for machinery and other personal estate . .
WITHHOLDING OF TAXES .
The Contractor shall comply with the requirements of V.S.A .
Chapter Subchapter relating to the withholding of taxes from employees and all taxes withheld pursuant to Subchapter shall be reported and paid to the Commissioner of the Vermont Department of Taxes. . STATE SALES TAX .
Contractors are not required to pay the Vermont sales tax for materials incorporated into a State funded Project completed on property owned or held in trust for the benefit of any governmental body or agency and used exclusively for public purposes or owned or held in trust for the benefit of any organization holding a valid Exemption Certificate see Vermont Sales and Use Tax Regulations No .
and and V.S.A .
and used exclusively in the conduct of its business or purpose or for materials incorporated in a rail line in connection with the construction maintenance repair improvement or reconstruction of the rail line see V.S.A . .
Therefore no sales tax shall be included in the cost of these materials .
Contractors are responsible for maintaining records sufficient to justify eligibility for sales tax exemption .
Forms for maintaining these records are available from the Vermont Department of Taxes. . INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS .
Insurance obtained by the Contractor to cover the belowlisted requirements shall be procured from an insurance company registered and licensed to do business in the State of Vermont .
Before the Contract is signed and becomes effective the Contractor shall file with the Agency a certificate of insurance executed by an insurance company or its licensed agents on a form satisfactory to the Agency stating that with respect to the Contract awarded the Contractor carries insurance in accordance with the following requirements .
Renewal certificates for keeping the required insurance in force for the duration of the Contract shall also be filed as specified above .
No warranty is made that the coverages and limits listed herein are adequate to cover and protect the interests of the Contractor and any Subcontractor for the Contractors and any Subcontractors operations .
These are solely minimums that have been established to protect the interests of the State .
a Workers Compensation Insurance .
With respect to all operations performed the Contractor shall carry Workers Compensation Insurance in accordance with the laws of the State of Vermont V.S.A .
Chapter .
The Contractor shall also ensure that all Subcontractors carry Workers Compensation Insurance in accordance with V.S.A .
Chapter for all work performed by them .
b Commercial General Liability Insurance .
With respect to all operations performed by the Contractor and Subcontractors the Contractor shall carry Commercial General Liability Insurance on an occurrence form providing all major divisions of coverage including but not limited to Premises Operations Independent Contractors Protective Products and Completed Operations Personal Injury Liability Contractual Liability applying to the Contractors obligations under Subsection .
Broad Form Property Damage Collapse and Underground CU Coverage Explosion X Coverage unless this requirement is waived in writing by the Agency of Transportation Limits of Coverage shall be not less than Each Occurrence General Aggregate applying in total to this Project only ProductsCompleted Operations c Automobile Liability Insurance .
The Contractor shall carry Automobile Liability Insurance covering all motor vehicles including owned hired borrowed and nonowned vehicles used in connection with the Project .
Limits of Coverage shall be not less than a. Bodily Injury Each Person Each Occurrence b .
Property Damage Each Occurrence Or a .
Combined Single Limit Each Occurrence d Railroad Protective Liability Insurance .
When the Contract involves work on over or under the RightofWay of any railroad the Contractor shall carry with respect to operations performed by the Contractor andor by the Contractors Subcontractors Railroad Protective Liability Insurance in a form and amount as required by the Operating Railroad and as specified in C.F.R .
..
If not available from insurance companies registered and licensed to do business in the State of Vermont this insurance may be procured from Eligible Surplus Lines Companies approved by the Vermont Department of Financial Regulation DFR .
The Contractor shall file the original Railroad Protective Liability Policy and one duplicate policy with the Agency .
The Agency will transmit the original Railroad Protective Liability Policy to the Operating Railroad concerned .
The Contractor shall cooperate with and allow the Operating Railroad or its agents free and full access to the Project during construction along with all materials and equipment necessary in order that their authorized employees or agents may do any and all railroad work inspection flagging and watching .
The Contractor shall defend indemnify and save harmless the Operating Railroad and all of its officers employees and agents against any Claim or liability arising from or based on any delay to the Contractor as a result of railroad construction or maintenance whether by the Operating Railroad its employees or agents .
e General Insurance Conditions .
The insurance specified under Subsection .a Subsection .b and Subsection .c shall be maintained in force until acceptance of the Project by the Agency .
Under Subsection .d the Liability Protective Policy shall remain in force until all work required to be performed on Railroad property is completed to the satisfaction of the Operating Railroad and of the Authorized Representative of the Agency .
The contractual liability insurance requirements detailed in the Contract Documents including Subsection .
are to indemnify defend and hold harmless the municipalityies the State the Agency and Operating Railroads as applicable and their officers agents representatives and employees with respect to any and all Claims causes of actions losses expenses or damages that arise out of relate to or are in any manner connected with the Contractors work or the supervision of the Contractors work on the Project .
Each policy except the Workers Compensation Policy shall name the municipalityies the State the Agency and Operating Railroads as additional insureds for actions losses expenses or damages that arise out of relate to or are in any manner connected with the Contractors work or the supervision of the Contractors work on the Project .
Umbrella Excess Liability Policies may be used in conjunction with primary policies to comply with any of the limit requirements specified above .
Claimsmade coverage forms are not acceptable without the prior written consent of the Agency .
The Contractor shall investigate and the Contractor andor insurance company shall either adjust or defend all Claims against the insured for damages covered even if groundless .
Each policy furnished shall contain a rider or noncancellation clause reading in substance as follows Anything herein to the contrary notwithstanding no cancellation termination or alteration of this policy by the company or the assured shall become effective unless and until notice of cancellation termination or alteration has been given by registered mail to the Chief Engineer of the Vermont Agency of Transportation National Life Drive Montpelier Vermont at least Calendar Days before the effective cancellation termination or alteration date unless all work required to be performed under the terms of the Contract is satisfactorily completed as evidenced by the formal final acceptance of the Project by the Agency .
There shall be no directed compensation allowed the Contractor on account of any premium or other charge necessary to take out and keep in effect such insurance or bond the cost thereof shall be considered included in the general cost of the work .
f Contract Insurance Requirements .
In cases that a discrepancy between the stated insurance requirements of Bulletin .
Attachment C Standard State Provisions for Contracts and Grants and this Section occurs the higher limit shall govern .
SECTION SCOPE OF WORK .
INTENT OF CONTRACT .
The intent of the Contract is to provide for the construction and completion in every detail of the work described .
The Contractor shall furnish all labor materials equipment tools transportation and supplies required to complete the work in accordance with the Contract Documents. . ALTERATION OF PLANS OR CHARACTER OF WORK .
To suit conditions disclosed as the work progresses the Engineer may without notice to the Sureties on the Contractors bonds make alterations in the design in type of materials in the quantities or character of the work or materials required in the crosssections in dimensions of structures in length of Project in locations and any other ways deemed appropriate .
Alterations will not constitute a change in other parts of the Contract or a waiver of any condition of the Contract and shall not invalidate any of the provisions of the Contract Documents .
Payment for work occasioned by changes or alterations will be made according to Subsection .
and Subsection ..
If the altered or added work is of sufficient magnitude to require additional time in which to complete the Project a time adjustment will be made pursuant to Subsection .. .
EXTRA WORK .
The Contractor shall perform extra or unforeseen work for which there is no quantity and price included in the Contract according to the Contract or as directed by the Engineer whenever it is deemed necessary or desirable by the Engineer in order to complete the work as contemplated payment will be made pursuant to Subsection .. .A MAINTENANCE OF VEHICULAR TRAFFIC .
a All Facilities Safe and Passable .
All facilities to be used by the traveling public including temporary highways bridges sidewalks and approaches as necessary to accommodate the vehicular or pedestrian traffic diverted from the facility undergoing improvements shall be provided and maintained in a safe and passable condition .
All traffic control plans and devices shall conform to the latest edition of the MUTCD .
b Service Shall Be Maintained .
During working hours the Contractor shall maintain at a minimum alternating oneway traffic unless otherwise shown on the Plans or directed by the Engineer .
Working hours will be limited to the period between sunrise and sunset for daytime operations and the approved scheduled night shift for night work .
Wherever oneway traffic is being maintained by the Contractor the traveling public shall not be delayed more than minutes per operation or not more than minutes cumulatively for the Project .
However twoway traffic shall be re established during all holiday periods temporary shutdowns and any other periods designated by the Engineer .
c Detours and Temporary Bridges .
Detours necessary for public travel which are not contiguous to the work will be designated by the Agency unless otherwise provided .
When contiguous to the work detours shall be constructed and maintained by the Contractor and no compensation will be allowed to the Contractor except as provided in the Contract .
If the Contractor elects to construct a temporary bridge on a detour contiguous to the work over which traffic is to be maintained while a culvert or bridge is being constructed the temporary bridge shall be constructed according to Section .
The expense of the construction maintenance and removal of a temporary bridge and its approaches and all incidental work pertaining thereto shall not be paid directly but shall be incidental to all other Contract Items .
The Contractor shall be responsible to the public for the structural adequacy and safety of these structures and approaches .
The Contractor shall provide erect and maintain all necessary barricades lights signs signals other traffic control devices and flaggers required in accordance with the applicable Subsections .
d Winter Maintenance on Active Projects .
The highway condition on active Projects shall be maintained such that snowplowing sanding and salting may occur without unduly burdening the properly designated entity from performing such tasks .
If the condition of the highway temporary highway sidewalks detours or bridges are such that ordinary winter maintenance activities can not occur the Contractor shall assume the responsibility to perform winter maintenance .
The costs for snowplowing sanding and salting shall be considered incidental to the appropriate Traffic Control Items .
e Winter Maintenance on Closed Projects .
When a Project is closed down for the winter season the Contractor shall leave the Project in a satisfactory condition for the traveling public and in a condition suitable for normal and satisfactory winter maintenance .
The full depth of subbase shall be placed over portions of the road under construction and used by the traveling public unless otherwise shown on the Plans or directed by the Engineer .
During the period that the Project is officially closed down for the winter season the State a political subdivision thereof or other properly designated entity will assume responsibility for snowplowing salting and sanding .
This shall not relieve the Contractor of any other responsibilities regarding public convenience and safety as specified in this Section from the liabilities as specified in Section or as specified elsewhere in the Contract .
If unsatisfactory travel conditions or ruts develop in the traveled way or other construction defects or conditions dangerous to the traveling public develop whether arising from the execution or nonexecution of the work the Contractor may be directed to return to the construction work site and carry out necessary measures to satisfactorily remedy the situation .
The cost for said work will be included as part of the cost of the items in the Contract with no additional payment .
If the Contractor fails to carry out the measures to satisfactorily remedy the situation immediately the Engineer may cause the work to be performed and deduct the cost from any monies due or to become due to the Contractor .
If the closing of a Project is due to the Contractors inability to complete the Contract before the Contract Completion Date the Contractor shall bear all costs associated with making the Project acceptable to the Engineer for winter shut down .
f Closed Projects Temporary Traffic Control Measures .
When a Project is closed down for the winter season or for any other reason the Contractor shall erect and maintain temporary guardrail guide posts barricades warning signs and other traffic control devices throughout the length of the Project as shown on the traffic control plan or as directed by the Engineer .
These temporary installations shall conform to requirements for the permanent items except that approved used material may be substituted they shall be removed when the Engineer indicates they are no longer required .
The installation maintenance and removal of temporary guardrail guide posts barricades warning signs and other traffic control devices will not be paid for directly but will be incidental to all other items in the Contract .
g Closed Projects Guardrail .
When the Contract specifies that the base course or the intermediate course of pavement be placed prior to suspension of work for the winter season permanent rather than temporary guardrail shall be installed in accordance with the Contract .
No payments will be made for adjustments to these permanent installations in order to accomplish work when construction resumes in the spring .
h Suspension of Work Contractor Responsibility .
If regardless of the cause construction is suspended on the Project before the completion acceptance and termination of the Contractors responsibility as defined under Subsection .
the Contractor shall take precautions against injury or damage to the work and shall repair andor replace any damaged work as specified under Subsection .. i Traffic Control Devices .
All traffic control devices shall be presented to the Engineer for approval prior to placement on the Project .
At no time will traffic control devices that do not have the specified reflectivity sheeting or are dirty damaged or unacceptable to the Engineer be placed or remain on the Project .
All traffic control devices including but not limited to signs pavement markings pavement marking removals temporary traffic barrier barricades reflectorized plastic drums cones flashing arrow boards and detours shall conform to the latest edition of the MUTCD shall be installed to the satisfaction of the Engineer and shall be functioning prior to the beginning of field work .
j Reflectorized Sheeting Cleaning Costs .
All reflectorized sheeting on the Project shall be cleaned on a biweekly basis unless more frequent cleaning is directed by the Engineer .
The cost of this work will not be paid for directly but will be incidental to all other Contract Items .
k Traffic Control Devices During Construction Costs .
Costs involved in covering uncovering and otherwise adjusting the signing and traffic control devices during construction to conform to the changing requirements of traffic flow around and through various operations will not be paid for directly but will be incidental to all other Contract Items .
l Suspension of Work Treatment of Signing Costs .
Costs involved in covering or removing signs at the beginning of a suspension of work including winter shutdown and in uncovering or re installing the signs at the end of a suspension of work will not be paid for directly but will be incidental to all other Contract Items .
Such signing adjustments shall be performed as directed by the Engineer .
.B MAINTENANCE AND PROTECTION OF RAIL TRAFFIC AND INFRASTRUCTURE .
a General .
Operating Railroad traffic shall be maintained at all times with safety and continuity and the Contractor shall be responsible for conducting all operations on over or under the railroad RightofWay fully within the rules regulations and requirements of the Agency and the Operating Railroad .
The Contractor shall perform its work in such a manner that the tracks traffic and appurtenances of the Operating Railroad shall be safeguarded .
The Contractor shall comply with the requirements of the Operating Railroad relative to the Contractors work on or adjacent to the railroad and shall make all efforts to prevent fouling of the tracks .
The Contractor must anticipate unscheduled trains .
b Railroad Clearances and Fouling .
In the construction of any staging falsework or forms the Contractor shall not foul the tracks and shall coordinate with the Engineer .
c Contractor Equipment and Materials .
Equipment of the Contractor to be adjacent to the tracks shall be in firstclass condition so as to fully prevent any failure that would cause delay in the operation of trains or damage to railroad facilities .
The Contractor shall not place or put into operation equipment adjacent to a track without first obtaining permission of the Operating Railroad .
Materials and equipment belonging to the Contractor shall not be stored adjacent to tracks without first obtaining permission from the Operating Railroad .
The Agency andor Operating Railroad will not be liable for damage to such materials and equipment from any cause .
The Contractor shall keep the tracks and the site adjacent to the tracks clear of all refuse and debris and shall leave the property in the condition existing before the start of construction operations .
d Railroad Safety Personnel .
The Contractor shall consult with the Operating Railroad to determine the type of protection required to ensure the safety and continuity of Operating Railroad traffic incidental to the particular methods of operation and equipment to be used in the work .
Any Construction Inspectors track foremen or track watchmen signalmen or other employees deemed necessary for protective services by the Operating Railroad or its Authorized Representative to ensure the safety of trains contingent upon the Contractors operations shall be obtained from the Operating Railroad by the Contractor .
The providing of such watchmen and other precautionary measures shall not relieve the Contractor from liability for payment of damages caused by the Contractors operations .
Refer to Subsection .b and Section for information on railroad flaggers .
e Damage to Railroad .
During the execution of the Contract if the trains tracks or other facilities of the Operating Railroad are endangered the Contractor shall immediately restore safe conditions .
If the Contractor fails to make conditions safe the Agency may take whatever steps necessary to restore safe conditions .
All costs of restoring safe conditions or any damage to trains tracks or other facilities due to the Contractors operations shall be the sole responsibility of the Contractor .
f Fouling of Ballast .
In performing construction operations the Contractor shall prevent the fouling of railroad track ballast with earth mud silt or other foreign matter .
To prevent fouling of the ballast it may be necessary for the Contractor to construct temporary erosion control measures or sheeting or provide other precautionary measures .
The Contractor shall take preventive measures to protect the entire ballast section to the satisfaction of the Engineer .
The protective measure shall remain in place until there is no further possibility of fouling the ballast and then shall be removed by the Contractor .
In the event that the railroad track ballast does become fouled after the protective measures are taken the Agency shall remove and replace the fouled ballast with clean ballast .
All costs of restoring the ballast to the satisfaction of the Engineer shall be the sole responsibility of the Contractor .
g Existing Signage .
All existing signs markers and other informational indicators associated with the Agency or the Operating Railroad that are removed by the Contractor shall be preserved .
All signs shall be in place prior to the operation of any trains as directed by the Engineer .
All costs associated with installing signs prior to train operations to the satisfaction of the Engineer shall be the sole responsibility of the Contractor . .
REMOVAL AND DISPOSAL OF STRUCTURES AND OBSTRUCTIONS .
The Contractor shall remove any existing structure parts of structure or other obstructions which interfere in any way with the new work or which is shown on the Plans to be removed .
Unless otherwise provided all salvageable material being removed shall become the property of the Contractor and shall be disposed of andor recycled as authorized by the Engineer .
Salvage generated by Utility relocation shall remain the property of the applicable Utility. . USE OF MATERIALS FOUND IN THE PROJECT LIMITS AUTHORIZATION PAYMENT .
a General .
With the written approval of the Engineer the Contractor may use stone gravel sand or other materials found in the excavation for other work items for the Project provided the materials meet the requirements of the Contract .
The Contractor will be paid for the removal of such materials used for the Project at the proper Contract Unit Price for items of excavation .
The Contractor shall not excavate or remove any material that is not within the slope and grade lines of an excavation as shown on the Plans without written authorization from the Engineer .
If the Engineer allows overexcavation for the use of the Contractor the State will be compensated for the quantity of material removed and the replacement of material if necessary shall be done at no additional cost to the Agency and shall conform to the requirements of embankment construction as specified in the Contract .
The overexcavation if allowed by the Engineer shall only occur within the States RightofWay .
b Quantities .
Whenever any material except Granular Borrow is removed from excavation and used in the construction of other items in the Contract the total quantity measured for payment of these items shall be multiplied by .
and the resulting quantity deducted from the total quantity of the Contract Item Earth Borrow .
If the final quantity of Earth Borrow is zero no deductions will be made for material used for other items .
Whenever material meeting the requirements for Granular Borrow is taken from excavation on the Project and used for Contract Item Granular Borrow its removal and use shall be paid for by single payment under the appropriate excavation item in Section . .
FINAL CLEANUP FOLLOWING COMPLETION OF PROJECT .
a Cleanup of Project .
Upon completion of the work before acceptance and before final payment will be made the Contractor shall satisfactorily and completely clean and remove from the Right ofWay and grounds occupied by the Contractor in connection with the work all equipment falsework surplus and discarded materials rubbish temporary structures buildings tools lumber refuse and other unsightly material .
b Restoration of Property .
The Contractor shall restore in an acceptable manner satisfactory to the Engineer all property both public or private which has been damaged during the prosecution of the work replace or renew any fences damaged leave the waterways unobstructed and leave the work area in a neat and presentable condition throughout the entire length of the work .
c Drainage Structures and Ditches .
The removal and disposal of silt debris and other material from drainage structures and ditches deposited during construction under the Contract shall be accomplished prior to acceptance of the Project as ordered by the Engineer .
d Closure of Material Supply and Disposal Areas .
Material supply and disposal areas shall be closed in accordance with Subsection .. e Costs .
Costs involved with final cleanup following completion of the Project will either be paid for under specific Pay Items or be incidental to all other Contract Items . .
DIFFERING SITE CONDITIONS .
a During the progress of the work if subsurface or latent physical conditions are encountered at the site differing materially from those specified in the Contract or if unknown physical conditions of an unusual nature differing materially from those ordinarily encountered and generally recognized as inherent in the work provided for in the Contract are encountered at the site the party discovering such conditions shall promptly notify the other party in writing of the specific differing conditions before they are disturbed and before the affected work is performed .
b Upon written notification the Engineer will investigate to determine if the conditions materially differ and will cause an increase or decrease in the cost or time required for the performance of any work under the Contract .
The Contractor will be notified of the Engineers determination whether or not an adjustment of the Contract is warranted .
If an adjustment is warranted the Contract will be modified in writing accordingly .
Any adjustment made will exclude loss of anticipated profits .
c No Contract adjustment that results in a benefit to the Contractor will be allowed unless the Contractor has provided the required written notice .
d No Contract adjustment will be allowed under this clause for any effects caused on unchanged work .
SECTION CONTROL OF THE WORK .
AUTHORITY OF THE ENGINEER .
a General .
The Engineer shall decide all questions which arise concerning the quality and acceptability of materials furnished the manner of performance of the work the rate of progress of the work and compliance with the requirements of the Contract .
The Engineer shall decide all questions concerning interpretation of the Contract .
b Quantities Orders Disputes Rejection of Materials Work Suspension of Work .
The Engineer shall determine the amount and quantity of the work performed and materials furnished that are to be paid for under the Contract .
The Engineer shall have authority to enforce and make effective decisions and orders the Contractor fails to carry out promptly .
In case of any dispute arising between the Contractor and the Engineer as to materials furnished or the manner of performing the work the Engineer has the authority to reject the materials andor to suspend the work until the dispute is decided by the Chief Engineer .
The Engineer is not authorized to revoke alter enlarge relax or release any requirements of the Contract Documents .
The Engineer has authority to suspend the work or withhold payment of all estimates due the Contractor when necessary to secure proper compliance with the Contract .
c Performance of Work by Engineer Setoff .
If the Contractor fails to perform work ordered by the Engineer the Engineer may upon written notice proceed to perform the work as deemed necessary the cost of the work will be deducted from any monies due or which may become due the Contractor under the Contract .
d Advice by Engineer .
Advice given the Contractor by the Engineer shall not be construed as binding the Agency in any way or releasing the Contractor from any obligations under the Contract. . CHIEF ENGINEER TO BE REFEREE .
a General .
The Chief Engineer shall act as referee in all questions of dispute arising under the terms of the Contract .
If the Contractor is aggrieved by the decision of the Chief Engineer the Contractor may appeal the decision in writing to the Transportation Board via the Chief Engineer .
Included with the notice of appeal shall be a complete outline of the nature and extent of the question or questions appealed together with any supporting documentation .
b Limitation of Time to Appeal .
Notwithstanding any other provision of law case law regulation or the Contract all appeals shall be made within Calendar Days of the decision to which the Contractor is aggrieved and not thereafter. . PLANS AND WORKING DRAWINGS .
A complete description of the work requires the Contract Documents which are furnished to the Contractor by the Agency and Working Drawings which are submitted to the Agency by the Contractor or the Contractors suppliers .
The Contract Documents and Working Drawings will be provided as follows a Contract Documents .
The Agency will make available the Contract in electronic format .
The Contractor shall keep the Contract available on the Project at all times .
b Working Drawings .
General .
Certain items and work activities require Plans drawings procedures and other information to document the Contractors proposed actions to conform with Contract requirements .
Drawings and procedures shall be submitted sufficiently in advance of the anticipated work to allow for reviews comments corrections and if necessary resubmittal .
In the event that any condition requires a change to the any previously approved or conforming Working Drawings the Contractor is required to submit updated Drawings prior to performing the work .
When a Contract Item requires calculations to be submitted the calculations shall be included with the submittal of the Working Drawings .
Manufacturers engineering data for prefabricated materials including that for falsework and forms shall be submitted with each set of Working Drawings .
All submittals shall be transmitted electronically to the Vermont Agency of Transportation unless prior approval has been granted by the Engineer .
Submittals shall be flattened prior to transmitting so that information added to the submittal becomes an integral part of the document rather than separate information on top of the document .
The document shall have a clean appearance so that any comments or stamps placed as part of the submission can not be mistaken as review comments .
Resubmittals shall be free from previous review comments and have a clean appearance so that any comments or stamps placed can not be mistaken as a review comment .
Drawing and detail sheets shall be provided as an ISO standard Portable Document Format PDF file .
The PDF document properties shall be set up with an appropriate page size and engineering or architectural scale .
The page size and scale shall be of sufficient size to permit toscale plotting of the documents on paper for review use in construction and shall include the following a .
Project name and number b .
Route number and location information c. Prime Contractors name and address d. Fabricator or suppliers name and address e. Sheet title or identification of details shown f. The name of the detailer and the checker g. Date and version of the drawings h. Sheet number ______ of ______ Required Submittals .
Working Drawings submitted to detail work that has been designed and detailed in the Contract Plans shall be submitted to the Agency for Approval .
Fabrication Drawings are a type of Working Drawing that are submitted for Approval .
Working Drawings submitted to detail work that has not been designed in the Contract Plans shall be designed and detailed by a Professional Engineer and submitted to the Agency to be Reviewed for Conformance with the Contract .
These Working Drawings shall ensure that the Contractor or Contractors suppliers have correctly interpreted the intent of the Contract .
Construction Drawings and Design Drawings are types of Working Drawing that are submitted to be Reviewed for Conformance .
Exceptions to this guidance will be detailed by the Specification for the individual Pay Item .
No work shall begin on any item associated with a Working Drawings until all of the associated drawings have been Approved Approved as Noted marked as Conforming or Conforming with Comments by the Agency .
The Contractor or fabricator shall assume all risk for materials ordered or work performed prior to written notification by the Agency .
a. Submittals for Approval .
Approval of drawings andor procedures does not relieve the Contractor or fabricator of compliance with all Specifications and code requirements .
The Agency assumes no responsibility for errors andor omissions in the drawings and procedures .
Drawings and procedures identified Approved as Noted indicate that specific clarification or conditional changes have been identified and take precedence over submitted information .
Withholding of Approval by the reviewer for selected details or procedures shall not constitute a basis for delay of performance of a non related item of work that has Approval to proceed .
After Approval of the drawings andor procedures no changes shall be made without the written Approval of the Agency .
b. Submittals to be Reviewed for Conformance .
When the submittal is Reviewed for Conformance the Agency will review the submittal for compliance with the requirements of the Contract .
The Contractor shall submit the required drawings andor procedures in advance of the proposed work .
The Contractor is entirely responsible for the work associated with these submittals .
The Agency will not be responsible for errors in dimensions incorrect erection procedures or design requirements .
If the drawings andor procedures have misinterpreted the Contract Plans or Specifications the submittal will be returned as NonConforming .
The submittal shall not be marked as Conforming or Conforming with Comments until all of the required information has been received and reviewed .
After the drawings have been marked Conforming or Conforming with Comments no changes shall be made without the written approval of the Agency .
The Contractor or fabricator shall assume all risk for materials ordered or work performed prior to the changes being marked as Conforming by the Agency .
Categories of Working Drawings .
a .
Fabrication Drawings. . General .
Fabrication Drawings are required for work performed by or in conjunction with materials furnished by a fabricator or supplier .
They shall consist of complete details developed from information in the Contract and field measurements to define dimensions sizes procedures and materials necessary to complete fabrication and installation or erection of the work specified .
Once a complete submittal has been received for approval the reviewer shall be allowed Calendar Days for the initial review period and a Calendar Day review period for each subsequent resubmittal unless stated otherwise in the Pay Item requirements .
The Contractor is entirely responsible for the work associated with these submittals .
The Agency will not be responsible for errors in dimensions incorrect erection procedures design requirements or successful completion of the work . .
Ownership Delivery Procedures .
Fabrication Drawings shall be the property of the Agency .
Prior to processing the Final Estimate the Engineer shall verify that all asbuilts have been received by the Agency .
b .
Construction Drawings .
For an item or element of work that permits the Contractor optional details procedures and materials the Contractor shall prepare and submit to be Reviewed for Conformance detailed drawings and procedures of how the Contractor proposes to perform and control the work .
Construction Drawings and procedures shall be stamped and signed by a qualified licensed Professional Engineer registered in the State of Vermont .
The Professional Engineer is responsible for the design performance of the designed element and preparation of the Construction Drawings and procedures .
Once a complete submittal has been received the reviewer shall be allowed Calendar Days for the initial review period and Calendar Days for review of a submittal returned as NonConforming unless stated otherwise in the Pay Item requirements .
The Contractor is entirely responsible for the work associated with these submittals .
The Agency will not be responsible for errors in dimensions incorrect erection procedures design requirements or successful completion of the work .
c. Design Drawings .
For an item or element of work to be permanently incorporated in the Project which has not been designed and detailed in the Contract Plans the Contractor shall prepare and submit to be Reviewed for Conformance detailed designs procedures and drawings for the item or element of work .
Design Drawings and procedures shall be stamped and signed by a licensed Professional Engineer registered in the State of Vermont. . CONFORMITY WITH PLANS AND ALLOWABLE DEVIATIONS .
a General .
The work shall be performed in reasonably close conformity with the lines grades cross sections dimensions and material requirements including tolerances shown in the Contract .
Any deviation from the Contract as required will be determined by the Engineer and authorized in writing .
b Acceptance of NonConforming MaterialsWork Price Adjustment .
If the materials or the finished product in which the materials are used do not conform to the Contract requirements but reasonably acceptable work has been produced the Engineer will determine if the work will be accepted and remain in place .
If accepted the Engineer will document the basis of acceptance which may require a Contract modification and price adjustment .
c Rejection of NonConforming MaterialsWork Treatment of Rejected MaterialsWork .
If the materials or the finished product in which the materials are used do not conform to the Contract requirements and the Engineer determines that the product is unsatisfactory the Engineer will direct the work or materials be removed replaced or otherwise corrected by the Contractor at the Contractors expense . .
COORDINATION OF CONTRACT DOCUMENTS .
a General .
The Project Permits Project Special Provisions Contract Plans General Special Provisions Standard Drawings Supplemental Specifications Standard Specifications and all supplemental documents are essential parts of the Contract .
A requirement occurring in one is as binding as though occurring in all .
The Contract Documents are complementary and intended to describe and provide for a complete work .
In case of discrepancy precedence of the Contract Documents will be determined in the following order Contract Document Precedence .
a .
Project Permits .
In the event of a conflict between permit requirements the more protective or stringent shall take precedence as determined by the Engineer .
b .
Project Special Provisions c. Contract Plans .
Calculated dimensions .
Scaled dimensions d. General Special Provisions e. Standard Design Detail Sheets .
Calculated dimensions .
Scaled dimensions f. Standard Drawings .
Calculated dimensions .
Scaled dimensions g. Supplemental Specifications h. Standard Specifications i .
Any other Specifications adopted by reference b No Advantage from Errors or Omissions in Contract Documents .
Neither the Contractor nor the Agency shall take advantage or be afforded any benefit as the result of apparent errors or omissions in the Contract Documents .
If either party discovers errors or omissions it shall immediately notify the other .
c Corrections to Contract Documents .
The Engineer will make corrections and interpretations deemed necessary and appropriate to fulfill the intent of the Contract Documents .
When there is an apparent absence or mention of a detail or an apparent omission of a detailed description in the Contract Documents the detail or description shall be interpretedunderstooddetermined using the best general engineering and construction practice .
d Effect of Other SpecificationsStandards .
Other specifications e.g .
ASTM NDS CRSI ACI cited by reference shall become effective only if the work or material covered by them is not included in the Contract Documents .
Specifications so referenced shall be the latest revision in effect on the date of advertisement for bids .
Where any conflict shall arise between VTrans Standard Specifications Supplemental Specifications and Contract requirements the more stringent specification shall apply as determined by the Engineer. . COOPERATION BY CONTRACTOR .
The Contractor shall a Bid Documents .
Promptly provide copies of all bid documents upon request by the Engineer including but not limited to all information used to prepare the bid proposal .
Failure to provide such documents may result in the waiver of any right to bring a Claim for additional compensation under Subsection .. b Competent Contractor Superintendent .
Have on the Project at all times a competent and reliable Englishspeaking Superintendent authorized to receive orders and to act for the Contractor .
The Contractor shall make every effort to provide continuity in the position of Superintendent .
However the Agency reserves the right to refuse or terminate the assignment of any Superintendent on the Project this shall not be grounds for a Claim under Subsection .. c Competent Safety Officer .
Have available on the Project at all times during the prosecution of the work a competent and reliable Englishspeaking employee designated as the safety officer .
This person shall be authorized to receive orders and issue binding directions concerning safety to all persons associated with the Project who are employed by the Contractor Subcontractors or material suppliers .
This individual shall be well versed in all applicable OSHA regulations shall be capable of implementing a plan to conform to these regulations and shall have the authority to stop operations on the Project .
The Safety Officer shall maintain a complete copy of the safety plans for the Project which shall be available at all times during the prosecution of the work for inspection andor copying by the Engineer .
d Emergency Contacts .
Furnish to the Engineer a list of addresses and telephone numbers of the Contractors personnel who can be reached in an emergency .
The Contractor shall alert certain personnel to stand by and shall inform the Engineer of all arrangements therefore .
e Facilities Information Assistance Samples Control Points .
Provide all reasonable facilities and furnish the information assistance and samples required by the Engineer or Inspector to properly inspect and test materials and quality of work and cooperate in setting and preserving stakes benchmarks and other control points used in laying out the work. . COOPERATION WITH UTILITIES .
a General .
The Agency will notify all Utility companies pipeline owners and other known parties affected and endeavor to have all necessary adjustments of the public or private Utility fixtures pipelines and other appurtenances within or adjacent to the limits of construction made as soon as practical .
b Moving Utility Property Owners Expense .
Water lines gas lines wire lines service connections water and gas meter boxes water and gas valve boxes light poles cableways signals and all other Utility appurtenances within the limits of the proposed construction which are to be relocated or adjusted are to be moved by the owners at their expense unless otherwise provided in the Contract .
c Utility Interference No Claim for Delays .
The Contractor acknowledges and understands that at the time of bid submission it has considered all of the permanent and temporary Utility facilities or appurtenances in their present andor relocated positions as shown on the Plans and evident at the site .
Notwithstanding any other provision of law case law regulation or the Contract no additional compensation will be allowed for any delays inconvenience or damage sustained by the Contractor due to any interference from Utilities Utility companies Utility facilities appurtenances or the operation of moving them .
d Utility Relocation for Contractors Convenience .
Should the Contractor desire temporary changes of location of any Utility facilities or appurtenances for convenience in performing the work the Contractor shall satisfy the Agency that the proposed relocation does not interfere with its own or other Contractors operations or the requirements of the work and does not cause an obstruction or a hazard to traffic .
The Contractor shall be responsible for requesting such relocation work of a Utility andor other affected parties .
Such relocation work shall be made solely at the Contractors expense. . COOPERATION BETWEEN CONTRACTORS .
a Agency Right to Contract .
The Agency reserves the right to Contract for and perform other or additional work on or near the work covered by the Contract at any time .
b No Interference with Other Contractors .
When separate Contracts are let within the limits of a Project each Contractor shall conduct its own work so as not to interfere with or hinder the progress or completion of the work being performed by other Contractors .
Contractors working on the same Project shall cooperate with each other as specified or ordered by the Engineer .
c Liability Indemnification Defense .
Each Contractor involved shall assume all liability financial or otherwise in connection with its own Contract and shall defend indemnify protect and save harmless the Agency from any and all damages or Claims that may arise because of inconvenience delay or loss experienced by the Contractor because of the presence and operations of other Contractors working within the limits of the same Project. . CONSTRUCTION STAKES .
a Initial Layout .
Unless other methods of placing stakes are provided in the Contract the Engineer will be responsible for setting sufficient points to establish the initial alignment and elevation of the proposed work .
The Contractor shall check the proposed grades any mistakes or errors identified shall be brought immediately to the attention of the Engineer and adjustments will be made by the Engineer .
b Permanent Marking Layout .
Once the wearing course has been placed the Engineer will establish the layout for the permanent centerline traffic markings including passing zones breaks for town highways and side roads and any other items required for the centerline markings .
The Contractor shall be responsible for the layout of all noncenterline markings .
c Responsibility for Layout .
The Contractor shall be responsible for the preservation of all stakes and markings and shall replace any stakes or grades that are destroyed or disturbed .
No Claim shall be brought and no additional compensation will be paid on account of any alleged inaccuracies in the construction layout including any additional layout that the Engineer may perform that is not covered in this Subsection unless the Contractor notifies the Engineer of the inaccuracies in writing at least hours prior to commencement of the work .
d Qualified Personnel .
All other stakes templates and other materials either in addition to or in replacement of the original set which may be required for the construction operations shall be furnished set and properly referenced by qualified personnel employed by the Contractor .
e Contractor Layout .
The Contractor shall stake out the work and make known the immediate plan or procedure of the next work contemplated sufficiently in advance of construction to permit the Engineer to take the necessary measurements for the computation of quantities and to check the Contractors layout .
The Contractor shall lay out in a timely manner and maintain a sufficient number of grade stakes so the Engineer can monitor and regulate all portions of the Contract work .
f Cost .
The cost of this work shall be considered as incidental to the Project as a whole and shall be included in the Unit Price bid for the Contract Items involved. . AUTHORITY AND DUTIES OF RESIDENT ENGINEER ENGINEER .
As the direct representative of the Chief Engineer the Resident Engineer on a Project has immediate charge of the engineering details of the Project is responsible for the administration and satisfactory completion of the Projects has the authority to reject defective material to suspend any work that is being improperly performed and to withhold payment until defective work has been corrected .
The Resident Engineer also has the authority to suspend work or specific aspects of the work if necessary to address a concern for safety of the workers or traveling public or a serious environmental concern or violation .
Notwithstanding any other provision of law case law regulation or the Contract no additional compensation shall be provided for any work suspensions of this sort. . AUTHORITY AND DUTIES OF INSPECTORS .
Inspectors employed by the Agency are authorized to inspect all work done and materials furnished and to perform other duties as directed by the Engineer .
Inspections can extend to all or any part of the work and to the preparation fabrication or manufacture of the materials used .
An Inspector is not authorized to alter or waive the provisions of the Contract to issue instructions contrary to the Contract Documents or to act for the Contractor . .
INSPECTION OF WORK .
a General Contractor to Help Engineer .
The Engineer or designated representative shall be allowed access to all parts of the work at all times and shall be furnished by the Contractor all information and assistance necessary to make a complete and detailed inspection .
The Contractor shall furnish such help as the Engineer desires andor needs to ascertain whether or not the work is performed in accordance with the requirements and the intent of the Contract .
b Examination of Completed Work .
If before the acceptance of the work the Engineer requests the Contractor shall remove or uncover portions of the finished work as the Engineer may direct .
After the examination the Contractor shall restore the portion of the work to the standard required by the Contract .
If the work thus exposed or examined proves acceptable the expenses of uncovering or removing and replacing the parts removed shall be paid for as Extra Work as defined in Subsection .
but if the work exposed or examined is unacceptable the expenses of uncovering or removing and replacing the parts removed shall be borne by the Contractor .
c All Work Requires Supervision or Inspection .
The Agency will not be required to pay for any work done or materials used without supervision or inspection by the Engineer or an Inspector .
Supervisioninspection includes Project mill plant or shop inspection of any work furnished under the Contract .
d Inspection by Others .
When any unit of government or of a public or private entity is to pay a portion of the cost of the work covered by the Contract its respective representatives shall have the right to inspect the work .
Such inspection shall not make any entity a party to this Contract and shall not interfere with the rights of either party hereunder . .
REMOVAL OF UNACCEPTABLE AND UNAUTHORIZED WORK .
a General .
All work which does not conform to the requirements of the Contract will be considered unacceptable unless otherwise determined to be acceptable under the provisions of Subsection .. b Removal and Replacement of Unacceptable Work .
Unacceptable work whether the result of poor quality of work use of defective materials damage through carelessness or any other cause found to exist prior to the acceptance of the work shall be removed immediately and replaced in an acceptable manner .
c All Work Must Be Authorized .
Work shall be performed only with lines and grades having been provided by the Engineer .
Work performed contrary to the instructions of the Engineer beyond the lines shown on the Plans or without authority will be considered unauthorized and no payment therefore will be made .
Work so done may be ordered removed or replaced at the Contractors expense .
d Failure to Comply with Order of Engineer .
Upon failure by the Contractor to comply forthwith with any order of the Engineer communicated under the provisions of this Subsection the Engineer will have authority to require unacceptable work to be remedied or removed and replaced and to require unauthorized work to be removed .
In either case the Engineer is authorized to deduct the costs from any monies due or to become due the Contractor .
e Responsibility for Agency Expense .
Any expense incurred by the Agency in making removals renewals or repairs which the Contractor has failed or refused to make shall be paid for out of any monies due or which may become due the Contractor or may be charged against one or more Contract bonds .
f No Compensation for Additional Time .
No additional Contract time shall be warranted for any of the work described in this Subsection. . SUNDAY NIGHT AND HOLIDAY WORK .
a Sundays .
The Contractor shall not carry on construction operations on Sundays unless allowed by the Contract or as authorized by the Engineer .
b Nights .
Night work shall be performed in accordance with the NCHRP Report Guidelines for Design and Operation of Nighttime Traffic Control for Highway Maintenance and Construction .
Prior to beginning night work the Contractor shall design a lighting plan and present it as an addition to the traffic control plan .
The Contractor shall not perform any night work or activities within the Project limits until the lighting system has been found to be in Conformance and is in place on the Project .
The designed lighting plan shall be mobile shall be mounted separately from other construction equipment shall illuminate the entire work area to daylight intensity with minimal glare and shall be a surrounding design that minimizes shadows in the work area as much as possible .
All costs associated with the lighting plan will be considered incidental to the appropriate Traffic Control items .
c Holidays .
Unless otherwise permitted in writing by the Engineer the Contractor shall not work during holiday periods .
Designated holiday periods shall begin at noon on the day before the weekend or holiday whichever applies and shall end at a.m. on the day after the holiday or the weekend as appropriate .
The Engineer may require the Contractor to cease construction operations for the entire day before if a holiday falls on Tuesday and for the day after if a holiday falls on Thursday .
c Application .
The limitations in this Subsection shall not apply for the purposes of maintenance emergency repairs and proper protection of the work including but not limited to the curing of concrete and the repair and servicing of equipment .
d Other Provisions Not Affected .
The above limitations shall not relieve the Contractor of any responsibility for the work involved as set forth in Subsection .
Subsection .
or elsewhere in the Contract. . CONVICT LABOR .
No incarcerated convict labor shall be employed on the Project. . LOAD RESTRICTIONS .
a General .
All Contractors Subcontractor suppliers or others involved in any Projectrelated activities shall comply with all legal load restrictions specified in V.S.A .
in the hauling of equipment or material on public roads including that beyond the limits of the Project .
The application for and possession of any hauling or related permit will not relieve the Contractor or others involved in any Projectrelated activities of any liability that may arise due to any damage resulting from the use or moving of equipment vehicles or any other Projectrelated activity .
b Limitations on Use of Equipment and Vehicles .
Use of equipment and vehicles is subject to the following No vehicle or equipment exceeding the load restrictions cited in V.S.A .
will be permitted on any structure as defined by the Engineer .
The operation of any equipment or vehicle of such weight or any other Projectrelated equipment loaded so as to cause damage to structures the roadway or to any other type of active construction will not be permitted regardless of the limits set forth in V.S.A .
Hauling or operation of said vehicles or equipment over any permanent course of any bituminous pavement or any structure during active construction will not be permitted .
Notwithstanding those restrictions above the Contractor shall be responsible for any and all damages incurred to any public roadway as defined in V.S.A .
due to the use of any equipment or vehicles related to Project activities .
c Penalty and Reduction for Overweight Operation .
Each vehicle entering or leaving the Project limits must be within the legal load limit or the load limit imposed by a current overload permit for the roadways and structures .
Should any vehicle not meet these requirements in addition to the appropriate penalty under V.S.A .
a the difference in weight between the legal load limit and the gross vehicle weight shall be converted to the appropriate measurement quantity for the item involved and treble this amount shall be deducted from the quantity of the item to be paid the Contractor .
The Contractor shall not deduct this amount from the payment to its trucking Subcontractorssuppliers .
d Provision of Overweight Permit Copies .
The Contractor shall provide copies of overweight permits to the Engineer prior to the commencement of hauling .
Copies of permits provided after hauling has begun will not be considered to be in effect for the Project prior to the time that the Engineer receives the copy .
e Provision of Tare Weight .
The Contractor shall provide the Engineer with tare weights for all vehicles carrying or delivering materials to be used on a Project .
A tare weight shall be the weight of the unloaded vehicle with full fuel tank and water tank as applicable .
f Application to All Vehicles Used for Project .
These requirements including the overload reduction shall apply to the Contractors vehicles as well as all other vehicles used in conjunction with the construction of this Project including the vehicles of Subcontractors and suppliers . .
MAINTENANCE OF PROJECT DURING CONSTRUCTION .
a General .
The Contractor shall maintain the work during construction and until the work is accepted .
This maintenance shall constitute continuous and effective performance of the work daybyday with adequate equipment and forces so that the Project is kept in satisfactory condition at all times .
b Costs .
All cost of maintenance work during construction and before acceptance of the work shall be included in the Contract Unit Prices for the various Pay Items and the Contractor will not be paid an additional amount for such work .
c Maintenance During Shutdown .
In the event the work is ordered shut down for failure to comply with the provisions of the Contract or for any other reason the Contractor shall maintain the Project as provided herein and provide such ingress and egress for local residents as necessary during the period of shutdown. . FAILURE TO MAINTAIN PROJECT COST .
Failure on the part of the Contractor to properly maintain the work will result in the Engineer immediately notifying the Contractor to comply with the required maintenance provisions .
If after receipt of such notice the Contractor fails to remedy the situation to the Engineers satisfaction the Engineer will proceed with adequate forces and equipment to maintain the Project the cost of this maintenance will be deducted from monies due or which may become due the Contractor under the Contract . .
FINAL INSPECTION AND ACCEPTANCE .
a General .
The Contract shall not be accepted until all of the work required by the Contract has been satisfactorily completed .
b Procedure .
Upon notice from the Contractor of their intent to achieve Substantial Completion the Engineer will review the work and issue a Written Order if the Project has achieved Substantial Completion .
The Written Order will document the date on which the Project achieved Substantial Completion .
The Engineer will arrange a date for a final inspection of the work .
As a result of the final inspection a final punch list will be developed and provided to the Superintendent .
When the punch list is completed and all work provided for and contemplated by the Contract is found to be completed the Contractor will be informed in writing that the Project is complete and accepted. . CLAIMS FOR ADJUSTMENT .
a Claims Process In General .
Whenever the Contractor learns that a condition andor issue may result in costs andor delays that were not anticipated by the Contractor at the time of bid the Contractor must provide the Engineer with notice of that fact immediately or as soon as reasonably possible .
It is critical that VTrans be aware of potential Claims at the earliest opportunity so that it can carefully monitor the potential additional costs and potentially assist the Contractor in taking steps to mitigate those additional costs .
Thus the Contractor must promptly file a Notice of Intent to File a Claim .
If the Contractor later decides to file a Claim for additional compensation under the Contract that Claim must provide certain key pieces of information to the Construction Engineer so that the Claim can be evaluated expeditiously .
If necessary the Construction Engineer will contact the Contractor for additional information about the Claim and may request a meeting with the Contractor .
The Construction Engineer typically does not invite legal counsel to such meetings unless the Contractor chooses to have its own legal representation at the meeting .
b Notice Procedural Requirements .
In order to bring a Claim for additional compensation for costs and conditions not clearly covered under the Contract the Contractor shall provide written notice Notice of Intent to File a Claim for Additional Compensation or the Notice to the Engineer before incurring any costs or conducting any work that could in any way be included in any such Claim for additional compensation under the Contract the Claim .
The Engineers written acknowledgement of receipt of the Notice and the Contractors daily reporting under this Subsection shall not be construed as an approval by the Agency of the merits of the Claim .
c Notice Substantive Requirements .
The words Notice of Intent to File a Claim must appear in large print at the top of the document .
The Notice must specify the basis for the Claim including the nature of the Claim the reason why the Contractor believes that the Agency is responsible for payment of the Claim and a description of the additional compensation including reference to each activity associated with the work andor materials including reference to any impacts to the Contractors Progress Schedule as defined in Subsection .
or CPM Schedule as defined in Section .
If the Contractor fails to provide the Notice as specified herein the Contractor waives its right to bring the Claim under the Contract and the Agency may deny the Claim on this basis alone .
d Notice Documentation Requirements .
Upon providing the Notice of Intent to File a Claim the Project Superintendent shall commence daily records for all labor hours equipment hours idle and operating and materials involved with the work or materials at issue in the Notice and submit such records to the Engineer on a daily basis .
Daily Records .
Such records must separate the work andor materials subject to the Claim from the undisputed work and include a written analysis of how the work andor materials at issue in the Notice impacts the Critical Path .
If the Contractor fails to provide such records to the Engineer as required herein the Contractor waives its right to bring the Claim and the Agency may deny the Claim on this basis alone .
e Claim Documentation Requirements .
The Contractor shall provide the Construction Engineer with the following documentation in support of the Claim Claim Documentation A detailed statement of the Claim including all necessary dates location and work and material items at issue in the Claim including copies of the Daily Records The date on which the Contractor first became aware of the actions or conditions giving rise to the Claim A copy of the Notice of Intent to File a Claim A list of the names of all Agency employees and agents including consultants the Contractor believes have knowledge or information concerning the facts giving rise to the Claim A list of the names of all Contractor employees and agents including Subcontractors whom the Contractor believes have knowledge or information concerning the facts giving rise to the Claim A list of the specific provisions of the Contract that the Contractor believes support the Claim and a description of why the Contractor believes those provisions support the Claim A list of all documents and all written statements that the Contractor believes support the Claim and copies of the same A statement as to whether additional compensation andor a time extension are being requested in the Claim If a time extension is being requested in the Claim a statement as to the specific number of days being requested supported with reference to how the facts underlying the Claim affected the Contractors performance schedule including how such facts affected the Critical Path If additional compensation is being requested an itemized listing of the total amount of any and all costs being sought in the Claim listed by category of work including but not limited to work items labor and materials costs and costs relating to delays associated with performing the work .
Such documentation shall include invoices for rented equipment the Rental Rate Blue Book published by EquipmentWatch the Blue Book analysis for owned equipment and Subcontractor agreements .
For every Claim seeking additional compensation in excess of the Contractor must provide a separate document certifying that the documentation provided in support of the Claim and that the amount of additional compensation sought in the Claim is accurate and that the Contractor has a good faith basis for believing that the Agency is responsible for payment of the Claim the Claims Certification .
The Claims Certification shall be notarized and executed by a senior officer of the Contractor with legal authority to bind the Contractor or if the Contractor is a sole proprietor by the proprietor .
The Claims Certification may be used in any proceeding under the Federal False Claims Act U. S. C. andor the Vermont False Claims Act V.S.A .
f Procedure for the Initial Adjudication of Claims .
The initial determination of the merits of the Claim shall be made by the Construction Engineer .
Completeness Determination .
Within Calendar Days of receipt of the Claim the Construction Engineer shall endeavor to determine whether the Claim Documentation provided by the Contractor meets the requirements of Subsection .e .
Where this Calendar Day period is unfeasible due to the volume andor the complexity of the Claim the Construction Engineer shall inform the Contractor what additional documentation is required and endeavor to keep the Contractor updated as to the status of the Completeness Determination if necessary on a quarterly basis .
The review and analysis of the merits of the Claim may be postponed pending the Completeness Determination .
The Construction Engineer will inform the Contractor in writing that the Completeness Determination has been issued .
Claims Analysis .
Once the Construction Engineer has issued the Completeness Determination the Construction Engineer will begin a principled meritsbased analysis of the Claim Initial Claim Judgment or ICJ .
The Construction Engineer may seek additional documentation from the Contractor including but not limited to a full set of the Contractors original bid preparation package .
a .
The Construction Engineer may interview employees of the Contractor and Subcontractors and conduct other interviews or seek additional documents from other entities including the Agency .
The Construction Engineer may also hold an informal hearing with the Contractor to ask any followup and clarifying questions and to give the Contractor a full and fair opportunity to present the merits of the Claim .
The Construction Engineer will endeavor to keep the Contractor informed as to the status of the Claim if necessary on a quarterly basis .
b .
The Construction Engineer will make all reasonable efforts to issue in writing the Initial Claim Judgment allowing or denying the Claim in whole or in part within Calendar Days of the Completeness Determination .
The ICJ shall include findings of fact and conclusions of law with respect to the specific Contractual provisions governing the Claim .
g Appeal to the Chief Engineer .
If the Contractor is aggrieved by the ICJ an appeal may be made to the Chief Engineer .
Review .
The Chief Engineer will review the ICJ and determine whether additional documents or interviews will be necessary to decide the appeal .
The Chief Engineer may interview or reinterview employees of the Contractor and Subcontractors and conduct other interviews or seek additional documents from other entities including the Agency .
The Chief Engineer may also hold an informal hearing with the Contractor to ask any followup and clarifying questions and to give the Contractor a full and fair opportunity to present the merits of the Claim .
The Chief Engineer will endeavor to keep the Contractor informed as to the status of the Claim if necessary on a quarterly basis .
DecisionMaking .
The Chief Engineer will make all reasonable efforts to issue in writing the Agencys final determination on the merits of the Claim Final Claim Judgment or FCJ as required under Paragraph of the Construction Contract Dispute Resolution Exclusivity of Administrative Remedies within Calendar Days of the date of the appeal .
The FCJ may affirm the ICJ in whole or in part or may allow or deny the Claim in whole or in part on other grounds .
The FCJ shall include findings of fact and conclusions of law with respect to the specific Contractual provisions governing the Claim .
QuasiJudicial Appeal .
If the Contractor is aggrieved by the FCJ it may seek appellate review of the FCJ before the Transportation Board pursuant to Subsection .
of the Specifications .
The Transportation Board shall defer to the factual findings of the FCJ and review the legal conclusions of the FCJ de novo .
h Time for Claims Appeals .
Notwithstanding any other provision of law case law regulation or the Contract all Claims by the Contractor shall be submitted in writing within Calendar Days after the Acceptance Date of the Project or within Calendar Days of the Notice of Intent to File a Claim whichever occurs first and not thereafter the Claim Filing Period .
Such Claims must meet the requirements set forth above including but not limited to complete documentation supporting the Claim .
Any additional time granted by the Construction Engineer because the Claim was incomplete or for the time to produce supplemental information shall not be the subject of any demand for interest payments or for attorneys fees andor other costs .
If the Contractor fails to file the Claim within the Claim Filing Period the Contractor waives its right to bring the Claim .
If the disputed work continues to be performed beyond the Claim Filing Period the Contractor must submit a written request to extend the Claim Filing Period prior to the expiration of the Claim Filing Period .
The Contractor shall submit such requests for extension of the Claims Filing Period every Calendar Days until the disputed work is completed .
Once the disputed work is complete the Contractor must submit the complete Claim within the latest approved Claim Filing Period or Calendar Days from the date the disputed work was completed whichever is first and not thereafter. . PAYROLLS .
a General .
The Contractor shall maintain and make available payroll records as required in the Contract .
This requirement shall also apply to the work of any Subcontractor having a Subcontract for any part of the work performed on the job .
Any costs associated with this work will not be paid for directly but will be considered incidental to the Contract Pay Items .
b Examination Authority .
The Contractor hereby authorizes the Engineer or the Engineers Authorized Representative to examine the Contractors orders for construction workers on file with the local employment office of the Vermont Department of Employment and Training .
c Additional Contract Requirement .
For construction and transportation Projects over .
a payroll process by which during every pay period the Contractor collects from the Subcontractors or independent Contractors a list of all workers who were on the jobsite during the pay period the work performed by those workers on the jobsite and a daily census of the jobsite .
This information including confirmation that Contractors Subcontractors and independent Contractors have the appropriate workers compensation coverage for all workers at the jobsite and similar information for the Subcontractors regarding their Subcontractors shall also be provided to the Department of Labor and to the Department of Financial Regulation DFR upon request and shall be available to the public. . ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATION .
The Contractor shall perform all Project related operations so as to give adequate protection to the natural and cultural resources of the State .
The Contractor shall conduct the work in conformance with all regulations and permit conditions applicable to the Project .
If the Contractor proposes to perform the work differently than the manner provided in the Contract the Contractor shall obtain approval from the appropriate regulating entities prior to performing the work .
The costs associated with obtaining and complying with permits required to perform the work will not be paid for directly but will be considered incidental to the Contract Pay Items . .
EROSION PREVENTION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL .
a Submission of Plans .
Unless otherwise required by Contract to comply with Subsection .
the Contractor shall submit a plan in writing for the prevention of erosion and control of sedimentation and pollution on the Project and on associated access roads material waste and borrow areas and staging areas .
The plan shall be submitted no later than the preconstruction conference and a Notice to Proceed will not be issued until the plan has been found to be in Conformance .
b Erosion Prevention and Sediment Control Measures .
Erosion prevention and sediment control measures shall be installed and maintained in conformance with the Contract .
Unless otherwise specified in the Contract this work shall be performed as described in this Section and Section .
c Engineers Authority General .
The Engineer has authority to limit the surface area of erodible earth material exposed by construction activities and to direct the Contractor to provide immediate permanent or temporary erosion prevention and sediment control measures to minimize adverse effects on resources .
This may include restricting the area of clearing and grubbing excavation borrow and embankment operations such that these activities are commensurate with the Contractors capability to install erosion prevention and sediment control measures in accordance with the Erosion Prevention and Sediment Control Plan .
d Temporary and Permanent Erosion Prevention and Sediment Control .
The Contractor shall incorporate all temporary and permanent erosion prevention and sediment control measures into the Project at the earliest reasonable time .
Temporary erosion prevention and sediment control measures shall be used to prevent erosion and to correct conditions that develop during construction prior to installation of permanent measures .
As the earthwork proceeds slopes shall be graded to finish grade whenever practical and all disturbed areas shall be stabilized by seeding and mulching or other acceptable methods within hours of disturbance .
e Erosion Clearing and Grubbing .
Clearing and grubbing shall be performed so that the resulting exposed surfaces are stabilized with temporary or permanent measures within hours .
f Conflicts .
In the event of conflict between the requirements of this Subsection and those of Federal State or local agencies the more restrictive provisions shall apply as determined by the Engineer .
g Suspension of Operations .
If construction operations are suspended areas of exposed earth shall be stabilized .
If permanent stabilization is not possible exposed areas shall be shaped and then covered with mulch or matting to intercept and divert runoff to locations where the least amount of erosion will result .
During a suspension of construction operations the Contractor shall act immediately to correct any deficiencies that develop with the erosion prevention and sediment control measures andor stabilized areas .
h Maintenance of Temporary Erosion Prevention and Sediment Control Measures .
Temporary erosion prevention and sediment control measures shall be acceptably maintained until both the permanent drainage facilities have been constructed and vegetation has been established throughout the Project. . POLLUTION CONTROL .
a General .
The Contractor shall exercise every reasonable precaution to prevent pollution of the air land and water of the State and shall comply with applicable statutes and regulations relating to the prevention and remediation of pollution .
b Bridge Operations .
For Projects with bridge activities including demolition painting cleaning cutting welding or grinding operations the Contractor shall include a description of any proposed containment measures as part of their Erosion Prevention and Sediment Control Plan submitted in accordance with Subsection .a .
When the bridge activities listed above are in progress where lead paint is known or suspected the Contractor shall utilize containment devices to retain all generated materials .
The Contractor shall also consult with the Vermont Department of Health Asbestos and Lead Regulatory Program to determine if a lead abatement permit is required .
When required the Contractor shall coordinate with the Agency Hazardous Materials and Waste Coordinators to administer the permit request .
c CoatedTreated Materials .
The Contractor shall comply with all pollution control health and transportation regulations when cleaning handling moving repainting cutting welding sanding or grinding any coated or treated materials .
d Noise and Air Pollution .
The Contractor shall employ standard methods to minimize noise and air pollution associated with construction operations .
The methods employed shall be acceptable to the Engineer and compatible with the location of the work .
The burning of tires or other manufactured products is prohibited .
f Contaminated Materials and Hazardous Waste .
The Contractor shall provide documentation to the Engineer that any generated or found contaminated material or hazardous waste was characterized as necessary and disposed of in conformance with all applicable regulations .
In the absence of the Engineer the Agencys Construction Safety Technician and the Agencys Hazardous Materials and Waste Coordinators shall each have the authority to suspend work when they determine that a serious safety or environmental violation exists on the job site .
The period of time work is suspended due to a serious safety or environmental violation will not be justification for an extension of time .
g Limits on Use of Mechanized Equipment .
Unless otherwise approved in writing and permitted by the appropriate Federal or State regulating authority mechanized equipment shall not be operated in waters of the State .
h Water Quality .
Pollutants including but not limited to chemicals paints fuels lubricants bitumens raw sewage sediment or other waste shall not be discharged into or alongside wetlands waters of the State or natural or constructed channels leading thereto .
Any construction activity in or adjacent to regulated waters shall comply with Vermont Water Quality Standards. . OFFSITE ACTIVITY AREAS .
OffSite Activity OSA areas are those areas located outside of the Projects defined construction limits that are necessary adjuncts used for supporting the construction activities including access roads waste borrow and staging areas .
Compliance with Environmental Regulations described in Subsection .
and Pollution Control described in Subsection .
shall apply to all OSA areas . .
OPENING OFFSITE ACTIVITY AREAS .
a General .
The Contractor shall demonstrate that the proposed OSA area is in accordance with all Project permits and that the following are met The final shape slope and contour of the land in and about the area will not be undesirable aesthetically or as it relates to drainage Is consistent with any duly adopted development plan land use plan or land capability plan whether site specific local or regional The entrance is at the most desirable angle or perspective from any nearby highways residences and other facilities The Contractor shall remove stockpile and preserve topsoil sod and other suitable material from the surface of the area prior to proceeding with other operations and The Contractor has all erosion prevention and sediment control measures as indicated in the Conforming Erosion Prevention and Sediment Control Plan in place prior to use of the area .
At a minimum The Low Risk Site Handbook for Erosion Prevention and Sediment Control published by ANR shall be used as best management practices for OSA areas .
b Clearances .
Exempt Sites .
Certain types of sites for certain activities are exempt from requiring further review of potential natural and cultural resource impacts .
A list of these exemptions is part of the OffSite Activity Exemption Record form that is available on the Vermont Agency of Transportation website .
To use an exempt OSA area the Contractor shall complete this form and then submit to the Engineer .
Nonexempt Sites .
For nonexempt OSA areas the Contractor shall complete an OSA Submittal form that is available on the Vermont Agency of Transportation website .
The completed form shall be submitted to the VTrans Environmental Section to review potential natural and cultural resource impacts .
A copy of this form shall also be submitted to the Engineer .
Within Calendar Days the Environmental Section will provide an OSA Review form indicating Conformance or nonConformance of the site along with any specific conditions .
c Permits .
The Contractor andor the property owner shall be required to obtain or amend all necessary State Federal and local permits and clearances prior to using an area for an Agency Project .
Any fees related to applications for such permits shall be the responsibility of the Contractor . .
MAINTAINING OFFSITE ACTIVITY AREAS .
a General .
The Contractor shall conduct operations at OSA areas so as to minimize air pollution .
The Contractor shall keep in a condition acceptable to the Engineer the portions of an area where a pit or pits have been opened and shall maintain all access roads with sufficient dust control and proper drainage to prevent damage to adjacent properties .
Area operations shall be restricted to normal working hours except with the express written approval of the Engineer and shall be in accordance with all permit conditions .
b Area Erosion Prevention and Sediment Control Measures .
Installation and maintenance of erosion prevention and sediment control measures at OSA areas shall be consistent with the Conforming Erosion Prevention and Sediment Control Plan for the specific area .
The OnSite Plan Coordinator OSPC shall review these areas as required in the Contract .
c Seasonal Shutdown .
For areas that will be utilized for more than one Construction Season the Contractor shall grade to no more than VH seed and mulch disturbed fill areas prior to shutting down for the season . .
CLOSING OFFSITE ACTIVITY AREAS .
With the exception of those areas which will remain open for commercial use the Contractor shall complete the following prior to the Completion and Acceptance of the Project a Shape the entire area to leave banks in a neat and presentable condition properly and thoroughly graded and drained .
b Establish vegetation on all disturbed areas .
c All stones boulders stumps and debris shall be removed or satisfactorily disposed of .
d Slopes shall not be left steeper than VH for earthen fills .
Slopes shall not be left steeper than VH for fill made up of stone or concrete .
The tops of slopes and toes of slopes shall be neatly rounded .
Stockpiled sod topsoil and other stripped material shall be evenly spread over the surface of the area .
The complete area shall be seeded and mulched in accordance with Section . . PAYMENT FOR EROSION PREVENTION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL .
a General .
Unless otherwise indicated in the Contract all materials installation monitoring maintenance and where necessary removal for those erosion prevention and sediment control measures required by the Plans andor the Engineer that are not items in the Contract will not be paid for directly but will be considered incidental to all other Contract Items .
Environmental protection work in connection with erosion prevention and sediment control for the opening maintaining and closing of OSA areas and pollution control measures will not be paid for directly but will be considered incidental to all other Contract Items .
Costs for damages to OSA areas to the owners thereof or to adjacent property owners shall be the responsibility of the Contractor .
b Temporary Erosion Prevention and Sediment Control Measures .
Required temporary erosion prevention and sediment control work not attributable to the Contractors negligence carelessness or failure to install permanent controls will be performed and paid for as specified in Subsection .a or as ordered by the Engineer .
Temporary erosion prevention and sediment control measures required due to the Contractors negligence carelessness or failure to install permanent controls as a part of the scheduled work or as ordered by the Engineer shall be performed by the Contractor at the Contractors expense .
c Failure to Control Erosion Pollution or Siltation .
In case of repeated failures by the Contractor to control erosion pollution or siltation the Engineer may employ outside assistance or use State forces to provide the necessary corrective measures .
Such incurred direct costs plus Project engineering costs will be charged to the Contract and appropriate deductions made from any money or monies due or to become due the Contractor. . VALUE ENGINEERING .
a General .
The intent of value engineering VE is to provide an incentive to the Contractor to initiate develop and present to the Engineer for consideration cost reduction proposals involving changes in the drawings designs Specifications or other requirements of the Contract .
These provisions do not apply unless the proposal submitted is specifically identified by the Contractor as being presented for consideration as a VE proposal .
The change in cost proposals contemplated are those that would require a Change Order modifying the Contract and would produce an overall savings to the public by providing items or methods other than those specified in the Contract andor reduce future maintenance costs without impairing or compromising essential functions and characteristics such as service life safety durability reliability economy of operation ease of maintenance and necessary standardized features .
A VE proposal shall contain proven features that have been used under similar conditions and is presented as such and does not contain equivalent options already provided in the Contract .
The Agency will not be responsible for schedule delays that occur as a result of the Contractors desire to pursue a VE proposal .
b Procedure .
General .
Unless mutually agreed otherwise the VE proposal approval process will occur in three steps a .
A conceptual VE proposal submission and review b .
A detailed VE proposal submission and evaluation and if approved c. A Change Order modifying the Contract including the amount of payment due to the Contractor and credit due to the Agency .
Conceptual Value Engineering Proposal .
To begin the VE proposal approval process the Contractor shall submit a written Conceptual Value Engineering Proposal CVEP to the Engineer for consideration .
The CVEP is not a formal and complete submittal based upon detailed technical analysis but instead relays a conceptual idea based upon the Contractors knowledge and expertise .
The CVEP should include the following information based upon the Contractors best knowledge and understanding a .
General Description .
A narrative that describes the proposed change in concept and includes the basic differences between the existing Contract and the proposed change .
b .
Advantages and Disadvantages .
A listing and brief description of the comparative advantages and disadvantages of the CVEP including effects on the service life safety durability reliability economy of operation ease of maintenance and any other factors significantly altered by the CVEP .
c. Impacts to Permits andor ThirdParty Agreements .
A description of steps necessary to address existing permits new permits or thirdparty agreements that may be impacted or required in order to initiate the proposed changes .
In addition the Contractor shall describe its expectation of securing or modifying these documents who is responsible for securing them and required timeframes .
d. Identification of Prior Similar CVEPs .
If the CVEP was submitted previously on another Agency Project the date the Project name and number and the action taken by the Agency shall be indicated .
e. Known Use or Testing .
A description of any previous use or testing of the concepts included in the CVEP that is known to the Contractor including the tester the conditions and the results .
f. Estimate of Net Savings .
An estimate of the Net Savings as defined in Subsection .c .
This amount shall not include the cost to prepare and submit the CVEP .
g. Estimate of Development Costs .
A scope of work and related cost estimate to develop and submit a Detailed Value Engineering Proposal DVEP .
This estimate should include a detailed estimate of both the engineering costs the Contractor will incur in preparing the DVEP the Internal DVEP Costs and the cost the Contractor will incur to obtain specialty engineering services that the Contractor can not perform and which are necessary to prepare the DVEP the External DVEP Costs collectively the DVEP Costs .
If the Contractor establishes to the satisfaction of the Construction Engineer that it does not have the financial resources to incur the DVEP Costs the Agency may in its sole discretion decide to advance the Contactor up to of the DVEP Costs .
In no event will the Agency pay more than of the DVEP Costs nor will the DVEP Costs exceed of the Net Savings amount as defined in Subsection .c .
h. Savings and Schedule Impacts .
An estimate of the time necessary for the Contractor to submit a DVEP and the timesensitivity of the savings identified .
Such estimate shall specify the date by which the Agency must approve the DVEP to obtain the maximum cost reduction and the latest date by which the Agency must approve the DVEP for the Contractor to avoid significant impacts on the estimated Net Savings or the Contractors schedule of work .
If the Agency determines that the time for response is insufficient for review the Contractor will be promptly notified .
The Contractor shall identify the date by which if the DVEP is not approved the VE will be withdrawn and the original work can commence without delay to the Project .
i .
Plans and Specifications .
A set of Preliminary Plans and Specifications prepared as Construction Drawings in accordance with Subsection .
showing the proposed revisions relative to the original Contract features and requirements .
VE proposals that require engineering design computations or analysis shall be prepared under the responsible charge of and sealed and signed by a Professional Engineer licensed in the State of Vermont .
The Plan Specifications and Engineering changes should be progressed far enough along to clearly show the design intent and be able to provide a quality cost estimate .
j. CVEP Presentation .
Within Calendar Days of submitting a CVEP the Contractor shall be available to attend a meeting scheduled by the Agency for the purpose of presenting and answering questions regarding the CVEP .
The purpose of the meeting is to discuss possible risks design implications and schedule impacts associated with the VE proposal .
If applicable the Contractor shall be accompanied by their engineer responsible for the Plan and Specification revisions associated with the VE proposal .
k. Agency Review .
The Engineer will use best efforts to review a conforming CVEP and respond to the Contractor within Calendar Days of receipt .
The Agency may at its sole discretion .
Invite the Contractor to submit a DVEP .
Reject the CVEP for reasons that will be described briefly or .
Request additional information .
DVEP .
If invited by the Agency as provided in Subsection .bk .. the Contractor may submit a DVEP .
DVEPs will be processed in the same manner as prescribed for any other alterations of the Contract that require a Change Order and shall contain as a minimum the following information a .
Description .
A description of what is being changed altered or deleted and why and what is being proposed to improve upon the originally designed feature .
b. Itemization .
An itemization of the requirements of the Contract Plans Specifications Pay Items and Unit Prices that must be changed and a recommendation of how to make each change including a description of the advantages and disadvantages and where these items have been successfully used on other Projects before or tested elsewhere .
c. Computation of Net Savings .
A detailed computation of the estimated net savings to be generated as defined in Section .c actual DVEP development costs and estimated savings and schedule impacts including approval dates required .
If the Agency determines that the time for response is insufficient for review the Contractor will be promptly notified .
d. Prediction of Other Costs .
A prediction of any effects the proposed changes would have on other costs to the Agency including environmental effects traffic impacts and preventive action or treatment costs .
e. Plans and Specifications .
A complete set of Plans and Specifications prepared as Construction Drawings in accordance with Subsection .
showing the proposed revisions relative to the original Contract features and requirements .
All DVEPs that require engineering design computations or analysis shall be prepared under the responsible charge of and signed and sealed by a Professional Engineer licensed in the State of Vermont .
f. Contract Completion .
A statement as to the effect the proposal would have on the time for the completion of the Contract .
Extension to the original Contract Completion Date will generally not be approved .
Evaluation of DVEP .
The Agency will evaluate the DVEP and consider the following a .
The Agency may request any additional information that it determines is necessary to properly evaluate the DVEP .
Where design changes are proposed such additional information may include results of field investigations and surveys design computations specifications and any field changes already incorporated into the Project .
The Contractor shall promptly provide any such requested information .
b .
The Agency may require the Contractor to provide additional information to verify the Contractors cost analysis .
c. When the Agency is acting as the contracting authority for a locally owned facility the local governing body must also provide approval .
The Contractor shall present their proposal to the local governing body and allow sufficient time to present the proposal and receive comments .
Evaluation Response .
The Agency will use its best effort to evaluate a conforming DVEP and provide the Contractor with a written response within Calendar Days of receipt of all of the information it has determined was necessary to properly evaluate the DVEP .
Such response will include a brief description of the Agencys reasons for its decision .
The Agency at its sole discretion will either accept the DVEP accept it with contingencies or reject it .
No Liability for Delay .
The Agency shall not be liable for any delay in acting upon any VE proposal submitted .
The Contractor may withdraw in whole or in part any VE proposal not accepted within the period specified in the proposal .
The decision of the Engineer as to the acceptance or rejection of VE proposals will be final and will not be subject to the provisions of Subsection .
or Subsection .. Contingencies .
The Agency may accept a DVEP with contingencies which if not met by the Contractor will prompt the Agency to reject the DVEP before the execution of a Change Order .
Contingencies may include but not be limited to the necessary approvals of permits amendments execution or amendments to thirdparty agreements specific deadlines for completion of submittals or execution of permits agreements andor amendments thereof .
RejectionTermination .
If the Agency rejects the DVEP the DVEP process will terminate .
The Agency in its sole discretion will determine whether to reimburse the Contractor for DVEP Costs and if so what percentage of those costs .
In no event will the Agency pay more than of the DVEP Costs .
These costs will not include the cost to prepare the CVEP .
c Accepted Proposals Change Order .
If a DVEP is accepted or if it is accepted with conditions and the Contractor wants to proceed the necessary Contract modifications will be effected by execution of a Change Order which will provide for equitable price adjustments giving the Contractor and the Agency equal shares in the net savings .
Unless and until a proposal is effected by such Contract modification the Contractor shall remain obligated to perform in accordance with the terms of the existing Contract .
In addition to the requirements of Subsection .
and Subsection .
the DVEP will set forth the credit due the Agency calculated as the difference between the cost of performing the work as originally specified and the amount payable to the Contractor for the revised work .
The payment for this Contract modification will only include the following amounts The cost of performing the work as revised by the DVEP at agreed upon unit or lump sum prices The DVEP development costs that the Agency agreed to reimburse the Contractor as provided in Subsection .bg .
if any and Fifty percent of the Net Savings NS generated by the DVEP as determined by the Agency calculated as follows 𝑁𝑆 𝐶𝐺𝑆 𝐶𝑆𝑃 𝐶𝑈𝐶𝐶 𝐴𝑈𝐶𝐶 where NS Net Savings generated by the DVEP .
EGS Estimated Gross Savings is an agreed upon difference between the cost of performing the work as originally specified in the Contract and the cost of performing the work as revised by the DVEP .
CSP Cost Savings to the Public are those funds not expended by the public including but not limited to reduced maintenance costs and reduced road user costs .
CSP shall not include any cost savings attributable to a time period exceeding years from the Contract Completion Date .
CUDC Contractors Unreimbursed Development Costs related to the preparation of the DVEP including costs of the Contractors design subconsultants and Subcontractors but excluding all such costs already paid by the Agency under Subsection .bg .
AVEC Agencys VE Costs related to review approval and implementation of the DVEP including design costs field inspection and the value of any Agencyprovided property .
The Change Order effecting the necessary Contract modifications shall establish the net savings agreed upon and shall provide for such adjustment in the Contract price as will divide the net savings equally between the Contractor and the Agency .
All reasonably incurred costs of developing the cost reduction proposal and implementing the changes including any increased costs to the Agency resulting from its application will be deducted from the total estimated decrease in the Contractors costs of performance to arrive at the net savings .
d Subsequent Payment Adjustments .
Upon completion of the portion of the work revised by the DVEP the Agency on its own initiative or upon request by the Contractor may review the actual net savings realized by the DVEP .
The Contractor will be afforded an opportunity to review and comment on such a review .
If the actual net savings were greater than set forth in the Change Order the increased savings will be shared equally between the Agency and the Contractor .
If the net savings were less than set forth in the Change Order the reduction in savings will be borne equally by the Agency and the Contractor by a reduction of amounts otherwise due the Contractor .
e General Conditions .
DVEPs will remain the property of the Contractor provided that the Agency will have the unrestricted right to use any approved DVEP or any DVEP in which the Agency has reimbursed the Contractor for any portion of the development costs on other Agency Projects without notice cost or liability to the Contractor .
Only the Contractor may submit DVEPs .
The Contractor shall review be responsible for and submit all proposals initiated by the Contractors Subcontractors .
The Contractor shall not anticipate Agency approval of a VE proposal when bidding or otherwise before approval of a DVEP .
The Contractor is responsible for all delays caused by the VE proposal that were not negotiated in the Change Order .
If a VE proposal is rejected by the Agency the Contractor shall perform the work in accordance with the Contract .
Except as otherwise provided in this Subsection the Contractor shall have no Claim against the Agency for additional compensation or time resulting from the delayed review or rejection of a DVEP including but not limited to development costs loss of anticipated profits and increased material or labor costs .
Cost sharing applies only to the Contract for which the DVEP was submitted .
Upon acceptance of a cost reduction proposal any restrictions imposed by the Contractor on its use or on disclosure of the information submitted shall be void and the Agency shall thereafter have the right to use duplicate and disclose in whole or in part any data necessary to the utilization of the proposal on this Project or other Projects .
Any time savings realized by implementation of VE proposals may result in a corresponding adjustment in the Contract completion time .
No incentive pay will be provided for early completion days resulting from time savings of any approved VE proposals .
Because the Agency has no obligation to change the terms of the original Contract all VE proposal decisions by the Agency are final and are not subject to the dispute resolution provisions provided in this Contract or otherwise available in law .
The Contractor may withdraw any DVEP prior to the time the Contractor signs the Change Order .
If the Contractor elects to withdraw the DVEP in accordance with this provision the Contractor waives its right under Subsection .bg .
for reimbursement of DVEP costs including any costs advanced to the Contractor .
If such costs have been advanced the Contractor shall reimburse the Agency for those costs within Calendar Days of withdrawing its DVEP .
Acceptance of a DVEP by the Agency does not indicate any assumption of liability by the Agency for any design errors andor omissions associated with the DVEP implementation .
SECTION CONTROL OF MATERIAL .
SOURCE OF SUPPLY AND QUALITY REQUIREMENTS .
The material used in the work shall meet the requirements of the Agencys Quality Assurance Program QAP .
The QAP including the Materials Sampling Manual MSM has been developed to clearly articulate the processes for acceptance of materials in construction and maintenance .
In order to expedite the inspection and testing of materials the Contractor shall notify the Engineer of the proposed approved sources of materials at least hours prior to delivery .
Sources not previously approved by the Agency will require a minimum of four weeks advanced notification to complete the necessary inspection and testing of materials .
At the option of the Engineer materials may be approved at the source of supply before delivery is started .
If it is found during acceptance that supplied materials from previously approved sources do not meet Specifications the Contractor shall take action to supply materials that meet Specifications. . LOCAL MATERIAL SOURCES .
The Contractor shall determine potential sources of material and the amount of equipment and work required to produce material meeting the Specifications .
The Agencys Geologist maintains a list of material sources that have previously produced materials meeting Specifications .
The ability to purchase from the owners of the sources and the quality of the material are not guaranteed by the Agency .
The Contractor acknowledges that it is not possible to ascertain from samples the limits of a deposit and that variations in quality in a material source are normal and to be expected .
Exploration for new material sources will be the responsibility of the Contractor .
The Engineer may order procurement of material from any portion of a material source and may reject portions of the material sources as unacceptable .
It shall be the responsibility of the Contractor to acquire the right to take materials from any source together with the right to use such property as required for whatever purpose including plant sites stockpiles and hauling roads .
The Contractor shall pay all costs related thereto together with any costs resulting from exploring and developing these sources . .
SAMPLES AND TESTS .
All materials will be inspected sampled tested or accepted by the Engineer as incorporated into the work .
Under any applicable Quality Acceptance QA specifications the Contractor shall perform all Process Quality Control testing with the Engineer performing all Quality Acceptance testing .
Any work in which untested andor unaccepted materials are used without the approval or written permission of the Engineer shall be performed at the Contractors risk .
Any work determined to be unacceptable and unauthorized will not be paid for .
All testing will conform to the most recent cited standard methods of AASHTO or ASTM including AASHTO Provisional Standards or the ASTM Tentative Specifications that are current on the date of the advertisement for bids unless otherwise specified .
In the case of conflict between the ASTM and the AASHTO methods of sampling and testing the AASHTO method shall govern .
When modified AASHTO or ASTM test methods or Vermont Agency of Transportation test methods are designated the test method will be available at the office of the Agencys Materials Testing and Certification Section .
Tests for compliance with specification requirements will be made by and at the expense of the Agency .
Samples will be taken by Authorized Representatives of the Agency in accordance with the requirements of the latest edition of the Agencys Materials Sampling Manual .
The Contractor shall provide such facilities as specified in these Specifications or as the Engineer may require for collecting andor forwarding samples .
In all cases the Contractor shall furnish the required samples without charge .
All materials used are subject to inspection testing and acceptancerejection at any time during the Contract period .
Materials contaminated by the Contractors operations shall be removed .
No work or materials shall be deemed approved until accepted by the Engineer .
Copies of all test results will be furnished to the Contractors representative upon request. . PLANT INSPECTION .
The Engineer may undertake the inspection of materials at the source .
In the event plant inspection is undertaken the following conditions shall be met a The Engineer shall have the cooperation and assistance of the Contractor and the producer with whom the Contractor has contracted for materials .
b The Engineer shall have full entry at all times to such parts of the plant as may concern the manufacture or production of the materials being furnished .
c When required by the Contract the Contractor shall arrange for an approved building or trailer with the necessary equipment for testing for the use of the Inspector such building or trailer shall be located conveniently near the plant .
d Adequate safety measures shall be provided and maintained .
The Agency reserves the right to retest all materials that have been tested and accepted at the source of supply prior to incorporation into the work after delivery and to reject all materials that do not meet the requirements of the Contract when retested . .
STORAGE OF MATERIALS .
Materials shall be stored so as to ensure the preservation of their quality and fitness for the work .
Stored materials even though approved before storage may be inspected prior to their use in the work they shall meet the requirements of the Contract at the time of use .
Stored materials shall be located so as to facilitate inspection .
Upon approval portions of the RightofWay not required for public travel may be used for storage purposes and for the placing of the Contractors plant and equipment but any additional space required shall be at the Contractors expense .
The Contractor may not store materials under any bridge without written approval from the Engineer .
Private property shall not be used for storage purposes without written permission of the owner andor lessee .
All storage sites shall be restored to their original condition at the Contractors expense this shall not apply to the stripping and storing of topsoil or to other materials salvaged from the work or specifically prescribed in the Contract. . HANDLING MATERIALS .
All materials shall be handled so as to preserve their quality and fitness for the work . .
UNACCEPTABLE MATERIALS .
At the discretion of the Engineer all materials not in conformance with the requirements of the Contract shall be considered unacceptable and all such materials whether in place or not shall be rejected and removed immediately from the site of the work unless otherwise instructed by the Engineer .
Rejected materials that have been subsequently corrected shall not be used unless and until approval has been given. . EXPLOSIVE AND FLAMMABLE MATERIALS .
The Contractors attention is directed to the provisions of the Vermont Statutes Annotated as amended which authorize the State Fire Marshal to make publish enforce and from time to time to alter amend or repeal rules and regulations pertaining to fire prevention and public safety concerning the safekeeping storage use manufacture sale handling transportation or other disposition of blank cartridges gun powder dynamite nitroglycerine crude petroleum or any of its products including liquefied petroleum gas explosives flammable gases and flammable fluids compounds or tablets any other explosive or any substance that may spontaneously or acting under the influence of any contiguous chemical or physical agent ignite inflame or generate inflammable or explosive vapors or gases to a dangerous extent and may prescribe the location materials and construction of buildings and other facilities to be used for storage of such products .
Attention is further directed to the regulations applying to explosives while being transported by carriers in motor vehicles railroad cars or vessels in conformity with the regulations adopted by the U.S. Department of Transportation the U.S. Coast Guard or the Vermont Secretary of Transportation under the provisions of V.S.A .
and Subsection .. . STOCKPILING OF MATERIALS .
a Ordering Materials Stockpiling Authority .
The Contractor is urged to place orders for materials with producers and suppliers as early as practicable .
The Contractor may submit a written request to the Agency to pay for stockpiled material .
The Engineer may authorize payment for the Contractors cost of materials including freight .
The Agency may deny any and all requests to stockpile materials and to make stockpile payments .
b Request and Procedure Criteria .
To request stockpiling the Contractor shall submit the following for consideration by the Agency Listing of materials by specific Contract Pay Item and quantity to be stockpiled Invoice for all materials or a receipt for delivery Drafts of documents that show that ownership of the materials without encumbrances will be in the name of the Contractor and will be for the benefit of the Agency Appropriate certifications andor passing samples as required for the specific materials Statement that the material shall be clearly marked so as to easily identify the Project in which the material will be incorporated and shall be available for inspection by the Agency and The location where and conditions under which the material will be stockpiled .
The storage location and security of the stockpiled materials shall be the responsibility of the Contractor .
c Raw Materials .
In addition to the criteria set out above for other materials raw material stockpiles shall be approved by the Construction Engineer and meet the following additional criteria The various components of the finished product shall include all of the appropriate certifications passing samples passing tests and any other documentation that may be required to certify that the materials are acceptable and Any other criteria the Engineer deems necessary to allow for payment .
d Cap Payment to Supplier Charge Back Minimum to Stockpile .
Payment will be made for the invoiced amount not to exceed of the total Contract bid amount for each specific item for which stockpiling is allowed the quantity of stockpiled material shall not exceed the Contract quantity for the specific item .
The Contractor shall furnish the paid invoice within Calendar Days after the cutoff date for the estimate in which the stockpile amount is paid .
If the Contractor fails to furnish the paid invoice within this time limit the amount of the stockpile payment will be deducted from one or more subsequent payments .
Under no circumstances shall stockpiling be allowed for an item with a Contract bid amount totaling less than .
The stockpile credit amount shall be reduced once installation of the item begins and the reduction shall correspond with the installation and payment of the specific stockpiled item .
The Contractor may request an exception to the cap any such request shall be included in the original request for stockpile and shall include all information to support the request .
e Finished Product .
Payment for stockpiled materials shall not relieve the Contractor from providing an acceptable finished product or from its responsibility for the condition of the materials as specified elsewhere in the Contract .
Any defects flaws or poor craftsmanship shall be the responsibility of the Contractor and shall be corrected to the Agencys satisfaction at the Contractors expense .
SECTION LEGAL RELATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITY TO THE PUBLIC .
LAWS TO BE OBSERVED .
a General Defense and Indemnification .
The Contractor shall observe and comply with all Federal and State laws and local bylaws ordinances and regulations in any manner affecting the conduct of the work and the action or operation of those engaged in the work including all orders or decrees as exist at present and those which may be enacted later by bodies or tribunals having jurisdiction or authority over the work and the Contractor shall defend indemnify and save harmless the State and all its officers agents and employees against any Claim or liability arising from or based on the violation of any such law bylaws ordinances regulations order or decree whether by the Contractor in person by the employees of the Contractor or by a Subcontractor or supplier .
b Contract Contrary to the Law .
If the Contractor discovers any provisions in the Contract that are contrary to or inconsistent with any law ordinance regulation order or decree the Contractor shall immediately report it to the Engineer in writing .
c U.S. VOSHA and Environmental Protection Regulations .
The Contractors attention is directed to the various regulations promulgated and enforced by the United States and VOSHA and the environmental protection agencies .
d Fair Employee Practices Act .
The Contractor shall comply with all of the requirements of V.S.A .
Chapter Subchapter relating to fair employment practices to the extent applicable .
A similar provision shall be included in any and all Subcontracts .
e Hazardous Wastes .
The Contractors attention is directed to regulations regarding the management of hazardous wastes such as waste crankcase and hydraulic oils and waste paint generated by construction operations ref Agency of Natural Resources Department of Environmental Conservation and V.S.A .
Chapter .
f Americans with Disabilities Act .
The Contractor shall comply with the Americans with Disabilities Act of and shall ensure that individuals with disabilities have equal access to the services programs and employment activitiesopportunities offered by the Contractor under the Contract .
g Prompt Payment Act .
The Contractor shall fully comply with the provisions of V.S.A .
also referred to as Act No .
of or the Prompt Payment Act as amended .
h Subcontractor Payments Reporting Violations Inclusion in Subcontracts .
On all FederalAid and State funded Contracts the Contractor during the life of the Contract and on a monthly basis shall submit electronically a listing of payments to Subcontractors on the form specified by the State and made available on the Agency Office of Civil Rights and Labor Compliance website .
Electronic reports shall be filed with the Agency Office of Civil Rights and Labor Compliance by an Authorized Representative and received in the Agency Office of Civil Rights and Labor Compliance on or before the tenth Working Day after month end .
Contractors without access to the Prompt Pay reporting site shall submit manual reports to the Office of Civil Rights and Labor Compliance using the Prompt Pay Manual Reporting Form .
The form can be found on the Agency Office of Civil Rights and Labor Compliance website .
Manual reports shall be signed by an Authorized Representative sent to the Agency Office of Civil Rights and postmarked on or before the tenth Working Day after month end .
There shall be no direct compensation allowed the Contractor for this work but the cost thereof shall be included in the general cost of the work .
In accordance with V.S.A .
notwithstanding any contrary agreement payments made to Subcontractors after Calendar Days from receipt of a corresponding progress payment by the State to the Contractor or Calendar Days after receipt of a Subcontractors invoice whichever is later violate this agreement .
Violations shall be reported to the Agency Office of Civil Rights and Labor Compliance for review .
Failure to resolve disputes in a timely manner may result in a complaint made to the Agency Prequalification Committee .
In this Committees judgment appropriate penalties may be involved for failure to comply with this specification .
Penalties may include suspension reduction or revocation of the Contractors prequalification rating .
This clause shall be included in the prime Contractors Contract made with all of its Subcontractors .
i Cargo Preference Requirement .
All Contractors and Subcontractors are required to follow the requirements of C.F.R .
.ab .
Guidance on the requirements of Part Cargo Preference U.S .
Flag Vessels can be found on the FHWA website . .
PERMITS LICENSES AND TAXES .
The Contractor shall procure all permits and licenses pay all charges fees and taxes and give all notices necessary and incidental to the lawful prosecution of the work. . PATENTED DEVICES MATERIALS AND PROCESSES .
If any design device material or process covered by letters of patent or copyright is used by the Contractor whether required or not the Contractor shall provide for such use by suitable legal agreement with the patentee or owner a copy of this agreement shall be filed with the Agency .
The Contractor and the Contractors Surety shall defend indemnify and save harmless the State any affected third party or political subdivision from any and all Claims for infringement by reason of the use of any such patented design device material or process or any trademark or copyright and shall indemnify the State for any costs expenses and damages including reasonable attorneys fees which it may be obliged to pay by reason of any infringement at any time during the prosecution or after the completion of the work. . FEDERALAID PROVISIONS .
The Contractor acknowledges that pursuant to the provisions of U.S.C .
and Acts amendatory thereto as well as any and all other Federal legislation appropriating funds to the State the Federal Government may pay a portion of the cost of this Project .
The above act of Congress provides that the construction work and labor on any FederalAid Project in Vermont shall be done in accordance with its laws and under the direct supervision of the State of Vermont Agency of Transportation subject to the inspection and acceptance of the U.S. Department of Transportation or appropriate Federal agency and in accordance with the rules and regulations made pursuant thereto .
Therefore the construction work will be subject to such inspection by the U.S. Department of Transportation or appropriate Federal agency or its agent as deemed necessary to meet the above requirements .
Such inspection will in no sense make the Federal Government a party to this Contract and will in no way interfere with the rights of either party hereunder. . SANITARY PROVISIONS .
The Contractor shall provide and maintain in a neat and sanitary condition such accommodations for the use of its employees as necessary to comply with the requirements and regulations of the State or local Boards of Health at no expense to the Agency. . PLANT PEST CONTROL REQUIREMENTS .
Soil and soil moving equipment are subject to plant quarantine regulations .
In general these regulations provide for cleaning soil from equipment before it is moved from a Project .
Complete information may be secured from the Agency of Agriculture Food and Markets and the United States Department of Agriculture plant and pest control inspectors. . PUBLIC CONVENIENCE AND SAFETY .
a General .
The Contractor shall conduct all work so as to ensure the least possible obstruction to all types of traffic .
The safety and convenience of the general public and the residents within the construction area and the protection of persons and property shall be provided for by the Contractor as specified in Subsection .. b Dust Control .
The Contractor shall use all necessary dust control on haul roads and maintenance yards in the same manner as required for material sources and disposal areas in Subsection .
and shall be performed in accordance with Section or as directed by the Engineer .
Unless otherwise provided dust control will not be paid for directly but will be considered incidental to all other Contract Items .
The Engineer will direct the use of all necessary dust control within the limits of the work performed under the Contract .
Under those Contracts which contain Pay Items for dust control the dust control within the construction area shall be performed in accordance with the requirements of Section and will be paid for under the appropriate Contract Items .
Under those Contracts which do not contain Pay Items for dust control the necessary dust control shall be performed in accordance with the requirements of Section and the cost will not be paid for directly but will be considered incidental to all other Contract Items .
c Stored Materials .
Materials stored within the construction area shall be placed so as to cause a minimum obstruction to the traveling public and snow removal operations .
d Fire Hydrants .
Fire hydrants located within the construction area shall be kept accessible to fire apparatuses at all times and no material or obstruction shall be placed within feet of any such hydrants .
e Adjoining Ways .
Sidewalks gutters drainage inlets and portions of highways adjoining the roadway under construction shall be obstructed only when necessary .
If a sidewalk is obstructed temporary pedestrian access meeting the requirements of the ADA and the MUTCD shall be provided around the obstructed area .
f Lane Restrictions .
When the total useable width of a traveled way will be decreased to feet or less for a period longer than one Working Day the Contractor shall notify the Engineer of the date of the first day and the anticipated period of time such a lane restriction will be in effect .
This notification shall be provided at least Calendar Days prior to the beginning of the lane restriction so that the Engineer may provide proper notification to the OversizedOverweight Section of the Commercial Vehicle Enforcement Unit of the Department of Motor Vehicles and the Agencys Public Outreach Section .
When the date of the removal of the restriction becomes known the Contractor shall notify the Engineer so that notification can be provided to these entities .
g Parking Restrictions .
Only such trucks and equipment as are necessary for the construction of this Project will be permitted to stop or park on the travel lane or shoulders of the highway or intersecting highways .
All trucks or equipment so stopped or parked shall be at least feet from the edge of the through traffic lanes .
Parking or stopping on the traveled portion of the roadway will not be permitted unless authorized by the Engineer to meet field conditions .
Private automobiles of workers will not be permitted to stop or park on the travel lane or shoulders of the highway or intersecting highways .
Each of the Contractors trucks or equipment used for the construction of this Project and permitted to park or stop as provided above shall be equipped with flashing light signals on the front and rear and the signals shall be operating at all times when parked or stopped on the highway unless otherwise authorized by the Engineer .
equipment materials or vehicles must be parked or placed a minimum of feet from the edge of pavement in all directions or a minimum of feet behind guardrail when not being utilized .
The flashing light signals shall be visibly distinct from and physically separate from the hazard warning system required by Federal and State motor vehicle laws and regulations .
At least one of these flashing light signals shall be visible to traffic approaching from any angle at all times .
The procedure shown on the traffic control plan shall be strictly adhered to whenever the Contractors vehicles or equipment including that belonging to the individual workers enter or leave the traffic flow .
All movement in or out of the traffic flow shall be with the flow of traffic. . TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES .
a General .
All approach signs shown on the Plans shall be installed prior to beginning other work .
Additional traffic control devices necessary for work on any portion of the Project shall also be installed prior to beginning work on that portion .
All traffic control devices shall conform to the latest version of the MUTCD .
The Contractor shall have available on the Project the current editions of both the MUTCD and the Standard Highway Signs and Markings SHSM book .
The Contractor shall furnish erect and maintain all signs barricades lights signals and other traffic control devices necessary for the protection of the work and safety of the traveling public .
b Existing Pavement Markings .
Whenever existing pavement markings conflict with desired traffic patterns within a construction or detour area or otherwise create a potentially misleading confusing or hazardous condition for the traveling public the markings will be completely removed or obliterated by the Contractor to the satisfaction of the Engineer .
Painting over the existing lines is not acceptable .
Unless otherwise specified in the Contract no direct payment will be made for this work which will be considered incidental to all other Contract Items .
c Warning Signs .
The Contractor shall erect warning signs in advance of any location on the Project where operations interfere with the use of the road by traffic and all locations where the new work crosses or coincides with an existing road .
d Detour Signs .
The Contractor shall provide and maintain throughout the Project acceptable warning direction and detour signs at all closures and intersections along the construction and detour routes the Contractor shall provide and maintain acceptable warning direction and detour signs directing traffic around the closed portion or portions of the highway so that the temporary detour routes shall be indicated clearly throughout its their entire lengths .
e Closed Highways or Sidewalks .
Highways closed to traffic shall be protected by barricades andor other approved barriers which shall be reflectorized or illuminated .
When a section of an existing sidewalk is closed to pedestrians suitable barricades and warning signs conforming to the ADA and the MUTCD shall be installed .
If channelizing devices are used to establish a temporary pedestrian route those devices shall conform to the MUTCD .
f Delineation .
Delineation will be required through the construction area as shown on the Plans or as directed by the Engineer .
g Warning Lights .
Warning Lights may be required by the Engineer for use on signs and barricades to call attention to special or hazardous conditions .
If warning lights are used those devices shall conform to the MUTCD .
h Costs Incidental .
The cost of furnishing fabricating installing maintaining and removing traffic control devices shall be considered incidental to all other items in the Contract unless otherwise specified .
i Failure to Install Maintain Remove .
If the Contractor fails to satisfactorily install maintain or remove traffic control devices the Engineer may have such installations made maintained or removed and the cost thereof shall be deducted from the monies due the Contractor. . RESPONSIBILITY FOR USE OF FLAGGERS .
a Highway Flaggers .
As conditions warrant the Contractor shall employ one or more highway flaggers at any location on the Project where equipment or construction operations will interfere with the movement or safety of the traveling public .
This includes operations where equipment enters leaves or crosses normal traffic lanes being used or set aside for the traveling public and locations where heavy equipment is operating adjacent to areas where traffic is moving .
Highway flaggers may not be required at locations manned by uniformed traffic officers assigned for the protection of the traveling public as a Pay Item of the Contract .
Attention is directed to the provisions of Section as they may apply to the use of highway flaggers .
Where needed to assure safe ingress and egress for activities associated with the construction of the Project the Engineer may require the use of highway flaggers at locations off the Project site .
The dress equipment and procedures of all highway flaggers shall conform to the requirements in the MUTCD and Section .
b Railroad Flaggers .
The Contractor shall request flagging protection from the Operating Railroad where equipment or construction operations will interfere with the movement or safety of the trains in advance of entry into the Operating Railroad RightofWay .
This includes any operation where equipment enters leaves or crosses the Operating Railroad RightofWay .
Attention is directed to the provisions of Section and Section as they may apply to the use of railroad flaggers .
Where needed to assure safe ingress and egress for activities associated with the construction of the Project the Engineer or the Operating Railroad may require the use of railroad flaggers at locations outside of the Project site . .
THIS SUBSECTION RESERVED. . USE OF EXPLOSIVES .
a General .
The Contractor shall use the utmost care to protect life and property and whenever directed by the Engineer shall reduce the number and size of explosive charges .
Blasting mats shall be used when required by regulation or deemed necessary .
The Contractor shall notify each person company corporation or public Utility that owns leases or occupies property or structures near the site of the work of plans to use explosives notice shall be given sufficiently in advance to enable people to take such steps to protect their property or structure from injury as they may deem necessary .
Provision of notice shall not relieve the Contractor of responsibility for any damage resulting from the Contractors blasting operations .
All persons within the danger zone of blasting operations shall be warned a warning whistle shall be sounded and the zone cleared just prior to blasting .
A sufficient number of flaggers shall be stationed outside the danger zone to stop all approaching traffic during blasting operations .
Explosives shall be used only during daylight hours and shall be handled only by competent trained workers particular care shall be taken to ensure that no unexploded charges remain in the work area unattended and when constructions operations cease for the day .
All explosives shall be stored securely all storage locations shall be clearly marked DANGER EXPLOSIVES and all storage locations shall be supervised and controlled by a competent trained person at all times .
All explosives and highly flammable materials shall be stored and used in strict conformity with all Federal State and local laws rules and regulations .
Attention is directed to VOSHA Safety and Health Standards for Construction Subpart U Blasting and the Use of Explosives .
b Liability .
Each of the insurance policies required for a Project shall include coverage for injury to persons and injury or destruction of any property arising out of the storage and use of explosives .
c Insurance .
The Contractor acknowledges full responsibility and assumes full liability for any and all damage or injury to persons or property caused either directly or indirectly by the Contractors or a Subcontractors use of explosives .
The liability of the Contractor shall apply equally to damages or injury to persons or property whether said injury or damage occurs within or outside of the RightofWay .
The cost of all precautionary measures shall not be paid for directly but all costs therefore shall be included in the bid prices for the Pay Items under the Contract .
d Blasting Cap Danger .
The Contractor andor the Contractors agents shall take all precautions necessary to prevent premature explosions of electric blasting caps either individually or when they are connected into a circuit .
If blasting is within feet of a railroad a notification shall be provided to the Agency .
The Contractor andor the Contractors agents acknowledge and are hereby advised of the potential hazard of a premature explosion of electric blasting caps due to propagation of radiofrequency energy by transmitters of radio and the related radio services such as television and radar .
Mobile and fixed radio cellular telephone radar television and related transmitters are in general use in the State of Vermont including police departments fire departments political subdivisions Utility companies commercial carriers private and public enterprises and individuals .
e Warning Signs Costs Incidental .
Prior to blasting operations the Contractor shall install warning signs in conformance with the MUTCD .
Warning signs shall be located in prominent positions at least feet from the point of blasting and visible to any person approaching the blasting point .
Payment for furnishing erecting and maintaining warning signs shall be considered incidental to all other items in the Contract .
f Documentation of Structure Condition .
It shall be the responsibility of the Contractor to document the existing condition of all structures that have potential for damage .
This documentation shall be in the form of a video or pictures with sufficient description and shall be supplied to the Engineer prior to any blasting on the Project .
The costs of preparing this documentation will not be paid for directly but shall be considered incidental to all Contract Items .
g Blast Surveys .
The Contractor shall monitor all blasts and provide a report to the Engineer that shall indicate the Peak Particle Velocity PPV of the blast .
The PPV sensitivity as reported shall range from less than .
ins to more than .
ins .
The Engineer reserves the right to request more than one instrument to monitor the blasting if there is a need for monitoring in more than one direction from the blasting area .
The costs of the monitoring and preparing the reports will not be paid for directly but shall be considered incidental to all Contract Items. . PROTECTION AND RESTORATION OF PROPERTY .
a General .
The Contractor shall Not enter upon private property for any purpose without obtaining written permission Be responsible for the preservation of all public and private property along and adjacent to the work Use every precaution necessary to prevent damage or injury to public and private property Protect from disturbance or damage all land monuments and property markers until an authorized agent has witnessed or otherwise referenced their locations monuments and property markers Not move any land monuments and property markers until directed by the Engineer and Protect all trees shrubs and other plants not marked by the Engineer for removal from damage by construction operations .
b Protection of Existing Infrastructure .
The Contractor shall make sure that any portions of the existing roadway and existing structures which are to be retained for public travel are left in as good condition as when the Contractor commenced work .
The Contractor shall not move or use equipment on any pavement or structure in a manner that may or does cause damage .
c Contractors Responsibility .
The Contractor shall be responsible for all Claims involving damage or injury to or destruction of property of any type resulting from any act omission neglect or misconduct of the Contractors manner or method of executing the work due to the Contractors nonexecution of said work or due to defective work or materials .
The Contractors responsibility shall not be released until the work has been completed and accepted and the applicable statute of limitations has expired .
d Restoration of Damaged Property .
When any direct or indirect damage or injury is done to public or private property by or on account of any act omission neglect or misconduct in the execution of the work or in consequence of the nonexecution thereof on the part of the Contractor such property shall be restored at the Contractors expense to a condition similar or equal to that existing before such damage or injury was done or the Contractor shall make good such damage or injury in an acceptable manner .
e Cleaning Traffic Signals and Street Lighting .
When the Contractors operations compromise the functionality of existing traffic signals andor street lighting equipment the Engineer may require the Contractor to clean said equipment prior to Project completion .
Cleaning of traffic signals shall include all vehicle and pedestrian signal face lenses inside and outside .
Further the inside of the controller cabinet shall be vacuumed and any vent filter shall be replaced cleaning of streetlights shall include both the lens inside and outside and the reflector .
The cleaning of electrical equipment shall be done by a traffic signalelectrical Contractor .
Any equipment that is damaged in the cleaning process shall be repaired or replaced at the Contractors expense .
The costs for cleaning will not be paid for directly but will be considered incidental to all other items in the Contract .
f Ground Vibration Limits .
The maximum Peak Particle Velocity PPV of ground vibration in any of the three mutually perpendicular components of particle velocity for the following structure types shall be limited as shown in Table .A .
TABLE .A MAXIMUM PEAK PARTICLE VELOCITY Type of Structure Frequencies Hertz Frequencies Hertz Modern Homes drywall interior PPV in inchessec .
Older Homes plaster on wood or lath PPV in inchessec .
The Agency reserves the right to lower the PPV limit in areas where there may be structures or elements with a higher sensitivity to ground vibration .
Adherence to this Specification does not waive the Contractors responsibility for damage as specified in this Subsection and in Subsection .. . PROTECTION AND RESTORATION OF UTILITIES AND SERVICES .
a General .
The Contractor shall take proper precaution during construction to avoid damage to public and private services .
These services include but are not limited to gas water sewer and drainage pipes springs wells septic tanks cesspools telephone telegraph television and other communication and electrical services .
Services may be located on or adjacent to the Project above on or under the ground and may not be shown on the Plans .
b Dig Safe .
The Contractor shall comply with the requirements of Dig Safe per V.S.A. . c Notice of Work .
At commencement or resumption of construction the Contractor shall notify the owners operators occupants or lessees of all the public or private services of any work to be done on over under adjacent to or in proximity to said Utilities during the construction of the Project .
Further the Contractor shall again notify the aforesaid parties to Calendar Days in advance of starting such work to enable them to take steps as they may deem necessary to protect their property or structures from damage .
Provision of notice shall not relieve the Contractor of its responsibility for any damages resulting from the Contractors work .
d Owner Access .
Owners employees or agents of public or private services located within the Project limits shall be allowed free and full access with the tools materials and equipment necessary to install operate maintain place replace relocate and remove service facilities .
No compensation will be paid to the Contractor for any inconvenience caused by working with these parties or around or with their services .
e Service Relocation .
The exact location of any service facility relocated within the Project limits shall be as shown in the Contract or directed by the Engineer .
f Cooperation .
The Contractor shall cooperate with the owners of any of the aforementioned services in order that the service removal andor relocation operation will progress in a reasonable manner that duplication or temporary relocation work may be reduced to a minimum and that services rendered by the concerned parties will not be unnecessarily interrupted .
g Service Interruption .
If in connection with the work interruption in service occurs the Contractor shall promptly notify the owner or the owners Authorized Representative and cooperate with the owner to promptly restore service .
In no case shall interruption to water or sewer service be allowed to exist without the substitution of acceptable alternate service .
h Fire Hydrants .
No work shall be undertaken around fire hydrants until provisions for continued service have been approved by the local fire authority .
i Responsibility for Damage .
The Contractor shall be responsible for all damages done to services from the beginning of construction to the satisfactory completion of the Project including all damages to water supplies and sewage systems including but not limited to damage to springs and wells septic tanks cesspools and underground pipes whether located within or outside the Project RightofWay or whether or not shown on the Plans except as otherwise provided in the Contract .
j Restoration of Service by Agency .
If the Contractor fails to restore a service or to make good on a damage or injury to services the Engineer may proceed to repair rebuild or otherwise restore the service as deemed necessary and the cost thereof will be deducted from any monies due or which may become due the Contractor under the Contract. . PROTECTION OF HISTORICAL AND ARCHAEOLOGICAL SITES .
When the Contractors excavation operations encounter sites or artifacts of historical or archaeological significance the operations shall be immediately discontinued .
The Engineer will contact the VTrans Archaeology Officer for instructions. . FOREST PROTECTION .
When working within or adjacent to forests or other plant growth the Contractor shall satisfactorily chip or otherwise dispose of all valueless trees and logs stumps roots brush weeds grass and other objectionable material .
Disposal of such material shall be in conformance with the laws rules and regulations of the State of Vermont pertaining thereto and other authority having jurisdiction governing the protection of forests and in carrying out work within forests. . RESPONSIBILITY FOR DAMAGE CLAIMS .
a General .
The Contractor shall defend indemnify and save harmless the municipalityies the State the Agency and Operating Railroads and all of their officers agents and employees from all suits actions or Claims of any character name and description brought for or on account of any injuries or damages received or sustained by any person persons or property that arise out of relate to or are in any manner connected with the Contractors work or the supervision of the Contractors work on the Project or by or in consequence of any neglect in safeguarding the work or through use of unacceptable materials in constructing the work or by or on account of any act of omission neglect or misconduct of the Contractor or by or on account of any Claims or amounts recovered for any infringement of patent trademark or copyright or from any Claims or amounts arising or recovered under the Workers Compensation Act or any other law bylaw ordinance order or decree .
The State shall notify the Contractor in the event of any such Claim or suit and the Contractor shall immediately retain counsel and otherwise provide a complete defense against the entire Claim or suit .
After a final judgment or settlement the Contractor may request recoupment of specific defense costs and may file suit in Washington County Superior Court requesting recoupment .
The Contractor shall be entitled to recoup costs only upon a showing that such costs were entirely unrelated to the defense of any Claim arising from an act or omission of the Contractor .
The Contractor shall indemnify the State and its officers and employees in the event that the State its officers or employees become legally obligated to pay any damages or losses arising from any act or omission of the Contractor .
b Right to Retention of Funds .
Money due the Contractor under and by virtue of the Contract as shall be considered necessary by the Agency for such purpose may be retained for the use of the State .
If no money is due the Contractors Surety shall be held until such suit or suits action or actions or Claim or Claims for injuries or damages shall have been resolved and suitable evidence to that effect furnished by the Agency .
c Submission of Damage Claims .
With regard to each and every damage Claim the Contractor shall Provide the Claimant with a damage Claim form for the submission of damage Claims to the Contractor Submit the Claim to the insurance carrier Pay settle or otherwise resolve the Claim Treat all Claimants with respect Maintain a record of all Claims submitted against the Contract .
This record shall be available to the Agency and provided immediately upon request .
The record shall contain at least the following information name of the Claimant description of the Claim Claim date amount Claimed date that the Claim was sent to the insurance company if applicable date resolved amount paid indication of how the Claimant was notified of the resolution and notation of how the resolution was determined . .
OPENING SECTIONS OF PROJECT TO TRAFFIC .
a General .
Opening of a section of a Project to traffic prior to Substantial Completion of the entire Contract may be desirable in some instances .
Discussions concerning such an opening shall involve but are not limited to the Regional Construction Engineer Project Manager District Transportation Administrator and when appropriate local municipal officials .
Such an opening shall be made when directed by the Engineer and documented in a Written Order .
Such an opening shall not constitute acceptance of the work or a part thereof or a waiver of any provisions of the Contract .
b Maintenance Expense .
On any section opened by direction of the Engineer prior to Substantial Completion of the Contract the Contractor shall not be required to assume any expense entailed in maintaining the road for traffic beyond that required of a Contractor when opening a section of roadway to traffic .
When extraordinary work is required to open a section of work prior to Substantial Completion of the Contract the Engineer in hisher sole discretion may determine that compensation for any additional expense incurred by the Contractor to maintain traffic and allowance of additional time needed to complete the work will be made to the Contractor .
c Delayed Completion of Project .
If the Contractor delays completion of shoulders drainage structures or other features of the work the Engineer will notify the Contractor in writing and establish a reasonable period of time in which the work shall be completed .
If the Contractor fails to complete the work by the time specified the Engineer may order all or a portion of the Project opened to traffic at no additional cost to the Agency .
On sections that are ordered to be opened the Contractor shall conduct the remainder of construction operations so as to cause the least obstruction and disruption to the traveling public including vehicular and pedestrian traffic adjacent landowners and commercial businesses .
The Contractor shall not receive any additional compensation due to the added cost caused by opening such sections to traffic .
d Opening Project to Traffic for Winter Season .
As specified in Subsection .A the Contractor shall open the roadway for the winter shutdown period from December nd to April th inclusive .
However when work is being done because the Contractor did not complete the work before the Contract Completion Date any work that is not covered by a Pay Item in the Contract shall be considered incidental to the original Contract Items and shall be performed at no additional cost to the Agency .
This shall include any work required by the Agencys District Transportation Administrators andor municipal highway or public works officials to aid in the performance of winter maintenance activities .
None of the time associated with the performance of this work shall be considered for an extension of time under Subsection ..
Furthermore the Contractor shall not be entitled to any additional compensation for the completion of remaining work that has to be performed under the influence of pedestrian andor vehicular traffic .
e Compensation for Work on Opened Sections .
Except as provided for in this Subsection notwithstanding any other provision of the Contract Documents the Contractor shall receive no additional compensation for work on a section of the Project that has been opened to traffic as described herein . .
CONTRACTORS RESPONSIBILITY FOR WORK .
a General .
Until acceptance of the Project by the Engineer the Contractor shall be responsible therefore and shall take every precaution against injury or damage to any part thereof by the action of the elements or from any other cause whether arising from the execution or from the non execution of the work .
The Contractor shall rebuild repair restore and make good all injuries or damages to any portion of the work before acceptance and shall bear the expense thereof except damage to the work due to unforeseeable causes beyond the control of and without the fault or negligence of the Contractor including but not restricted to acts of God of a public enemy or governmental authorities .
For purposes of this paragraph the term work shall exclude Contractor owned rented or leased materials equipment and incidentals .
b Suspension of Work .
When work is suspended for any reason the Contractor shall be responsible for the Project and shall take precautions to prevent damage to the Project provide for normal drainage and erect any necessary temporary structures signs or other facilities solely at the Contractors expense .
During a period of suspension of work the Contractor shall properly and continuously maintain in an acceptable growing condition all living material in newly established plantings seedings and soddings furnished under the Contract and take adequate precautions to protect new tree growth and other important vegetative growth against injury .
c Winter Maintenance .
The performance by the State a subdivision thereof or other authorized agent of any snowplowing salting andor sanding shall not relieve the Contractor of its responsibility as outlined herein or elsewhere in the Contract. . NO PERSONAL LIABILITY OF PUBLIC OFFICIALS .
It being understood that in all such matters relative to the Contract that they act solely as agents and representatives of the State neither the Vermont Secretary of Transportation Deputy Secretary the Chief Engineer Engineer or their Authorized Representatives shall be liable either personally or as officials of the State for their actions pursuant to authority granted to them by the Contract. . NO WAIVER OF LEGAL RIGHTS .
a General .
Upon completion of the work the Agency will expeditiously make final inspection and notify the Contractor of acceptance .
Acceptance of the Project however will not preclude or prevent the Agency from correcting any measurement estimate or certificate made before or after completion of the work and the Agency will not be precluded or prevented from recovering from the Contractor the Contractors Surety or both any overpayment it may have made by failure on the part of the Contractor to fulfill the Contractors obligations under the Contract .
A waiver on the part of the Agency of any breach of any part of the Contract shall not be held to be a waiver of any other or subsequent breach .
b Latent Defects Fraud and Gross Mistakes .
Without prejudice to the terms of the Contract the Contractor shall be liable to the Agency for latent defects fraud and such gross errors omissions or mistakes as may amount to fraud and as regards the Agencys rights under any warranty or guaranty . .
FURNISHING RIGHTOFWAY .
It will be the responsibility of the Agency or appropriate political subdivision to secure all of the permanent RightsofWay which may be necessary for a construction Contract and to make said RightsofWay completely and physically available to the Contractor .
Any additional RightsofWay andor additional rights to use land outside of the Rightof Way as shown on the Plans which the Contractor desires for its own convenience shall be obtained and paid for by the Contractor. . BUY AMERICA PROVISIONS .
a General .
All steel or iron products permanently incorporated into FederalAid Projects shall be products that have been entirely manufactured within the United States as per U.S.C .
and C.F.R .
.. All manufacturing processes of the steel or iron material in a product i.e .
smelting and any subsequent process which alters the steel materials physical form or shape or changes its chemical composition must occur within the United States to be considered of domestic origin .
This includes processes such as rolling extending machining bending grinding and drilling .
If an item is utilized and in the opinion of the Contractor it is impossible impractical or undesirable to remove the item then Buy America provisions apply .
b Use of Foreign Materials .
This requirement does not prevent a minimal use of foreign materials provided the cost of foreign materials used does not exceed .
of the total Contract price or whichever is greater .
The cost of foreign steel or iron is defined as its value delivered to the Project .
The Contractor shall notify the Engineer if it intends to use any foreign materials on the Project .
c Coatings on SteelIron .
In accordance with C.F.R. . iron has been added to the materials now subject to the Buy America requirements and the action of applying a coating to a covered material i.e .
steel and iron is now deemed a manufacturing process subject to Buy America .
Coating includes epoxy coating galvanizing painting and any other coating that protects or enhances the value of a material subject to requirements of Buy America .
d Temporary Items .
Temporary items are not subject to Buy America provisions where the Contract Specifications provide that the steel or iron products used on the Project are to be removed at the end of the Project or may be removed at the Contractors convenience .
Where the State can document that steel or iron products will be removed in subsequent nearterm stages as part of phased construction such products are considered temporary and not subject to Buy America .
Where steel or iron products will remain in place at the end of the Contract and where phased construction is not imminent such products are considered permanent and Buy America shall apply. . DEFENSE OF LAWSUITS CHALLENGE TO JURISDICTION AND WAIVER OF IMMUNITY .
When defending any Claim that may arise under the Contract the Contractor shall not raise or impose any defense involving the jurisdiction of the tribunal before which said Claim is pending the immunity of the State of Vermont governmental nature of the State or the provision of any statutes respecting suits against the said State of Vermont without obtaining the express advance permission of the Vermont Attorney Generals Office. . INTEREST .
Notwithstanding any statutory or other provisions to the contrary interest on monies owed pursuant to the Contract shall be paid as follows a Claims for Adjustment or Dispute PreDecision or Judgment .
Interest shall be allowed the Contractor on a decision or judgment for money in a Claim for adjustment or dispute .
Predecision or judgment interest shall be calculated for Calendar Days after the date of the Claim but for the failure of the Agency to make the payment to the date of decision or judgment at a simple rate equal to the weekly average year constant maturity Treasury yield as published by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System for the calendar week preceding the date of the decision or judgment b Claims for Adjustment or Dispute PostDecision or Judgment .
Interest shall be allowed the Contractor on a decision or judgment for money in a Claim for adjustment or dispute .
Post decision or judgment interest shall be calculated from the date of decision or judgment to the date of payment at a simple rate equal to the weekly average year constant maturity Treasury yield as published by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System for the calendar week preceding the date of the decision or judgment .
SECTION PROSECUTION AND PROGRESS .
SUBLETTING OR ASSIGNMENT OF CONTRACT .
a General .
The Contractor shall not sublet assign sell transfer or otherwise dispose of the Contract or any portion thereof or of its right title or interest therein to any individual firm corporation or other entity without the written consent of the Engineer .
The Contractor must file with the Agency copies of all executed Subcontracts and other documents .
An approved Subcontractor shall not in turn sublet or assign any of the work pertaining to the Subcontract without the Contractor obtaining further permission from the Agency .
In no event shall Agency approval release the Contractor from responsibility and liability under the Contract and bonds .
b Performance of the Contract Work .
The Contractor shall perform Contract work with its own organization amounting to at least of the total Contract work amount minus specialty items .
The Contractors own organization includes only workers employed and paid directly by the Contractor and equipment owned leased or rented by it from a nondebarred individual or entity with or without operators .
The term own organization does not include employees or equipment of a Subcontractor assignee agent or supplier of the Contractor .
When determining whether the Contractor is in compliance with this requirement the following shall apply The cost of materials and manufactured products to be purchased or produced under the Contract shall be included in the amount upon which the requirement is computed .
The percentage of Subcontracted work shall be based on the Contract rather than Subcontract Unit Prices .
If only a part of a Contract Item is to be sublet its proportional value shall be determined on the same basis .
When a firm sells materials to a Contractor and performs the work of incorporating the materials into the Project these actions must be considered in combination and as constituting a single Subcontract .
c Specialty Items .
The cost of specialty items may be deducted from the total Contract price before computing the amount of work required to be performed by the Contractors own organization .
Specialty items will be designated as such in the Project Special Provisions and may be performed by Subcontract .
d Performance Requirements .
The Contractor and its Subcontractors shall in the staffing and administration of the Contract comply with the following performance requirements Commercially Useful Function .
The Contractor and Subcontractors must each perform a commercially useful function .
This means that the ContractorSubcontractor is responsible for the execution of a distinct element of the work of a Contract and carries out its responsibilities by actually performing managing and supervising the work involved .
The ContractorSubcontractor must have the latitude to independently a .
Select Contracts to be bid b .
Determine prices to be quoted c. Select material suppliers d. Hire fire supervise and pay employees and e. Direct or cause the direction of the management and policies of the firm .
The ContractorSubcontractor may not broker work for another firm or act as a bidding conduit .
Contractor to Furnish Competent Representative Safety Officer Others .
To ensure that any Subcontracted work is performed in accordance with the Contract requirements the Contractor shall be required to furnish a .
A competent reliable Englishspeaking representative employed by the Contractor who has full authority to direct performance of the work in accordance with the Contract requirements and who is responsible for all construction operations on the Project regardless of who performs the work .
b .
A competent reliable Englishspeaking employee designated as the Safety Officer who is authorized to receive orders and to issue binding directions concerning safety to all persons except Agency representatives associated with the Project whether employed by the Contractor Subcontractors or material suppliers .
c. Such other individuals from the Contractors organization as the Agencys Construction Engineer determines is are necessary to ensure the performance of the Contract e.g .
supervisory managerial and engineering personnel .
Employees on Payroll .
The ContractorSubcontractor is not permitted to place on the payroll the employees of another firm for the purpose of avoiding Federal or State regulations or the provisions of the Contract. . NOTICE TO PROCEED .
The Contractor shall not commence construction operations until the written Notice to Proceed has been issued . .
PROSECUTION AND PROGRESS OF THE WORK .
a Progress Schedule .
The Progress Schedule shall be submitted a minimum of Calendar Days prior to the preconstruction conference .
The progress schedule shall show the proposed sequence of work and when the Contractor proposes to complete the various items of work within the times established in the Contract .
During the progress of the work the Contractor shall confer with the Engineer concerning performance of the work in accordance with the Conforming schedule .
The Conforming schedule shall be used as a basis for establishing major construction operations and for checking the progress of the work .
A Notice to Proceed will not be issued until the Progress Schedule has been found to be in Conformance .
b Performance of the Work .
The work shall be performed from as many points in as many parts at times in a manner and with sufficient materials equipment and labor so as to ensure its completion within the times set forth in the Contract .
c Resumption of Work After Discontinuance with Consent .
Should the performance of the work be discontinued by the Contractor for any reason the Contractor shall notify the Engineer at least hours before resuming operations . .
LIMITATIONS OF OPERATIONS .
The Contractor shall conduct the work at all times in a manner and sequence that will ensure the least interference with traffic .
The Contractor shall have due regard to the location of detours and to the provisions for handling traffic .
The Contractor shall not commence work to the prejudice or detriment of work previously started .
The Engineer may require the Contractor to complete an area on which work is in progress before work is commenced on other areas if the opening of the area in progress is essential to public convenience . .
CHARACTER OF WORKERS METHODS AND EQUIPMENT .
a General .
The Contractor shall at all times employ sufficient labor and equipment to perform the several classes of work to full completion in the manners and times required by the Contract Documents .
b Worker Skill and Experience .
All workers shall have sufficient skill and experience to properly perform the work assigned to them .
Workers engaged in specialty or skilled work shall have sufficient skill experience and experience with equipment required to perform such work properly and satisfactorily .
c Electrical Work .
All electrical work shall be performed by or under the supervision of a licensed electrician master or journeyman .
Electrical work shall be defined as any work which involves making connections to electrical components or splices in wiring that are or will be carrying volts or more .
Under the supervision of means that the licensed electrician employed on the Project shall be physically present on the Project and must be actively supervising the work .
d Removal of Workers from Project .
Any person employed by the Contractor or a Subcontractor who in the opinion of the Engineer does not perform work in a proper and skillful manner or is intemperate or disorderly shall at the Written Order of the Engineer be removed forthwith by the Contractor or Subcontractor employing such person and shall not be employed again in any portion of the work without the approval of the Engineer .
e Failure to Remove Worker from Project .
If the Contractor fails to remove a person or persons as required above or fails to furnish suitable and sufficient personnel for the proper prosecution of the work the Engineer may withhold all monies which are or may become due andor may suspend the work by written notice until the Contractor complies with the order .
f Equipment Sufficiency .
All equipment used to perform the work shall be of sufficient size and mechanical condition to meet requirements of the work and to produce work of satisfactory quality .
Equipment used on the Project shall not cause injury to the roadway adjacent property or other highways .
g Methods and Equipment Not Prescribed .
When the methods and equipment to be used by the Contractor are not prescribed in the Contract the Contractor is free to use any methods or equipment that it demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Engineer will accomplish the work in conformity with the requirements of the Contract and provided they pose no safety risk to the workers inspection staff traveling public or general public .
h Methods and Equipment Prescribed .
When the Contract specifies that the work be performed by the use of certain methods and equipment those methods and equipment shall be used unless otherwise authorized by the Engineer .
If the Contractor desires to use a method or type of equipment other than those specified in the Contract the Contractor shall request approval from the Engineer to do so .
The request shall be in writing and shall include a full description of the methods and equipment proposed to be used and an explanation of the reasons for desiring to make the change .
If approval is given it will be on the condition that the Contractor will be fully responsible for producing work in conformity with Contract requirements .
If after trial use of the substituted methods or equipment the Engineer determines that the work produced does not meet Contract requirements the Contractor shall discontinue the use of the substitute method or equipment and shall complete the remaining work with the specified methods and equipment .
The Contractor shall remove the deficient work and replace it with work of specified quality or take such other corrective action as the Engineer may direct .
No change will be made in basis of payment for the construction items involved or in Contract time as a result of authorizing a change in methods or equipment .
The changing of methods and equipment prescribed shall not be justification for a Claim. . WAGES AND CONDITIONS OF EMPLOYMENT .
a General .
The Contractor and all Subcontractors shall comply with the provisions and requirements of all Federal and State labor laws and with the wage requirements set forth in detail in the Contract .
In case of conflicts between wage determinations made by the U.S. Department of Labor and the minimum wage established by statute the larger of the two amounts shall be the minimum wage for that classification .
Fair Labor Standards Act .
The Fair Labor Standards Act FLSA of as amended U.S.C. . a .
General .
No law requires Federal or State agencies to insert in their Contracts a clause to ensure compliance by the Contractor with the FLSA .
However the FLSA most likely applies to work under a construction Contract with the Federal Government or that is financed with the aid of the Federal Government .
The FLSA requires payment of a minimum hourly rate as well as overtime pay for work in excess of hours in each workweek .
Moreover the overtime provisions of the FSLA and of the EightHour Law are not mutually exclusive .
Therefore a Contractors employees covered by the FLSA are most likely also covered by the overtime provisions of other applicable laws .
The FLSA sometimes known as the WageandHourLaw applies to individual workers who are engaged in commerce or in the production of goods for commerce as defined in the FLSA .
Workers on virtually all Agency construction jobs are included under these terms .
If a worker carries materials or moves equipment across state lines unloads or guards materials or equipment arriving from other states or performs other functions in commerce in the course of performing work that worker is covered under the FLSA .
Also if the job is one to repair reconstruct enlarge or improve an existing instrumentality of commerce such as a highway bridge or road the worker is likewise covered under the FLSA while working on the job including municipal streets if they are available to and are regularly used by interstate traffic .
New construction is covered by the FLSA when the Projects is are part of and directly related to the functioning of an existing instrumentality of commerce .
Coverage is therefore extended to construction workers on highways in the Interstate System or on other roads built to serve as part of a network carrying interstate traffic .
In this regard workers engaged in work preparatory to actual construction such as surveying clearing or grading are also covered .
b. Minors .
Under the FLSA the minimum age for general employment in the construction industry is years .
The minimum age is years for employment in occupations declared to be hazardous by the U.S. Secretary of Labor .
Included in this category are the occupations of motorvehicle driver and helper .
Children and years old may be employed for a limited number of hours and under certain conditions in office work they may not be employed in any manner at covered construction sites .
c. Contacts for More Information .
The above is general information concerning the applicability of the FLSA to the highway construction industry .
More information can be found on the U.S. Department of Labor website or U.S. Department of Labor Wage and Hour Division Manchester District Office Elm Street Suite Manchester NH Phone USWAGE Contract Work Hours and Safety Standards Act .
a .
General .
The Contract Work Hours and Safety Standards Act CWHSSA is administered by the Wage and Hour Division WHD .
The Act applies to Contractors and Subcontractors with Federal service Contracts and Federally funded and assisted construction Contracts over .
Covered Contracts include those entered into by the United States any agency or instrumentality of the United States any territory of the United States or the District of Columbia .
The CWHSSA also extends to Federally assisted construction Contracts subject to DavisBacon and Related Acts wage standards where the Federal government is not a direct party except those Contracts where the Federal assistance takes the form only of a loan guarantee or insurance .
b .
Basic Provisions and Requirements .
The CWHSSA requires Contractors and Subcontractors with covered Contracts to pay laborers and mechanics employed in the performance of the Contracts one and onehalf times their basic rate of pay for all hours worked over in a workweek .
DavisBacon Act .
Where the Contract includes DavisBacon wage rate requirements the following also applies .
a .
General .
The wage rate determination of the U.S. Department of Labor which has been incorporated in the proposal may not contain all job classifications necessary for the work contemplated under the Project .
The Contractor is independently responsible for ascertaining area practice with respect to the necessity or lack thereof for the use of any job classifications in the prosecution of the work contemplated by the Project no inference concerning prevailing area practices relative to their use may be drawn from the omission of these job classifications .
Further the omission of a job classification shall not be construed as establishing governmental liability for increased labor cost .
b .
Missing Job ClassificationsWage Rates .
The Contractor shall submit to the Agency any requests for missing job classifications and proposed wage rates .
c. Vermont Labor Laws .
The Contractors attention is directed to the provisions and requirements of the Vermont Workers Compensation Act and to Vermont statutes regulating employment of minors. . LABOR AND RENTAL PREFERENCE .
In accordance with V.S.A the Contractor shall give preference to Vermont labor and trucks owned in Vermont .
This requirement shall not apply to any highway Project or any part thereof financed with Federal funds. . MEETING PERSONNEL REQUIREMENTS .
Contractors are encouraged to use the services of the local offices of the State Department of Employment and Training to meet their personnel requirements .
Recruitment of workers in all occupations and skills is conducted by the State Employment and Training Services initially from the immediate labor market areas and when workers with the required skills are not available locally through the nationwide workforce clearance system of the U.S. Employment Service .
Available workers may be obtained from the Vermont Department of Employment Training and from the VTrans Office of Civil Rights and Labor Compliance . .
TEMPORARY SUSPENSION OF THE WORK .
a General .
The work may be suspended by the Engineer wholly or in part for such period or periods as necessary on account of Unsuitable weather conditions .
Failure on the part of the Contractor to carry out instruction or a Written Order to perform satisfactory work or to perform one or more provisions of the Contract .
Any other conditions which in the judgment of the Engineer make work impractical dangerous harmful to the environment or in violation of a permit or other authorization for the Project .
b Authority of Agency Safety Officer .
In the absence of the Engineer the Agency Safety Officer or person acting in that role shall have authority to suspend work when they determine that the suspension of work is warranted for a safety violation on the job site .
The period of time work is suspended due to a safety violation will not be justification for an extension of time under Subsection .
or for additional compensation .
c Authority of Agency Hazardous Materials and Waste Coordinator .
In the absence of the Engineer the Agency Hazardous Materials and Waste Coordinator or person acting in that role shall have authority to suspend work when heshe determines that the suspension of work is warranted for an environmental violation on the job site .
The period of time work is suspended due to an environmental violation will not be justification for an extension of time under Subsection .
or for additional compensation .
d Seasonal Closure .
From December nd to April th inclusive no construction work of any kind shall be done except by written permission from the Regional Construction Engineer and only under such conditions as specified therein .
Permission will only be granted for work which will result in a direct benefit to the State or the traveling public .
Items which may be considered as a benefit include but are not limited to shorter Contract Duration a cost savings increased safety for the traveling public and an ability to ensure the quality of work .
The Contractor shall request permission in writing detailing what Contract Items may be affected a schedule of work and the benefits to the State or traveling public .
The Agency reserves the right at its sole discretion to rescind permission to work during the seasonal closure period .
The rescission will not be justification for additional compensation .
e Seasonal Closure Procedure .
Construction procedure prior to closing down the Project for seasonal closure shall be as specified in Subsection .. f Contractor Suspension of Work .
The Contractor shall not suspend the work without permission of the Engineer .
Such permission will not be unreasonably withheld .
g Contract Applicable .
If the work is suspended for any reason all appropriate requirements of the Contract shall continue. . SUSPENSIONS OF WORK ORDERED BY THE ENGINEER .
a Additional CompensationTime Request Time Limit .
If the performance of all or any portion of the work is suspended or delayed by the Engineer for an unreasonable period of time not originally anticipated customary or inherent to the construction industry and the Contractor believes that additional compensation andor Contract time is due or will become due as a result of the suspension or delay the Contractor shall immediately submit to the Engineer in writing a Notice of Delay .
The Notice of Delay shall set forth the reasons and potential impacts to the work and the schedule .
The Contractor must submit a Request for Adjustment to the Contract to include additional costs and schedule impacts with all supporting documentation to the Engineer within Calendar Days of receipt of the Notice to Resume Work or the Conclusion of the Delay and not thereafter .
The Request will be evaluated in accordance with Subsection .. No Contract adjustment will be allowed unless the Contractor has submitted the required Notice of Delay and the Request for Adjustment within the time prescribed .
b Evaluation of Request .
Upon receipt of the Request for Adjustment the Engineer will evaluate the Contractors request .
If the Engineer agrees that the cost andor time required for the performance of the Contract has increased as a result of the suspensiondelay and the suspensiondelay was caused by conditions beyond the control of and not the fault of the Contractor its suppliers or Subcontractors at any approved tier and not caused by weather the Engineer will make an adjustment excluding profit and modify the Contract accordingly .
The Engineer will notify the Contractor whether or not an adjustment of the Contract is warranted .
To the extent that performance would have been suspended or delayed by any other cause or an adjustment is provided for or excluded under some other term or condition of the Contract no Contract adjustment will be allowed under this Subsection . .
DETERMINATION OF EXTENSION OF CONTRACT TIME FOR COMPLETION .
a General Request for Extension of Contract Completion Date .
When a definite date or a fixed number of days for completion is specified in the Contract and when the Contractor fails to substantially complete the work within the Contract time specified due to unforeseen conditions beyond the control and without fault or negligence of the Contractor the Contractor will be credited additional Contract completion time on a full day basis as provided in Subsection .b .
The Finals Engineer will submit to the Contractor a Request for Extension of Time Form containing a preliminary review of extension of time in accordance with Subsection .b .
If the Contractor concurs with the preliminary review the Contractor shall sign and return the form to the Finals Engineer within Calendar Days of the date of presentation the day period .
If the Contractor disputes the preliminary review the Contractor shall notify the Finals Engineer within the day period and provide supportive documentation regarding the dispute .
Upon notification of a dispute the Construction Section will research and provide a decision to the Contractor .
The Contractor may appeal this decision within Calendar Days to the Chief Engineer as provided in Subsection ..
Notwithstanding Subsection .
and Subsection .
failure to notify the Finals Engineer of a dispute within the day period shall constitute concurrence with the preliminary review and be deemed a waiver of the Contractors right to appeal in which case the extension of time will be processed without the Contractors signature .
The Contractor may request an extension of time to the Resident Engineer during the course of the Project .
No extension of time will be required when a Substantial Completion Date is established prior to the Contract Completion Date as modified by applicable Change Orders .
b Determination of Contract Completion Date Extension .
Whenever the work is delayed or suspended through no fault of the Contractor a Contract Completion Date extension may be made by the Engineer in the following circumstances Delay by the Agency in awarding the Contract andor in issuance of the Authorization to Proceed with Submittals or the Notice to Proceed .
Federal or State laws passed subsequent to the date of the Contract adversely affecting progress of the work .
Acts of God including but not limited to unusually severe storms of extended duration or impact which could not generally be anticipated by the Contractor either during the bidding process or during construction and catastrophic weather events such as floods droughts fires hurricanes tornadoes earthquakes or landslides .
Suspension of work by order of the Engineer .
In such cases the time for completion will be extended an amount equal to the elapsed time between effective dates of order to suspend and order to resume .
Differing Site Conditions pursuant to Subsection ..
Significant Changes in the Character of the Work pursuant to Subsection ..
Extra Work ordered by the Engineer pursuant to Subsection ..
Delays in the issuance of permits approvals or other government regulatory action that are not attributable to the Contractor .
Court orders including but not limited to temporary restraining orders preliminary and permanent injunctions or judgments that are not attributable to the Contractor .
Industrywide labor unrest .
The days from April th to December st inclusive on which the weather or condition of the ground caused suspension of the work .
Industrywide material or supply shortages not reasonably anticipated by the Contractor at the time the Contract was entered .
Delays caused by a shortage of materials but only when the Contractor furnishes to the Engineer documentary proof that a diligent effort has been made to obtain the materials from all known sources and the inability to obtain the materials when originally planned did in fact cause a delay in final completion of the entire work and the delay could not be avoided by revising the sequence of the Contractors operations .
The Contractor shall notify the Engineer in writing of the causes of delay caused by material shortages no later than Calendar Days from the beginning of any such delay and not thereafter .
Any other conditions which in the opinion of the Chief Engineer warrants consideration for an extension of time. . FAILURE TO COMPLETE WORK ON TIME .
a Time Essential Element .
Time is an essential element of the Contract .
The Contractor shall plan its progress schedule and progress the work in order to complete the Contract on or before the Contract Completion Date or duration set forth in the Contract .
b Liquidated Damages General Days Charged .
For each Working Day on which any work remains incomplete after the Completion Date or duration specified in the Contract for completion of the work involved there shall be deducted from any monies due the Contractor the amount shown in Table .A unless otherwise specified in the Contract .
The deduction is not a penalty but is liquidated damages to defray the cost to the Agency to administer the Contract including but not limited to the cost of engineering inspection supervision inconvenience to the public obstruction of traffic and interference with business .
Due account shall be provided for any adjustment of the Contract time for completion of the work under the provisions of Subsection .. TABLE .A DAILY LIQUIDATED DAMAGES CHARGE PER WORKING DAY OF DELAY Original Contract Amount dollars Daily Charge per Working Day of Delay dollars From More Than To and Including Should the Contractor elect to work on Saturdays Sundays holidays or days from December nd to April th inclusive after the Contract Completion Date the Contractor will be charged Liquidated Damages for such days worked .
c No Waiver .
Permitting the Contractor to continue to finish the work or any part of the work after the time fixed for its completion or after the date to which the time for completion may have been extended shall not operate as a waiver on the part of the Agency of any of its rights under the Contract .
d Liability for Liquidated Damages .
The Contractor covenants and agrees that should the amount of monies due or that may become due the Contractor be less than the amount of ascertained Liquidated Damages the Contractor and the Contractors Surety shall be liable to the State for the deficiency .
e Liquidated Damages Cutoff Date .
No Liquidated Damages will be charged after the establishment of a Substantial Completion Date . .
TERMINATION OF CONTRACT .
a General Notice .
Upon written notice from the Engineer or other proof satisfactory to the Secretary the Secretary will give notice in writing to the Contractor and the Contractors Surety of delay neglect or default if the Contractor Fails to begin the work under the Contract within the time specified in the Notice to Proceed In the opinion of the Engineer fails to perform the work with sufficient workers and equipment or with sufficient materials to ensure the prompt completion of said work In the opinion of the Engineer performs the work unsuitably or neglects or refuses to remove materials or to redo or replace work rejected as defective and unsuitable Discontinues the prosecution of the work without authorization of the Engineer Fails to resume work that has been discontinued within a reasonable time after notice to do so Becomes insolvent is declared bankrupt or commits any act of bankruptcy or insolvency Allows any final judgment to stand against the Contractor unsatisfied for a period of Calendar Days Makes an assignment for the benefit of creditors or In the opinion of the Engineer fails for any cause whatsoever to carry on the work in an acceptable and timely manner .
b Failure of Contractor to Proceed Termination .
If the Contractor or the Contractors surety does not proceed in accordance with the notice within a period of Calendar Days after notice the Agency may without violating the Contract terminate the Contract by taking performance of the work out of the hands of the Contractor .
The Agency may appropriate and use any or all materials and equipment on the Project as are suitable and acceptable and may enter into an agreement for the completion of the Contract according to the terms and provisions thereof or use such other methods as in the discretion of the Engineer will be required for the completion of the Contract in an acceptable manner and in the best interest of the Agency .
c Agencys Costs .
All costs and charges incurred by the Agency together with the costs of completing the work under Contract shall be deducted from any monies due or which may become due the Contractor .
If the expense incurred by the Agency is less than the sum which would have been payable under the Contract had it been completed by the Contractor the Contractor shall be entitled to receive the difference if the expense exceeds the sum which would have been payable under the Contract the Contractor and the Contractors Surety shall be liable and shall pay to the Agency the amount of the excess . .
TERMINATION OF CONTRACT FOR CONVENIENCE .
a General .
The Agency may by Written Order to the Contractor terminate the Contract or any portion thereof when such termination would be in the best interest of the Agency .
Any such termination shall be effected by delivery to the Contractor an Order of Termination specifying the termination is for the convenience of the Agency the extent to which performance of work under the Contract is terminated and the effective date of the termination .
In the event such termination occurs without fault and for reasons beyond the control of the Contractor all completed items of work as of the date of termination will be paid for at the Contract bid price .
Payment for partially completed work will be made either at agreed prices or by Force Account methods provided elsewhere in the Contract .
Pursuant to Subsection .
no compensation will be allowed for items eliminated from the Contract .
Upon request the Contractor shall make all Contractrelated records available to the Agency .
b Contractor Obligations .
After receipt of the Order of Termination and except as otherwise directed by the Engineer the Contractor shall immediately proceed to To the extent specified in the Order of Termination stop work under the Contract on the date specified .
Place no further orders or Subcontracts for materials services andor facilities except as may be necessary for completion of such portions of the work under the Contract as is are not terminated .
Terminate and cancel all orders or Subcontracts for materials services andor facilities except as may be necessary for completion of such portions of the work under the Contract as is are not terminated .
Submit to the Engineer a material inventory list certified as to quantity and quality of materials in its possession or in transit to the Project .
Transfer to the Agency all completed or partially completed plans drawings information and other property which if the Contract had been completed would be required to be furnished to the Agency in electronic format .
Take other action as may be necessary or as directed by the Engineer for the protection and preservation of the property related to the Contract which is in the possession of the Contractor and in which the Agency has or may acquire any interest .
c Claim by Contractor .
After receipt of the Order of Termination from the Agency the Contractor shall submit any Claim for additional damages or costs not covered herein or elsewhere in the Contract within Calendar Days of the effective termination date and not thereafter .
Should the Contractor fail to submit a Claim within the Calendar Day period the Agency may at its sole discretion based on information available to it determine what if any compensation is due the Contractor and pay the Contractor the determined amount .
d Materials .
At the option of the Agency acceptable materials included in the material inventory in Subsection .b above that have been obtained by the Contractor for the work but which have not been incorporated into the work may be purchased from the Contractor at actual cost and delivered to a location prescribed by the Engineer or otherwise disposed of as mutually agreed .
Payment for materials included in the material inventory chosen to be purchased by the Agency will be made at actual cost delivered to the Project or storage site designated by the Engineer including transportation charges to which overhead and profit will be added .
e Idle Equipment .
Idle equipment time Claimed by the Contactor will be paid as follows Contractor Owned Equipment .
For the portion of any Claim relating to idle equipment time for equipment owned by the Contractor the Contractor will be entitled to recover equipment rates based on the Contractors internal ownership costs .
Recovery for idle equipment time shall not be based on published rental rates .
Rented or Leased Equipment .
For the portion of any Claim relating to idle equipment time for equipment rented or leased by the Contractor the Contractor will be entitled to recover the lesser of the actual rental costs or fair market rental costs and the amount shall not exceed Calendar Days rental .
Limitations on Recovery for Idle Equipment .
Claims for idle equipment time whether for Contractor owned equipment or leasedrented equipment following termination of the Contract pursuant to this Subsection are limited to a maximum of Calendar Days and may not include any operating expenses .
f Negotiation No Anticipated Profit .
Negotiation to settle a timely Claim shall be for the sole purpose of reaching a settlement equitable to both the Contractor and the Agency .
Settlement shall be based on actual costs incurred by the Contractor plus overhead and profit as specified in Subsection ..
Consequential damages loss of overhead loss of overhead contribution of any kind andor loss of anticipated profits on work not performed shall not be included in the Contractors Claim and will not be considered allowed or included as part of any settlement .
g Records .
The Contractor shall make available to the Agency all cost records relevant to a determination of an equitable settlement .
h Contractual Responsibilities Continue .
Termination of the Contract or portion thereof shall not relieve the Contractor of its contractual responsibilities for work completed and shall not relieve the Contractors Surety of its obligation for and concerning any just Claim arising out of the work performed . .
TERMINATION OF CONTRACTORS RESPONSIBILITY .
a Completion and Acceptance .
Whenever the Projects provided for by the Contract has have been completely performed by the Contractor all parts of the work have been approved and accepted by the Engineer and all Contract Documents complied with the Contractor will then be released from further obligations except as set forth in the bonds provided and the Agency will provide the Contractor with a Completion and Acceptance Memorandum .
b Limited Completion and Acceptance .
If the Contract includes work at more than one location as separate Projects or as separate locations on a single Project the Agency may accept the work at any location when the work at that location is completely finished and all responsible parties agree to acceptance in the same manner as a normal final inspection .
If a portion of the Contract is accepted by the Engineer and all Contract Documents related thereto are complied with the Contractor shall remove all construction warning signs from that portion and the Contractor will then be released from further obligations as to that portion except as set forth in the bonds provided .
If Substantial Completion of the work is accomplished but additional work is required to achieve final acceptance the Agency may accept the work under the Contract with exceptions andor reservations . .
DELAYS COMPENSABLE AND NONCOMPENSABLE .
a Compensable Delays .
The Engineer may allow additional compensation for the timerelated issues specifically enumerated in this Subsection only if the delays and other timerelated issues result from Differing Site Conditions pursuant to Subsection .
or Significant Changes in the Character of the Work pursuant to Subsection .
or Suspensions of Work ordered by the Engineer pursuant to Subsection .. b Recoverable Costs .
Only the following costs may be recovered for Compensable Delays under Subsection .a Labor Materials and Equipment .
The costs provided for in Subsection .
and properly documented and maintained pursuant to that Subsection .
Field Office Overhead .
The actual cost paid by the Contractor to third parties for Field Office rental utilities and routine cleaning plus for Contract supervision overhead and profit .
Home Office Overhead .
Unabsorbed home office overhead is only recoverable pursuant to Subsection .. c NonRecoverable Costs .
The following costs are not recoverable under the Contract Home office overhead in excess of that provided in Subsection .. Loss of profit in excess of that provided in Subsection .. Loss of productivity andor inefficiencies in labor .
Consequential damages such as loss of interest or investment with respect to funds at issue in the dispute .
Attorneys fees mediation expenses Claims analysis or preparation expenses .
Costs attributable to the Contractors failure to advance the work in a reasonable manner .
d NonCompensable Delays .
The Engineer may allow an extension of the Contract Completion Date or the Interim Completion Date but may not allow additional compensation except for those situations specifically enumerated in Subsection .a .
e Failure to Perform Adequately .
Failure to perform the work continuously and effectively with adequate work force and as scheduled for the full time allowed will be cause for denial of a time extension that might otherwise be allowed .
SECTION MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT .
MEASUREMENT OF QUANTITIES .
a General .
All work completed under the Contract will be measured by the Engineer according to SI or U.S .
Customary units as required by the Contract Documents .
The measurement and determination of the number of units of each Pay Item will be made as specified in this Section and as are specifically described under the Method of Measurement and Basis of Payment subsections for each item .
b Area .
Unless otherwise specified in the Contract area computations will be made horizontally and no deductions will be made for individual fixtures having an area of square feet or less measurements for area computations will be to the neat dimensions shown on the Plans or authorized in writing by the Engineer .
c Structures .
Structures will be measured according to neat lines shown on the Plans or as altered to fit field conditions in accordance with the method of measurement stated in the Contract .
d Volumes .
Volumes of excavation and borrow pits will be calculated from crosssections the use of average end area formulae dimensional models created by survey or by another approved method .
Volumes of other work e.g .
Cement Masonry or Removal of Concrete or Masonry will be calculated by using arithmetical formulae .
Where the volume is bounded by varying dimensions and there is no simple volumetric formula applicable frequent crosssections will be taken and the volume computed from average end area formulae .
Other methods of measurement for small quantities may be authorized when approved in writing by the Engineer .
e Length Measurement .
All items measured by the linear foot will be measured parallel to the base or foundation upon which the item is placed unless otherwise shown on the Plans .
f Ton .
The term ton means the English short ton consisting of pounds .
All materials that are measured or proportioned by weight shall be done so on accurate approved scales by competent qualified personnel .
g Bituminous Materials Measurements .
General .
Bituminous materials will be measured by the gallon or hundredweight CWT .
Wherever used the term hundredweight and the abbreviation CWT shall refer to the U.S .
Customary Unit of the short hundredweight equal to pounds .
Volumes of bituminous materials will be measured at F or will be corrected to the volume at F using ASTM D for asphalt .
Shipping of Bituminous Materials Correction .
When liquid bituminous materials are shipped by truck or transport net certified weight or volume subject to correction for loss or foaming may be used for computing quantities .
h Cement .
Portland cement will be measured by the pound .
i Timber .
Timber will be measured by the thousand feet board measure MFBM actually incorporated in the work .
Measurement will be based on nominal widths and thicknesses and the inplace length of each piece .
An MFBM shall be equal to one thousand board feet .
A board foot is defined as a board that is inches long by inches wide by inch thick or a volume of cubic inches making one MFBM equal to cubic inches or exactly cubic feet .
j Lump Sum .
General .
The term lump sum when used as a unit of measurement for an item of payment means complete payment for the work described in the item description .
Everything Included .
When a complete structure or structural unit in effect lump sum work is specified as the unit of measurement the unit will be construed to include all labor tools equipment material necessary fittings accessories and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
k Rental .
Rental of equipment will be measured by time in hours of actual work time and the necessary travel time of the equipment within the limits of the Project .
l Final Bridge Quantities .
In order to save engineering resources and expedite payment of the Final Estimate the Agency will pay for the original plan quantities exclusive of estimated overrun allowances for all bridge quantities if the Agency and the Contractor agree to the acceptance of the plan quantities by the time the final survey is made .
However if either the Contractor or the State challenges the quantities final quantities will be computed in accordance with the Contract .
When one or more changes in design generate changes in quantities final quantities shall be based on final measurements . .
PURCHASES OF MATERIALS BASED UPON AGENCY MEASUREMENTS .
a Estimates Are Not Guarantees .
The Agency does not furnish or guarantee estimates of measurements of borrow gravel sands soils fill and other construction materials to be used on the Project for the benefit andor convenience of the Contractor either in dealings with sellers of those materials or any other purpose .
b Purchase of Materials .
Except by written agreement with a copy of the agreement furnished to the Agency prior to removal of materials for the Project the Contractor shall not purchase materials on terms that require payment on the basis of the estimates of measurement made by the Agency . .
SCOPE OF PAYMENT .
a General .
The Contractor shall receive and accept the compensation provided in the Contract as full payment For furnishing all materials labor tools and equipment and performing all work contemplated and required under the Contract For all loss or damage arising out of the work from the actions of the elements or from any unforeseen difficulties or obstructions which may arise or be encountered during the prosecution of the work until its acceptance by the Agency For all risks of every description connected with the prosecution of the work and For all expenses incurred by or in consequence of the temporary suspension or discontinuance of the work for any infringement of patent trademark or copyright and for completing the work in an acceptable manner according to the Contract Documents .
b Payment of Estimates Obligations of Contractor .
The payment of any current or Final Estimate shall not prejudice or affect the obligation of the Contractor under the Contract at its own cost and expense to repair correct renew or replace any defects or imperfections in the Project and its appurtenances or the strength of or quality of materials used on the Project payment of an estimate including a Final Estimate shall not relieve the Contractor from the payment of any and all damages due or attributed to defects or imperfections .. c Damage Claims and Liabilities Payment by Agency .
Relative to damage labor and materials and other Claims against the Contractor or Project no monies payable under the Contract or any part thereof shall become due and payable if the Agency so elects until the Contractor satisfies the Agency that the Contractor has fully settled or paid all damage labor or materials Claims and all liabilities incurred in connection with the work if it so elects the Agency may pay any or all Claims or liabilities wholly or in part and deduct the amount or amounts so paid from any biweekly or Final Estimates .
d Written Evidence of Releases .
If it so elects the Agency may require the Contractor to furnish written evidence of release from all Claims and obligations connected with the work . .
SIGNIFICANT CHANGES IN THE CHARACTER OF WORK .
a General .
At any time during work the Engineer reserves the right to make in writing changes in quantities and alterations in the work as are deemed necessary or desirable to satisfactorily complete the Project .
Changes in quantities and alterations in the work will not invalidate the Contract or release the Contractors Surety and the Contractor shall perform the work as altered .
b Significant AlterationChange to Character of Work Adjustment to Contract .
If the alterations or changes in quantities significantly change the character of the work under the Contract whether or not changed by different quantities or alterations a monetary adjustment will be made to the Contract loss of anticipated profits shall not be included .
The basis for the adjustment shall be agreed upon prior to the performance of the work .
If a basis can not be agreed upon an adjustment will be made as the Engineer determines to be fair and equitable .
c AlterationsChanges Not Significant .
If the alterations or changes in quantities do not significantly change the character of the work to be performed under the Contract the altered work will be paid for as provided elsewhere in the Contract .
d Significant Change Defined .
The term significant change shall be construed to apply only to the following circumstances When the character of the work as altered differs materially in kind or nature from that involved or included in the original proposed construction or When a major item of work as defined is increased in excess of above or decreased below of the original Contract quantity .
Any allowance for an increase in quantity shall apply only to that portion in excess of of the original Contract Item quantity any allowance for a decrease in quantity below shall apply to the actual amount of work performed .
e Major Item Defined .
A major item of work is any bid item that has a total bid value greater than of the total bid amount of the Contract . .
COMPENSATION FOR ALTERED PLANS OR QUANTITIES .
a General .
When alterations in the Plans or quantities of work are ordered and performed as provided in Subsection .
and when such changes or alterations result in an increase or decrease of not more than of the total original Contract amount or the length of the Project is not increased or decreased more than of the original length shown in the Contract the Contractor shall accept payment in full at the Contract Unit Price for the actual quantities of work done .
b Adjustment When Exceeded .
When changes or alterations result in a sum total change of more than of the total cost of the Contract calculated from the original bid quantities and the original Contract Unit Prices or a length increased or decreased more than and a demand is made by the Contractor or the Agency a negotiated Supplemental Agreement shall be signed by both parties setting forth the necessity for the change and an adjustment of Unit Prices agreed upon as satisfactory to both parties .
Agreement shall be signed by both parties setting forth the necessity for the change and an adjustment of Unit Prices agreed upon as satisfactory to both parties .
In order to bring a Claim for additional compensation the Contractor shall meet all applicable requirements of Subsection .. c No Further Allowance .
No further payments will be made for changesalterations including the changesalterations or indirectly from unbalanced allocation of overhead expense among the Contract Items by the Contractor and subsequent loss of expected reimbursements therefore or from any other cause . .
EXTRA AND FORCE ACCOUNT WORK .
Extra Work ordered and accepted as specified in Subsection .
will be paid for on a Unit Price or lump sum basis under a Supplemental Agreement .
The agreement will be made before the work is started .
When the Engineer deems it impractical to handle any Extra Work ordered on a Unit Price or lump sum basis a Supplemental Agreement will be made and the work will be ordered done and paid for on a Force Account basis as follows a Labor .
For all machine or equipment operators other workers and supervisors in direct charge of the specific operation the Contractor shall receive the actual wages agreed upon before beginning the work and were paid to the workers performing the work to which shall be added an amount equal to for profit .
If the Contractor elects to use employees more skilled than required to perform the Extra Work the Agency reserves the right to allow compensation for said employees to be capped at of the applicable DavisBacon wage rate of the base skill level required to perform the work .
Workers Compensation Insurance Unemployment Compensation Insurance and Social Security charges on labor items as paid by the Contractor will be allowed .
Other employee insurances health disability e.g .
being paid by the Contractor just prior to the work being ordered will also be allowed provided the Contractor submits an applicable notarized insurance rate schedule from its insurance agent .
The Contractor shall submit an Agency form indicating all applicable insurances and overhead items for each employee involved in the Extra Work .
The Contractor will be allowed an additional of the actual wages paid to the employee as compensation for administration charges and any other additional costs .
Additional cost or charge for the Superintendent shall not be allowed .
b Materials .
The Contractor shall receive the actual cost including freight charges both as submitted on original receipted bills for all materials furnished and used .
Ten percent shall be added thereto for overhead profit and any other costs incurred in supplying the materials .
Vermont sales tax shall not be included .
c Equipment .
The Contractor will be reimbursed as described below .
Equipment that is used shall be specifically described by year manufacturer model number and any other information required to identify the appropriate hourly rate in the Blue Book .
In the event the Contractor elects to use equipment of a higher rental value than equipment suitable for the work payment will be made at the rate applicable to suitable equipment .
Contractor Owned Equipment .
a .
Ownership Costs .
The Contractor will be reimbursed for its ownership costs for selfowned equipment at the rates agreed to before the work begins .
These rates shall be on an hourly basis and shall not exceed the monthly ownership rates listed in the current Blue Book divided by .
The rates will be adjusted for depreciation as computed and published in the Blue Book rate adjustment tables but will not be adjusted as recommended on the Blue Book regional adjustment maps .
The rates for ownership costs will be total reimbursement to the Contractor for all non operating costs of the equipment including depreciation insurance taxes interest storage overhead repairs and profit .
The maximum duration for reimbursement in a day shall not exceed eight hours unless the equipment actually is operated for more than eight hours on a particular day in which case the rate shall be paid for all hours the equipment actually worked on that day .
b .
Operating Costs .
The rates for operating costs include fuel lubricants other operating expendables and preventative and field maintenance .
The Contractor will be reimbursed the amount derived as the product of the number of hours of actual use multiplied by the Blue Book estimated operating cost per hour .
Operating costs do not apply to equipment idle time .
Operating costs do not include the operators wages .
Except as otherwise provided the rates to be used for computation shall be those in effect at the time the Force Account Work is performed as reflected in the applicable publication of the Blue Book .
c. Establishing New Rates .
In the event that an ownership cost rate andor an operating cost rate is not established in the Blue Book for a particular piece of equipment the Engineer shall establish a rates for that piece of equipment consistent with its costs and expected life .
The Contractor shall make no charge for small tools that are considered as having a replacement value of less than .
Rented Equipment .
In the event the Contractor does not own a specific type of equipment and must rent the Contractor will be reimbursed the actual cost for the equipment as submitted by invoice for the time that the equipment is used to accomplish the work .
Vermont sales tax shall not be included .
The Agency reserves the right to limit the hourly rate to the maximum amount allowed by Blue Book in the event that the prime Contractor is a subsidiary of or has a close affiliation to the firm supplying the rented equipment .
Maximum Amount Payable .
The maximum amount of reimbursement for the ownership cost of Contractor owned equipment or the rental cost of rented equipment is limited to the original purchase price of the equipment .
Equipment Downtime .
No rental cost or operating cost will be paid for downtime for either rented equipment or Contractor owned equipment .
Transportation Costs .
The Contractor will be paid for the reasonable documented cost of transporting both Contractor owned and rented equipment to the work location and back to its original location or a new location if the cost is less .
d Subcontracted Work .
The Contractor shall receive the actual cost as submitted on original receipted bills for all Extra and Force Account Work Subcontracted to others .
Ten percent shall be added thereto for overhead profit and any other costs incurred to perform the Subcontracted work .
However the Agency reserves the right to use the Force Account procedures as depicted previously in this Subsection in the event that the cost of reimbursable Subcontracted work is deemed excessive .
The compensation as herein provided shall be received by the Contractor as payment in full for Extra Work done on a Force Account basis .
The Contractors representative and the Engineer shall compare records of Extra Work on a Force Account basis at the end of each day .
Copies of these records shall be made on Agency forms provided for this purpose and shall be signed by both the Engineer and Contractors representative .
All requests for compensation for Extra Work done on a Force Account basis including original receipted bills to verify cost and freight charges for all materials shall be submitted to the Agency as soon as possible however if the required request invoices and other documentation are not filed before Calendar Days have lapsed following final acceptance of the Project the costs associated with such Extra and Force Account Work shall not be reimbursable .
e Additional Costs .
Any additional costs for Public Liability Insurance and Property Damage Insurance that are required in the Contract will be allowed and reimbursed at the actual cost to the Contractor . .
ELIMINATED ITEMS .
Should any items contained in the Contract be found unnecessary for proper completion of the work the Engineer may upon Written Order to the Contractor eliminate the items from the Contract .
Such action shall have no effect on the other provisions of the Contract and shall in no way invalidate the Contract .
No compensation will be allowed for items eliminated from the Contract . .
PARTIAL AND FINAL PAYMENTS .
a General .
Partial payments computed upon the basis set forth in the Contract will be made by the Engineer .
On or before the Saturday of each alternate week during satisfactory progress of the work the Engineer will make a biweekly estimate of the amount of work performed and will compute and report the value thereof under the Contract .
Such estimates may be approximate only and not be based on actual measurements .
All biweekly and partial estimates will be paid in full except as set forth below and no payment will be made when the total value of the work done since the last estimate amounts to less than .
b Tax Compliance .
If the Contractor is found to not be in good standing with respect to or in full compliance with a plan to pay any and all taxes due the State as required in V.S.A .
money otherwise owed to the Contractor will be withheld from one or more biweekly estimates and the Final Estimate .
c Claims and Withholdings .
For the protection of the State creditors and other Claimants of the Contractor payment for all or part of one or more biweekly estimates andor the final payment as determined by the Final Estimate may be held for the use of the State if the Agency so elects until the Contractor has fully settled for or paid for all materials and equipment used in or upon the work and labor done in connection therewith and fully settled for or paid for all damage Claims or liabilities incurred in connection with said work .
Upon satisfactory settlement of all such accounts the Final Estimate will be paid to the Contractor .
d Final Payments .
Payment of the Final Estimate will be made when an agreement is reached between the Agency and the Contractor regarding the final quantities of all Contract Pay Items the Acceptance Date as defined in Subsection .
is established all materials and certifications are accepted and all other Project requirements have been met .
The Finals Engineer will present the Agencys determination of final quantities to the Contractor for their concurrence .
If the Contractor wishes to dispute the final quantities the Contractor shall notify the Finals Engineer within Calendar Days of the date of presentation the day period of final quantities .
The Contractor shall indicate which specific quantities are being disputed and provide supportive documentation regarding the disputed quantities .
The Contractor may request a Calendar Day extension to review the quantities by notifying the Finals Engineer within the day period .
Upon notification of a dispute the Construction Section will research and provide a decision to the Contractor .
The Contractor may appeal this decision within Calendar Days to the Chief Engineer as provided in Subsection ..
Notwithstanding Subsection .
and Subsection .
failure by the Contractor to notify the Finals Engineer of dispute of final quantities within the day period or Calendar Days from the date of presentation if a day extension is granted will be deemed as agreement to the final quantities as presented and deemed a waiver of the Contractors right to appeal .
Following the resolution of final quantities the Finals Engineer will present the Contractor with closeout documents consisting of the Final Estimate for signature and a Status of Claims form .
Failure by the Contractor to sign the Final Estimate and Status of Claims form within Calendar Days will result in closure of the Contract provided that there are no Claims on file with the Agency .
At the discretion of the Finals Engineer the Contractor may be presented with closeout documents concurrent with the final quantities .
In such case notwithstanding Subsection .
and Subsection .
failure by the Contractor to notify the Finals Engineer of dispute of final quantities within applicable time durations specified in this Subsection will be deemed as agreement to the final quantities as presented and closure of the Contract without the Contractors signature will result .
In cases when presentation of final quantities to the Contractor indicates that the Agency has overpaid the Contract the Contractor shall remit payment to the Agency by the end of the day period unless the Contractor is disputing final quantities .
Failure to make payment may result in notification to the Agencys Prequalification Committee by the Construction Engineer andor may result in set off pursuant to the Bulletin .
compliance requirements in the Contract .
e Retainage .
The Agency shall not withhold retainage on the Contract the Contractor shall not withhold retainage on any Subcontract and Subcontractors shall not withhold any retainage on any of their Subcontracts . .
FINAL PAY QUANTITY .
When a Contract Item is designated in the Contract Documents as FPQ then this item shall be considered a Final Pay Quantity item .
The Contract quantity shall be considered the final pay quantity for the item unless the Plan dimensions of any portion for measurement of the item or the Contract quantity of that item are revised by the Engineer or the Contract quantity of the item or any portion of the Contract quantity of the item is eliminated .
If the dimensions of any portion for measurement of the item or the Contract quantity of the item is revised and the revision results in an increase or decrease in the Contract quantity of the item the final pay quantity for the item will be revised in the amount represented by the changes in the dimensions or by the imposed revision .
If the item is eliminated the Contract quantity for the item will be eliminated .
If a portion of the item is eliminated the Contract quantity will be revised in the amount represented by the eliminated portion of the item .
No adjustment will be made to the Contract quantity for an FPQ Pay Item except as allowed under this Subsection .
This Page Intentionally Left Blank DIVISION EARTHWORK SECTION CLEARING .
DESCRIPTION .
This work shall consist of performing all clearing grubbing thinning and trimming within the limits of the Project. . GENERAL CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS .
The Contractor shall protect all trees shrubs and vegetation as identified in the Contract Documents or as directed by the Engineer in accordance with Subsection ..
The Contractor shall take care to avoid damaging trees shrubs and vegetation that are to remain standing that are otherwise unprotected or outside the limits of clearing items .
Where any trees that are to be left standing have been damaged through the Contractors operations the Contractor shall be responsible for repairing all damage caused to trees in accordance with the current VTrans Technical Landscape Manual and its latest revisions at no additional compensation .
The Contractor shall protect public utilities buildings or other property in accordance with Section Subsection .A and Subsection .B .
All branches of trees overhanging the paved roadway surface shall be removed to a minimum height of feet above finished grade .
This work will not be paid for directly but will be considered incidental to other clearing items .
Where only branches are to be removed from trees that are to remain standing branches shall be removed in accordance with the current VTrans Technical Landscape Manual and its latest revisions .
Work associated with the removal of branches shall be considered incidental to other clearing items .
Where stumps are not to be removed they shall be cut flush with existing ground or as close as practical. . CLEARING AND GRUBBING .
a Clearing .
Clearing shall consist of cutting and disposing of all trees down timber brush bushes and debris from all areas extending from the centerline to feet beyond the limits of all cut or fill sections or to applicable RightofWay limits whichever is less .
Clearing areas shall also include any other areas shown in the Contract Documents .
Any trees designated for removal under another Contract Item are excluded from this work .
Where structures are to be constructed clearing shall include the area within the structure limits and feet beyond the structure limits .
Except for trees shrubs and vegetation that are to remain standing all trees shrubs down timber brush and other objectionable material shall be removed and disposed of prior to grading operations beginning in the respective areas .
If it is deemed impractical to fell the tree as a whole it shall be removed in sections according to standard practices of professional tree removal .
b Grubbing .
Grubbing shall consist of removing and disposing of all stumps roots grass turf debris or other objectionable material within the construction limits and within fill limits where the embankments are to be made to a depth less than feet below subgrade .
Grubbing areas shall also include any other areas shown in the Contract Documents .
The grubbing shall progress in such a manner to prevent erosion as required in Subsection .. Any voids left through grubbing operations shall be backfilled with approved excavated material or borrow and compacted to conform to the surrounding area . .
REMOVING TREES AND STUMPS .
Removing trees and stumps shall consist of removing and disposing of single trees and stumps as shown in the Contract Documents or as directed by the Engineer .
Removing trees shall include the removal and disposal of the entire tree including the stump limbs and brush .
A stump is designated as that portion of the tree remaining after the trunk has been severed .
Tree and stump size will be determined by circumferential measurement at a height .
feet above the ground line or at the point of cutoff whichever applies .
Small trees and stumps will be classified as having a circumference inches or less approximately inches in diameter .
Medium trees and stumps will be classified as having a circumference greater than inches approximately inches in diameter and less than inches approximately inches in diameter .
Large trees and stumps will be classified as having a circumference inches approximately inches in diameter or greater .
The work shall be in accordance with Subsection .
and Subsection .. . THINNING AND TRIMMING .
a General .
Thinning and trimming shall consist of selective cutting and trimming beyond the limits of clearing and grubbing to clear brush remove undesirable growths dead trees vegetation and stumps thin out trees trim branches allow for passage of overhead wires or improve visibility at locations shown on the Plans or directed by the Engineer .
b For Signs .
Thinning and trimming for signs shall consist of selective cutting and trimming to provide full visibility for a sign at a single designated sign location .
The Contractor shall remove all woody stemmed growth including brush saplings trees and tree limbs growing within or projecting into the required clear viewing area for the designated sign to the minimum horizontal and vertical dimensions shown on the Plans or as directed by the Engineer .
The dimensions are for the standard area of sign visibility however the Contractor shall not cut trim or clear any vegetation outside the RightofWay limits .
The Engineer will designate the RightofWay limits .
In performing this work the Contractor shall not use any chemical growth retardants poisons or defoliants . .
DISPOSAL .
Unless otherwise specified in the Contract Documents or herein all trees limbs stumps and other vegetation removed through this work shall become property of the Contractor .
On National Forest Lands the Contractor shall comply with the requirements included in the Contract Documents for the specific Project and in accordance with Subsection ..
Whenever elm trees are trimmed or removed all portions removed shall be chipped and remain on site . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT .
The quantity of the Clearing and Grubbing Including Individual Trees and Stumps will be on a lump sum basis for providing clearing and grubbing in the complete and accepted work .
If limits are changed an adjustment for the increased or decreased area will be measured in acres .
No adjustment will be made for changes involving less than .
acre .
Clearing and grubbing completed for the convenience of the Contractor will not be considered for adjustment .
When specified to be measured by area the quantity of the Clearing and Grubbing Including Individual Trees and Stumps to be measured for payment will be the number of acres cleared and grubbed in the complete and accepted work .
Clearing and grubbing completed for the convenience of the Contractor will not be included in the measurement for payment .
The quantity of Removing Medium Trees Removing Large Trees Removing Medium Stumps and Removing Large Stumps to be measured for payment will be for the number of each removed for the various classes in the complete and accepted work .
The quantity of Thinning and Trimming to be measured for payment will be the number of acres thinned and trimmed in the complete and accepted work as determined by using horizontal measurements .
The quantity of Thinning and Trimming for Signs to be measured for payment will be the number of each signs viewing area cleared in the complete and accepted work . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT .
The accepted quantity of Clearing and Grubbing Including Individual Trees and Stumps will be paid for at the Contract lump sum price or Contract Unit Price per acre .
Progress payments will be made based on the percentage of total area cleared .
When the clearing and grubbing limits are changed an adjustment for the increased or decreased area will be made by Change Order .
The accepted quantity of Removing Medium Trees Removing Large Trees Removing Medium Stumps and Removing Large Stumps will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price for each .
Small trees and stumps will not be paid for directly but will be considered incidental to other Contract Items .
The accepted quantity of Thinning and Trimming will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per acre .
The accepted quantity of Thinning and Trimming for Signs will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price for each location designated in the Contract .
If the Contract does not contain a quantity for a Contract Item listed in this Section but such work is required the work will not be paid for directly but will be considered incidental to all other Contract Items .
Payment as indicated will be full compensation for performing the work specified including disposal and for furnishing all labor materials tools equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Clearing and Grubbing Including Individual Trees and Stumps Lump Sum .
Clearing and Grubbing Including Individual Trees and Stumps Acre .
Removing Medium Trees Each .
Removing Large Trees Each .
Removing Medium Stumps Each .
Removing Large StumpsEach .
Thinning and Trimming Acre .
Thinning and Trimming for Signs Each SECTION DEMOLITION AND DISPOSAL OF BUILDINGS .
DESCRIPTION .
This work shall consist of the removal wholly or in part and the satisfactory disposal of all buildings including accessories and appurtenances erosion prevention and sediment control and the backfilling of holes and pits when required. . GENERAL CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS .
Basements shall be completely cleared of all unsuitable materials debris partition walls and supports .
Concrete or masonry floors or foundations shall be removed to a depth not less than feet below subgrade or foot below final ground level .
Floors below these levels shall be broken or holes approximately foot foot shall be provided at foot intervals to provide vertical drainage .
Septic tanks cesspools or appurtenant pipes shall be emptied of their contents and filled with suitable material or removed .
Underground fuel storage tanks shall be removed unless otherwise approved by the Engineer and the Agencys Hazardous Materials and Waste Coordinator .
All work related to all underground storage tanks shall be in accordance with all local State and Federal regulations .
The removal of any underground storage tank shall be coordinated through the Agencys Hazardous Materials and Waste Coordinator prior to commencing the removal of any underground storage tank .
Basements or cavities left by building removal shall be either filled with suitable material to the level of the existing ground and thoroughly compacted or the area shall be regraded to present a smooth free draining surface .
A combination of filling and regrading methods may be used .
Where filling and regrading operations occur within the limits of construction manipulation and placement of material shall conform to Subsection .. All regraded areas shall be seeded and mulched in accordance with Section and to the satisfaction of the Engineer .
All debris shall be removed from the parcel and the area shall be cleaned up and graded to the satisfaction of the Engineer .
All materials resulting from the demolition shall become the property of the Contractor and shall be disposed of or recycled in accordance with all applicable laws rules regulations and protocols .
If applicable the Contractor shall provide for the discontinuance of all utility services including but not limited to electricity telephone sewer water and gas lines and utility meters .
The Contractor shall be held responsible for any Claim arising from failure to provide for the discontinuance of such utility services .
If permission has been given to the previous owner to occupy a building until a specified date the previous owner shall not be required to pay rent to the Contractor or to move on a date earlier than that specified .
The Contractor shall provide for the discontinuance of all utility services after the specified date .
The Agency shall not be responsible for any changes in the condition of the buildings or for loss of fixtures or equipment at any time .
Once work has commenced the Contractor shall complete the demolition and disposal of each Contract Item in a continuous manner to the satisfaction of the Engineer .
The Contractor shall erect barriers around the site in accordance with all applicable safety guidelines .
The Contractor shall be responsible for finding opening and maintaining all disposal areas and shall comply with all applicable regulations .
When identified in the Plans the Contractor shall be responsible for the removal and disposal of lead andor asbestos .
The removal and disposal of lead andor asbestos shall be done in accordance with all applicable local State and federal regulations .
The Contractor shall submit to the Engineer and the Agencys Hazardous Materials and Waste Coordinator all applicable certifications licenses permits and Plans for approval prior to the commencement of this work . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT .
The quantity of Demolition and Disposal of Building to be measured for payment will be on a unit basis for each building as shown on the Plans .
BASIS OF PAYMENT .
The accepted quantity of Demolition and Disposal of Building will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price for each building specified in the Contract .
Payment will be full compensation for removing disposing andor recycling of buildings for excavating backfilling removal of hazardous materials and regrading incidental to their removal and for furnishing all labor tools equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
When seed mulch other turf establishment items andor erosion prevention and sediment control items are not part of the Contract they shall be considered incidental to the Demolition and Disposal of Building item .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Demolition and Disposal of Building Each SECTION EXCAVATION AND EMBANKMENTS .
DESCRIPTION .
This work shall consist of excavating and grading roadways runways and railways slides borrow pits waterways channels intersections approaches and steps in hillside embankments and excavating unsuitable material from the construction area and beneath embankment areas surfaces and pavements .
This work shall consist of excavating selected material found in the construction area for specific use in the construction constructing and removing detours shown on the Plans or directed by the Engineer trimming and shaping of slopes performing test borings for the purpose of determining areas of roadway and embankment subsurface voids and disposing of all unsuitable or surplus excavated material .
The work shall also consist of placing material in embankments and the grading of all material placed up to subgrade to the tolerance specified in the Plans .
The work is classified as follows a Common Excavation .
Common Excavation shall consist of the removal of all material which can be accomplished with normal excavating machinery encountered in grading the Project and not classified to be removed as Solid Rock Excavation Muck Excavation Channel Excavation Excavation of Surfaces and Pavements or Excavation for Structures .
Excavation required beyond the finished slope neat lines for slope stabilization removal of sod and unsuitable material other than muck located in embankment areas removal and stockpiling of topsoil and removal of unsuitable material existing at or below subgrade elevation in excavation areas is also classified as Common Excavation .
b Solid Rock Excavation .
Solid Rock Excavation shall consist of the removal of hard igneous metamorphic or sedimentary rock that requires blasting or the use of rippers detached rock boulders mortared stone masonry or concrete each having a volume of cubic yards or more and Portland cement concrete pavement including any bituminous surface overlay material encountered in the limits of excavation .
c Unclassified Excavation .
Unclassified Excavation shall consist of Common Excavation and Solid Rock Excavation as classified above and not measured separately .
d Muck Excavation .
Muck Excavation shall consist of the removal disposal and backfill of a saturated or unsaturated mixture of soils and organic matter encountered below the original ground line in an embankment area that is not suitable to be used as foundation material regardless of its moisture content .
e Channel Excavation of Earth .
Channel Excavation of Earth shall consist of the removal of all material which can be accomplished with normal excavating machinery encountered in the excavation except as classified as Channel Excavation of Rock for widening deepening and straightening of existing channels and waterways or in the construction of new channels and any other excavation designated to be removed as channel excavation as shown on the Plans or as directed by the Engineer .
f Channel Excavation of Rock .
Channel Excavation of Rock shall consist of the removal of rock in definite ledge formation that requires blasting or the use of rippers and detached rock boulders stone masonry and concrete each having a volume of cubic yards or more encountered in the excavation for widening deepening and straightening of existing channels and waterways or in the construction of new channels .
g Unclassified Channel Excavation .
Unclassified Channel Excavation shall consist of Channel Excavation of Earth and Channel Excavation of Rock as classified above and not measured separately .
h Excavation of Surfaces and Pavements .
Excavation of Surfaces and Pavements shall consist of the removal and disposal of existing surfaces and pavements that are located outside other excavation and embankment limits .
i Borrow .
Borrow shall consist of material required for the construction of embankments or for other portions of the work and shall be obtained from approved sources located outside the limits of the RightofWay unless otherwise shown on the Plans or directed by the Engineer .
Borrow is further classified as Earth Borrow Sand Borrow Granular Borrow or Rock Borrow .
j Test Borings .
Test Borings shall consist of an investigative and planned approach to determining areas of roadway and embankment subsurface voids and repairing bored areas .
k Gravel Filter for Slope Stabilization .
Gravel Filter for Slope Stabilization shall consist of an approved graded material placed against Slopes and any other places designated for use of this material .
l Shoulder Berm Removal .
Shoulder Berm Removal shall consist of removing the berm of debris and sand resulting from guardrail that is to be retained .
The removal may be performed by hand labor or mechanical means .
The Contractor shall remove the berm down to the proper line and grade for the shoulder from which the berm is being removed .
The removed sand and fine debris may be scattered into the turf on the roadway slope outside the point of shoulder unless otherwise directed by the Engineer .
Larger debris such as stones in excess of inches in diameter automobile parts wood glass and other bulky items shall be disposed of properly by the Contractor. . MATERIALS .
Materials shall meet the requirements of the following Subsections Classification of Soils Earth Borrow Sand Borrow and Cushion Granular Borrow Rock Borrow Gravel Filter for Slope Stabilization Backfill for Muck Excavation Concrete for backfilling subsurface voids shall meet the requirements of Controlled Density Flowable Fill of Section .
Bituminous concrete pavement shall conform to the requirements of Section as applicable for the Contract with the exception that the mix design submittal and plant inspection requirements set forth in Section will not apply. . GENERAL CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS .
Prior to beginning excavation grading and embankment operations in any area all necessary clearing and grubbing in that area shall have been completed in accordance with Section .
All slopes in cut and embankment sections ditches and waterways whether old or newly constructed shall be satisfactorily cleaned and cleared of obstructions and left in a neat and trim condition .
Excavation shall be performed in accordance with the Contract or as directed by the Engineer .
The construction area shall always be maintained to ensure proper drainage .
Where traffic is maintained care shall be exercised to keep the portion of the roadway or the traveled way open to traffic in a satisfactory condition as per Subsection .A and Subsection .B .
All suitable material removed by excavating shall be used in the formation of embankments as shown on the Plans or as directed by the Engineer .
Any excavation that can not be incorporated in embankments shall be disposed of as directed by the Engineer .
No material shall be wasted without permission of the Engineer .
The Contractor shall be responsible for the stability of all constructed embankments and shall replace at no cost to the Agency any portions that have become displaced and that are not attributable to the unavoidable movement of the natural ground upon which the embankment is made or to an Act of God .
Unless directed by the Engineer borrow material shall not be placed until all suitable material has been excavated and placed in the embankments except when Sand Borrow or Granular Borrow is shown on the Plans or when Granular Borrow is required by the Engineer for use under embankments or used with material from excavation in making embankments .
Should a surplus of excavated material result from the Contractor placing more borrow than required the amount of this surplus will be measured by the Engineer and of the total surplus will be deducted from the total quantity removed from the borrow source .
When not otherwise shown in the Contract Documents at all bridge approaches in excavation areas excavation for additional subbase shall be made to a depth of feet below finish grade for a distance not less than feet from the end of the bridge .
The transition depth from normal subgrade level to any extra depth level shall be at a rate of VH .
Prior to the construction of Test Borings and the placement of Controlled Density Flowable Fill the Contractor shall submit to the Engineer sitespecific plans detailing the schedule of work for these two items type and location of drilling sleeve installation pumping system confirmatory boring operation method of filling bore hole with or without voids being encountered and repair of the roadway section sand gravel and pavement .
All work performed under this Section shall conform to Section . . EXCAVATION .
Any loose material resulting from breakage and slides shall be removed and disposed of as directed by the Engineer .
Excavated material shall be sorted so that the best material is placed in embankments beneath the traveled way .
The Contractor shall not excavate or remove any material outside the limits of the excavation slope and grade lines shown on the Plans unless authorized in writing by the Engineer .
Grading shall be to full crosssection width at subgrade before placing of any type of subbase or pavement except that partial width construction is permissible where necessary for the maintenance of traffic and shall be done within the allowable tolerances as indicated on the Plans .
The Contractor shall strip ledge and then notify the Engineer that the area is ready for crosssectioning prior to making any rock excavation .
Any ledge removed prior to the taking of crosssections will be paid for as Common Excavation .
The Contractor may use other means of locating the rock line with the approval of the Engineer .
When excavating solid rock by the blasting method the Contractor shall drill slope holes to the full depth of the rock lift along the line and plane of inclination of the slope as shown on the Plans or as otherwise directed by the Engineer .
Spacing for the slope holes shall not exceed feet center to center of holes .
The diameter of the slope holes shall be not greater than inches .
The line of blast holes shall be drilled parallel to the plane of the slope holes .
No portion of any blast hole in this line shall be closer than feet to the proposed finished slope .
No portion of any blast hole larger than inches in diameter will be permitted closer than feet to the proposed finished slope .
When it is shown on the Plans that concrete shall be placed on or against the limits of rock excavation care shall be taken to avoid disturbing shattering or removing rock outside such limits .
Any costs incurred due to the unauthorized removal shattering or disturbing of the material outside the indicated limits shall be at the Contractors expense .
The explosives used in the slope holes along the line of the finished slope and the adjacent slope holes shall be explosives for presplitting use only prepared and packaged by explosives manufacturing firms and approved by the Engineer .
The slope holes along the line of the finished slope shall be loaded with approved explosives containing not more than .
pounds of explosives per foot of hole depth .
The spaced charges on a detonating cord shall be equal in length to the full depth of the hole .
If spacers are used the holes shall be completely stemmed so that uniform breakage of the rock will result from top to bottom of the hole .
A bottom charge of not more than pounds of explosive may be used .
No explosive charge shall be placed within inches of the collar of the finished slope holes .
The Contractor shall complete the drilling loading stemming and blasting of the slope holes at least feet in advance of any other blasting .
In areas other than along the proposed finished rock cut slopes and adjacent slope holes the spacing of holes distribution of explosives the methods of relief and fractional second delay blasting shall be adjusted by the Contractor .
The Contractor shall make adjustments according to the characteristics and structure of the rock encountered in order to obtain the required finished slopes with a minimum of overbreak .
The depth of the rock lift within any one excavation area will be approved by the Engineer and shall be reduced by the Contractor if the proper alignment of the slope holes can not be maintained. . MUCK EXCAVATION .
The material shall be excavated to the widths and depths shown on the Plans or as required to give a stable foundation for the placement of necessary backfill embankment or subbase material .
The excavation of this material shall be handled in a manner that will prevent the entrapment of muck within the backfill .
Unless otherwise specifically shown in the Contract Documents the material that has been excavated under this Contract Item shall be spread on the fill slopes as shown on the Plans or as directed by the Engineer .
If provision is not shown in the Contract Documents for the disposition of the muck excavation or if in the opinion of the Engineer its use on the slopes is impractical then the excavated material shall be disposed of by the Contractor in accordance with Subsection ..
The backfilling of the excavated area shall immediately follow the excavation of the muck so that any soft material that is pushed ahead of the backfill can be removed .
The material used for backfilling the excavated area up to the ground line or water level whichever is higher shall be rock or other granular material selected from the excavation if available .
When this material is not available it shall be obtained as Granular Borrow from an approved source .
After removal of the muck and prior to backfilling the Contractor shall allow the Engineer adequate time to take all necessary measurements for determining the volume removed. . CHANNEL EXCAVATION .
The area where the channel is to be excavated shall be cleared and grubbed as required .
The work involved shall be considered as incidental work to Channel Excavation when Clearing and Grubbing Including Individual Trees and Stumps is not a Contract Item .
The channel shall be excavated to the lines grades and crosssections shown on the Plans or as ordered by the Engineer .
All suitable material excavated shall be used in the formation of roadway embankments or for other construction purposes as shown on the Plans or as directed by the Engineer .
Unsuitable material or waste material when directed by the Engineer shall be wasted and disposed of by the Contractor at no additional compensation in accordance with Subsection .. . EXCAVATION OF SURFACES AND PAVEMENTS .
All excavation shall be made strictly to the required alignment grade and crosssections shown on the Plans or as directed by the Engineer for areas located outside of the limits of roadway excavation and embankment .
All suitable materials removed shall be used as far as practical in the formation of embankments and at other locations as directed by the Engineer .
The completed excavation shall be properly graded and shaped prior to receiving any cover or top dressing . .
BORROW .
Opening maintaining and closing borrow pits shall be in accordance with Section .
The simultaneous extraction of more than one borrow item from a given pit will require the written permission of the Engineer . .
DISPOSAL OF SURPLUS EXCAVATION AND WASTE MATERIAL .
All surplus excavation and waste material shall be deposited as shown on the Plans or as authorized in writing by the Engineer .
Excavated material shall not be wasted unless authorized by the Engineer .
Compaction requirements for surplus or waste material used to flatten slopes outside the embankment limits shown on the Plans may be waived however placement procedures shall ensure a stable fill slope .
Disposal of all surplus or waste material shall be in accordance with Section .
Disposal of surplus or waste material will not be paid for directly but shall be considered as incidental work pertaining to the grading or excavation Contract Item from which the material was obtained .
When sufficient onsite disposal areas are not shown on the Plans it shall be the responsibility of the contractor to locate disposal areas in accordance with Section and any applicable permits . .
HAUL ROADS .
Particular care shall be taken in the locating of haul roads .
In wooded areas haul road width shall be minimized and placed at approximate right angles or angled away from the view of oncoming traffic and where feasible shall incorporate one bend to eliminate the tunnel effect .
Large and wellshaped trees shall be preserved. . EMBANKMENTS .
a Preparation of Embankment Area .
When embankments are to be made on a hillside the slope of the original ground on which the embankments are to be constructed shall be stepped and properly drained as the fill is constructed in accordance with the Plans or as directed by the Engineer .
b Use of Materials .
The excavated rock ledge boulders and stone except where required in the construction of other items or otherwise directed shall be used in the construction of embankments to the extent of the Project requirements and generally shall be placed to form the base of an embankment .
When shown on the Plans certain portions of rock excavation may be reserved for special use such as rock fill for embankment construction at locations below high water or at locations susceptible to erosion .
Frozen material shall not be used in the construction of embankments .
The embankments or successive layers of the embankments shall not be placed upon frozen material .
Placement of material other than rock shall stop when the sustained ambient air temperature below F prohibits attainment of the required compaction .
If the material is otherwise acceptable it shall be stockpiled and reserved for future use when its condition is acceptable to the Engineer for use in embankments .
c Procedure for Placing and Spreading .
When an embankment is to be constructed across open water or across swampy wet ground the first layer of the fill shall be rock or Granular Borrow .
The first layer of the embankment may be constructed in one thickness of rock or Granular Borrow to the minimum elevation at which equipment may be operated as directed by the Engineer .
Above this elevation the embankment shall be constructed as specified below .
Material from excavation on the Project shall be used to the extent available and when not available shall be obtained from sources of Granular Borrow or Rock Borrow when authorized in writing by the Engineer .
When trucks are used to place Earth from excavation or borrow the material shall be deposited on the layer of embankment being constructed bladed or dozed into place and shaped and compacted .
Dumping directly onto previously constructed layers will not be permitted .
Embankments of either earth or rock material shall be placed in horizontal layers of uniform thickness and across the full section width .
When it is impractical to construct a full width layer across an embankment partial width layers may be authorized provided the full width procedure is resumed as soon as practical .
Logs stumps waste material and oversized cobblestones or boulders shall not be placed within the structural embankment area .
They may be placed outside the structural embankment area at locations directed by the Engineer or when authorized disposed of as surplus material .
Initial layers shall begin at the deepest part of the fill .
Except for the first layer of fill over swampy ground and cleared areas the loose layer thickness shall be limited to inches .
When conditions necessitate the Engineer may authorize layers in excess of inches but not more than inches .
The Contractor shall make all necessary excavations up to inches deep so that the Engineer can determine moisture density and stability solely at the Contractors expense .
Effective spreading equipment shall be used on each layer to obtain uniform thickness .
Cobblestones or boulders having their least dimension greater than the loose layer thickness being placed shall be removed prior to compaction .
Each layer shall be compacted as specified and if necessary stabilized prior to a successive layer being placed .
Each layer shall be kept crowned to shed water .
As the compaction of each layer progresses continuous leveling and manipulating will be required to ensure uniform density a uniform and satisfactory moisture content and acceptable stability .
The last lift constructed each day shall be graded crowned and rolled to ensure adequate drainage .
When A A A or A cohesive soils as identified in Table .A have excess moisture and can not effectively be air dried or dried by manipulation the Contractor may layer or mix the material with dry A A or A granular soils to obtain acceptable compaction and stability .
The Contractor is responsible for making prudent use of available granular excavation from the Project prior to being authorized the use of Granular Borrow .
The combined loose thickness of mixed or layered materials prior to compaction shall not exceed inches .
During the construction of the embankments if bulging cracking or unstable movement occurs the placing of the fill material shall be stopped retarded or corrected to allow the material to stabilize as directed by the Engineer .
Rutting rolling shoving or other displacement in excess of inches under the action of construction equipment may be considered evidence of stability problems .
When soft or wet clay or silt excavation is being used between layers of reasonably clean stable rock fill the rock embankment layers shall not exceed inches in loose measurement .
The clay or silt layers shall not exceed inches in loose measurement .
If embankments are to be constructed by using rock excavation all reasonable precaution must be taken to ensure a solid embankment .
The fill shall be made in uniform layers consistent with the size of the rock being used but not to exceed inches in thickness .
Individual pieces of rock or boulders with their least dimension exceeding the thickness of the layer being placed shall either be reduced to an acceptable size or placed outside the structural embankment area in such a manner that all voids are filled .
Rock shall not be dumped over the end of a fill .
Rock shall be deposited on the fill and distributed by blading or dozing to ensure proper placement in the embankment so that voids pockets and bridging are reduced to a minimum .
d Compaction .
Each layer between the design embankment limits shown on the Plans shall be uniformly compacted using compaction equipment to not less than of the materials maximum dry density as determined by AASHTO T Method C. Field density determination will be made in accordance with AASHTO T Sand Cone Method AASHTO T Nuclear Method or other approved procedures .
Field moisture determination will be made in accordance with AASHTO T or measured in accordance with AASHTO T Nuclear Method .
Locations within the embankment limits where waste materials have been placed shall be compacted to the extent that stability is ensured .
All fill material shall be compacted at a moisture content determined by the Engineer to be suitable for obtaining the required density .
The moisture content in each layer under construction shall not exceed above the optimum moisture content and it shall be less than that quantity that will cause the embankment to become unstable during compaction .
The Engineer will consider sponginess shoving or other displacement under heavy equipment sufficient evidence of a lack of stability under this requirement and the Contractor shall stop or retard further placement of material in the area affected to allow the material to stabilize .
When the moisture content of the material in the layer under construction is less than the amount necessary to obtain the required compaction by mechanical compaction methods water shall be added by pressure distributors or other approved equipment .
Water may also be added in excavation or borrow pits .
The water shall be uniformly and thoroughly incorporated into the soil by discing harrowing blading or other approved methods .
This manipulation may be omitted for sand and gravel .
When the moisture content of the material is in excess of above the optimum moisture content dry material shall be thoroughly incorporated into the wet material or the wet material shall be aerated by disking harrowing blading rotary mixing or other approved method or compaction of the layer of wet material shall be deferred until the layer has dried to the required moisture content by evaporation .
The density requirements do not apply to those portions of embankments constructed of material so coarse that it can not be properly tested with a conventional density testing apparatus .
Instead the material shall be compacted to the satisfaction of the Engineer .
In areas inaccessible to power rolling the embankment material shall be placed in uniform horizontal layers of not more than inches in depth and compacted by means of approved mechanical tampers to the density requirements specified above .
The use of hand tamps will not be permitted .
Additionally the following requirements apply to airport compaction Under all areas to be paved the top inches of the embankment shall be compacted to a density of not less than of maximum density for cohesive soils and for noncohesive soils unless otherwise shown in the Contract Documents .
In areas designed for the use of aircraft the determination of maximum density and optimum moisture content will be performed per AASHTO T Method D. e Test Borings .
Test borings shall be performed at the approximate locations indicated in the Plans andor as directed by the Engineer .
When used adjacent to culverts test borings shall extend to a depth equal to the bottom of the culvert using casing advanced drilling methods .
Alternate drilling equipment that provides a suitably clean open hole may be submitted to the Engineer for approval .
If voids are encountered Controlled Density Flowable Fill shall be placed to completely fill the voids .
Confirmatory borings shall be performed in these locations as directed by the Engineer .
The roadway surface at boring hole locations shall be backfilled and then patched using bituminous concrete pavement. . SUBGRADE .
The subgrade shall be constructed to the lines grades and crosssections shown on the Plans .
After all drainage structures have been installed and the subgrade has been shaped correctly the subgrade shall be brought to a firm unyielding surface compacted to attain at least of the maximum dry density .
This density will be determined by AASHTO T Method C. A power grader or other approved equipment shall be used during the placement and compaction to obtain the specified crosssection .
Areas of soft yielding or otherwise unsuitable material that will not compact readily shall be removed replaced with a suitable material and properly compacted as directed by the Engineer .
All loose rock or boulders encountered at subgrade in the Earth excavation shall be removed or broken off to a depth not less than inches below the subgrade .
In excavation areas the ground shall not be excavated or disturbed below the subgrade except as shown in the Contract Documents or as directed by the Engineer .
All ditches and drains shall be constructed so they will effectively drain the construction area before the placement of any subbase or surface course material .
In handling materials tools and equipment the Contractor shall protect the subgrade from damage .
Vehicles should not travel in a single track and form ruts .
If ruts are formed the subgrade shall be reshaped and compacted .
Any pockets of clay sand or soft material that may have been left in the subgrade shall be removed and replaced with approved material and properly compacted at the Contractors expense .
The subgrade shall be kept in a condition that it will drain .
Subbase base or surface material shall not be deposited on the subgrade until the subgrade has been checked and approved by the Engineer .
After the subgrade has been approved the Contractor shall not perform hauling or move equipment that will distort the crosssection over the subgrade .
A tolerance of inch above or below the finished subgrade will be allowed provided that this tolerance is not maintained for a distance longer than feet and that the required crosssection is maintained .
Grading shall be done with a power grader or other approved equipment to conform to the requirements as specified above .
For airport construction the field density will be determined in accordance with Subsection .d .
In fill sections stones or rock fragments larger than inches in their greatest dimension will not be permitted in the top inches below subgrade . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT .
a Excavation .
The quantity of all excavation items to be measured for payment will be the number of cubic yards of the material removed from the areas shown on the Plans or as directed by the Engineer .
The quantity will be measured in its original position by crosssections and computed by the method of average end areas .
When impractical other acceptable methods involving three dimensional measurement may be used to determine the quantity .
The limits shall not exceed those shown on the Plans or authorized in writing by the Engineer .
The method of mass centers for computing volumes will be allowed only when the method has been used in the original design computations .
Excavation requiring more than one handling prior to final placement in embankments will not be measured for payment for the additional handling unless specifically stated in the Contract .
Common Excavation .
Excavation for stepping of original ground under hillside embankments will not be measured for payment .
Excavation for removal of soft spots in the subgrade of embankment areas and the material required for replacement will not be measured for payment .
Any costs will be considered included in the Contract Items involved .
However where the embankments were constructed as part of another contract the quantities of excavation for removal of soft spots and the material for replacement will be measured for payment .
Solid Rock Excavation .
The measurement limits for solid rock excavation will coincide with the depth shown on the Plans or as directed by the Engineer .
Excavation below subgrade will not be measured .
Measurement limits for determining the amount of solid rock excavation will be that amount actually removed up to a limit inches outside of and parallel to the slope lines shown on the Plans or as directed by the Engineer .
Measurement for payment will not be made for rock removed beyond these limits unless authorized .
If natural fissures or faults exist making removal of rock beyond these limits necessary the Engineer will authorize removal in writing and the limits of excavation will be adjusted accordingly .
Unclassified Excavation .
The quantity of Unclassified Excavation to be measured for payment will be the number of cubic yards of material excavated as shown on the Plans or as directed by the Engineer .
There shall be no differentiation made between common or solid rock excavation for this item .
Muck Excavation .
The quantity of Muck Excavation to be measured for payment will be the number of cubic yards of material excavated as shown on the Plans or as directed by the Engineer .
Channel Excavation of Earth .
The quantity of Channel Excavation of Earth to be measured for payment will be the number of cubic yards of material excavated from its original position .
No differentiation will be made between the channel excavation of dry or wet material .
Where Excavation Common Solid Rock or Unclassified and Channel Excavation occur jointly or separately at the same location measurement for Channel Excavation will be made only below the lower limits of Common Solid Rock or Unclassified Excavation .
Channel Excavation of Rock .
Measurement limits for determining the amount of Channel Excavation of Rock will be as specified in Subsection .a .
Where Excavation Common Solid Rock or Unclassified and Channel Excavation occur jointly or separately at the same location measurement for Channel Excavation will be made only below the lower limits of Common Solid Rock or Unclassified Excavation .
Excavation of Surfaces and Pavements .
The quantity of Excavation of Surfaces and Pavements to be measured for payment will be the number of cubic yards of material removed and disposed of measured in its original position .
The measurement limits of excavation will not exceed those shown on the Plans or directed by the Engineer .
b Borrow .
The quantity of borrow to be measured for payment of the type indicated except Sand Borrow will be the number of cubic yards of the material removed and used in the complete and accepted work from approved borrow sources measured in its original position .
The quantity of Granular Borrow used to replace solid rock excavated below subgrade will be allowed and measured for payment to a depth not to exceed inches .
Any solid rock excavated below this depth shall be replaced by the Contractor with material from Solid Rock Excavation or Granular Borrow furnished and placed at the Contractors expense .
For small quantities of borrow with the written permission of the Engineer the quantity to be measured for payment of the type of borrow indicated will be the number of cubic yards of material used in the complete and accepted work as determined by the vehicle loads using three dimensional measurements .
A load ticket including truck identification and date of delivery shall be furnished to the Engineer upon delivery for each load delivered to the site .
All vehicles shall be loaded to at least their water level capacity and any load designated shall be leveled at the point of delivery when directed by the Engineer .
All quantities computed from vehicle load measurement will be divided by a factor of .
and the resulting volume paid at the Contract Unit Price for those Contract Items .
Stripping of pits to obtain borrow will not be paid for separately but will be considered incidental to the various borrow Contract Items .
Any material removed or excavated from a borrow pit before crosssections and measurements have been taken will not be paid for .
No borrow quantity will be allowed that is not taken from measured borrow pits unless otherwise agreed upon in writing by the Engineer and the Contractor .
Should more borrow be placed than required resulting in a waste of excavated material or should embankments be constructed beyond the neat lines shown on the Plans unless otherwise authorized in writing by the Engineer of the amount of such waste or excess will be deducted from the total amount of specified borrow being used .
When requested by the Contractor and authorized in writing by the Engineer material specified to be measured by the cubic yard may be measured by mass weighed and the weight converted to cubic yards for payment purposes .
Factors for conversion from weight measurement to volume measurement will be determined by the Engineer and shall be agreed to by the Contractor before the method of measurement of pay quantities is used .
The simultaneous extraction of more than one borrow item from a given pit will require the written permission of the Engineer and the method of measurement shall be as specified by the Engineer .
Earth Borrow .
With the written permission of the Engineer the method of measurement for Earth Borrow may be changed to the number of cubic yards in place in the complete and accepted work multiplied by a factor of ..
When material from excavation is removed and either used for payment under another Contract Item or diverted for the Contractors use such as the construction of haul roads the quantity measured for these uses will be multiplied by a factor of ..
The resulting quantity will be deducted from the total quantity of Earth Borrow .
Sand Borrow .
The quantity of Sand Borrow to be measured for payment will be the number of cubic yards placed in the complete and accepted work as determined by the plan dimensions of the compacted material .
No allowance will be made for material placed to a greater depth or width than shown on the Plans unless authorized in writing by the Engineer .
Granular Borrow .
With the written permission of the Engineer the method of measurement for Granular Borrow may be changed to the number of cubic yards in place in the complete and accepted work multiplied by a factor of .. Rock Borrow .
When obtained from previously blasted or stockpiled sources the quantity of Rock Borrow to be measured for payment will be the number of cubic yards of blasted material measured in the pile before removal divided by a factor of .. c Gravel Filter for Slope Stabilization .
The quantity of Gravel Filter for Slope Stabilization to be measured for payment will be the number of cubic yards placed in the complete and accepted work .
Measurements will be confined to the limits shown on the Plans or as directed by the Engineer .
d Shoulder Berm Removal .
The quantity of Shoulder Berm Removal to be measured for payment shall be the number of linear feet of shoulder from which the berm was properly removed measured from the beginning point of removal to the end point of removal .
e Test Borings .
The quantity of Test Borings to be measured for payment will be the number of linear feet of test boring performed in the complete and accepted work . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT .
The accepted quantities as measured will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per cubic yard for the specified Contract Items except for Shoulder Berm Removal and Test Borings which will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per linear foot .
Payment will be full compensation for performing the work specified submitting sitespecific plans as required performing test borings installing sleeves backfilling patching with bituminous concrete pavement including any drilling and blasting required and for furnishing all labor materials tools equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
No added compensation will be made for any special manipulation or delay resulting in the drying or wetting of soils necessary to obtain the required compaction .
The entire cost of such manipulation and delay will be considered included in the Contract Unit Price for the excavation Contract Item involved .
Compensation for the construction of embankments as defined in Subsection .
shall be considered incidental to the various excavation items .
Water added to embankment material to aid in compaction will not be paid for directly but will be considered incidental to the Contract Items involved .
All work and material required to grade loam seed and mulch waste areas borrow pits and haul roads as specified to eliminate unsightly conditions and prevent erosion will not be paid for directly but will be considered incidental to the various types of excavation and borrow .
Material used for backfilling voids created by the removal of unsuitable material below subgrade and on slopes will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per cubic yard for the particular Contract Item used in making the backfill .
If the particular Contract Item required for backfill is not included in the Contract a Change Order for this Contract Item will be negotiated with the exception of backfilling for Muck Excavation which shall be incidental to the item .
The work specified in Subsection .
will not be paid for directly but will be considered as incidental work pertaining to the excavation and borrow Contract Items .
On borrow Projects solid rock removed beyond the authorized limit as specified for solid rock measurement may be paid at the Contract Unit Price for other excavation or borrow items in the Contract whichever Unit Price is the least provided the material is used in constructing approved embankments .
When the subgrade has been prepared by others under another contract the excavation necessary to bring the subgrade to the required grade and crosssection or for the removal of soft spots in the subgrade will be paid for as Common Excavation .
All grading and shaping required after removing material paid for as Excavation of Surfaces and Pavements will not be paid for directly but will be considered incidental to this Contract Item .
Filling of subsurface voids encountered in performing Test Borings will be paid for under Contract Item .. Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Common Excavation Cubic Yard .
Solid Rock Excavation Cubic Yard .
Unclassified Excavation Cubic Yard .
Muck Excavation Cubic Yard .
Channel Excavation of Earth Cubic Yard .
Channel Excavation of Rock Cubic Yard .
Unclassified Channel Excavation Cubic Yard .
Excavation of Surfaces and Pavements Cubic Yard .
Earth Borrow Cubic Yard .
Sand Borrow Cubic Yard .
Granular Borrow Cubic Yard .
Rock Borrow Cubic Yard .
Gravel Filter for Slope Stabilization Cubic Yard .
Shoulder Berm Removal Linear Foot .
Test Borings Linear Foot SECTION EXCAVATION FOR STRUCTURES .
DESCRIPTION .
This work shall consist of the excavation and backfill or disposal of material removed .
All excavation for structures below the designated slope or subgrade line as shown on the Plans shall be included in this work .
The work is classified as follows a Trench Excavation .
Trench Excavation shall consist of excavation for the construction of new culverts and pipes of foot clear span and under conduits culvert headwalls drop inlets manholes catch basins leaching basins underdrains concrete steps and other minor structures and drainage ditches at the inlet and outlet of drainage structures with a clear span of feet and under excavation for the removal of all existing drainage structures exploratory excavation for locating underground utility services andor other structures and any other excavation designated to be removed under this Contract Item .
Trench Excavation of Earth .
Trench Excavation of Earth shall consist of all material excavated within the limits shown in the Contract Documents except boulders measuring cubic feet or more solid rock mortared stone masonry and concrete and the removal of all existing pipes foot and under regardless of material .
Trench Excavation of Earth Exploratory .
Exploratory excavation to locate underground utility services andor other structures shall be conducted where directed by the Engineer and shall be classified as Trench Excavation of Earth Exploratory .
The Contractor shall utilize protective measures during this excavation to avoid damage to any underground service or structure .
When necessary the Contractor shall cooperate with representatives of the utility companies to avoid damage to the utilities by permitting the utility companies to erect suitable supports props shoring or other means of protection .
Trench Excavation of Rock .
Trench Excavation of Rock shall consist of all solid rock in formation or boulders measuring cubic feet or more excavated within the limits shown in the Contract Documents .
All mortared stone masonry and concrete irrespective of the size of its components excavated within the above limits shall likewise be considered as rock .
b Structure Excavation .
Structure Excavation shall consist of excavation for the construction of foundations and substructures of all structures over foot clear span pipe culverts and storm sewers of over foot clear span grade separation structures retaining walls cribs and any other excavation designated to be removed under this Contract Item .
If temporary bracing sheeting or other means of supporting the excavation is required Construction Drawings shall be submitted in accordance with Section .
c Granular Backfill for Structures .
Granular Backfill for Structures shall consist of approved material placed within the limits shown on the Plans or directed by the Engineer. . MATERIALS .
Materials shall meet the requirements of the following Subsections Coarse Aggregate for Concrete a Crushed Gravel for Subbase Fine Graded a Granular Backfill for Structures Concrete shall have a minimum day compressive strength of psi and shall conform to the requirements of Section .
When approved in writing by the Engineer material meeting the gradation requirements for Coarse Aggregate for Concrete may be substituted for Granular Backfill for Structures under footings .
When approved in writing by the Engineer material meeting the gradation requirements for Crushed Gravel for Subbase Fine Graded may be substituted for Granular Backfill for Structures. . GENERAL CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS .
The locations and elevations for excavation shown on the Plans shall be considered as approximate only .
The Engineer may order removal of poor foundation material below the designed elevation and replacement with an approved material .
All suitable excess excavated material shall be used in the formation of embankments at other locations shown on the Plans or as directed by the Engineer .
The Contractor shall haul and dispose of the material at no additional compensation .
All work performed under this Section shall conform to Section . .
PREPARATION OF FOUNDATION .
The foundation pits shall be excavated so that the footings are the full lengths and widths shown on the Plans .
The footings shall be constructed with full horizontal beds .
Unless otherwise specified or authorized in writing foundations shall be constructed in the dry .
The site shall be dewatered to or below the footing elevation or lowest elevation of a structural component .
The excavation shall continue to either bedrock or the elevation specified for footings on soil .
All loose material shall be removed and all seams in the rock shall be cleaned out and filled with concrete or as directed by the Engineer .
No excavation shall be done below the elevations shown on the Plans unless authorized in writing by the Engineer .
Any material excavated without authority shall be replaced with concrete or as directed by the Engineer at the Contractors expense .
When the footing is to be constructed on an excavated surface other than rock particular care shall be taken not to disturb the bottom of the excavation .
No excavation shall be done below the elevations shown on the Plans unless authorized in writing by the Engineer .
Any material excavated without authority shall be replaced with approved backfill and thoroughly compacted in accordance with Subsection .a at the Contractors expense .
When poor foundation material is encountered at the designed foundation level it shall be removed as Structure Excavation or Trench Excavation and replaced with Granular Backfill for Structures or other suitable material as shown on the Plans or as directed by the Engineer and thoroughly compacted in accordance with Subsection .a. . BACKFILL .
a General .
All spaces excavated and not occupied by structures or select backfill shall be backfilled with material from excavation unless otherwise specified .
The Contractor shall backfill up to the elevation of existing ground or feet over the pipe whichever is less as shown on the Plans or as directed by the Engineer .
All backfill material shall be placed in inch maximum loose measure horizontal layers and each layer shall be thoroughly compacted by means of air or mechanical tampers .
Backfill material placed within the limits of Trench Excavation or Structure Excavation shall have a maximum stone size less than inches .
Compaction by means of hand tamping will not be permitted .
Where backfill is to be placed on both sides of a structure the layers on both sides shall be brought up simultaneously and at approximately the same level to avoid unbalanced pressure .
Care shall be taken to prevent wedging action against the structure .
Backfill of Trenches .
The backfill shall be carried to the uppermost level of the trench or subgrade .
No stones or blasted bedrock exceeding inches in diameter shall come in contact with pipes during backfill operations .
Backfill of Structures .
No backfill material shall be placed against a newly completed structure until the concrete has cured for days or until it has obtained of the designed compressive strength and then only with the permission of the Engineer .
Evidence of satisfactory compaction of the backfill adjacent to structures will consist of the attainment of the density required for the adjacent embankment material by testing at least every third layer in accordance with Subsection .d . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT .
a Trench Excavation .
The quantity of Trench Excavation of Earth Trench Excavation of Earth Exploratory or Trench Excavation of Rock to be measured for payment will be the actual number of cubic yards excavated up to the maximum dimensions as follows The horizontal dimensions for excavation for culverts and pipes excluding underdrain and carrier pipe shall be the distance between vertical planes inches outside of the interior lines of the culvert or pipe .
The horizontal dimensions for drop inlets manholes end sections and other minor structures shall be inches outside the exterior lines of the structure .
The width dimensions for underdrain shall be shown on the Plans .
The depth dimension for culverts pipes underdrain drop inlets manholes and other minor structures shall be the vertical dimension from the original ground surface or bottom limits of other excavation to the bottom of authorized excavation .
Unless otherwise specified in the Plans or directed by the Engineer limits of excavation shall extend foot below the pipe or structure .
When culverts pipes underdrains drop inlets manholes and other minor structures are in embankment areas the natural ground line as crosssectioned shall be the uppermost level of computation unless otherwise specified .
Vertical measurements will be used for the depth in making computations of Trench Excavation as follows a. of the volume for the first feet of vertical depth .
b. of the volume below the first feet of vertical depth .
When Trench Excavation of Rock and Drilling and Blasting of Solid Rock Subgrade occur at the same location the quantity of Trench Excavation of Rock will be measured for payment below the subgrade .
The quantity of any material that the Engineer directs to be removed after the embankments have been placed will be included in the total amount for Trench Excavation .
In measuring masonry or concrete as Trench Excavation of Rock for all openings having crosssectional areas of square feet or less the volume will be included as part of the rock .
For all openings having crosssectional areas greater than square feet the volume will be deducted and not allowed as either Trench Excavation of Rock or Trench Excavation of Earth .
The quantity of Trench Excavation of Earth Exploratory to be measured for payment will be the number of cubic yards of excavation regardless of depth for locating underground utility services andor other structures where directed by the Engineer .
b Structure Excavation .
The quantity of Structure Excavation to be measured for payment will be the number of cubic yards measured and computed by average end area method as follows Vertically .
Between the original ground surface or the bottom limits of any other excavation item whichever is the lower elevation and the bottom of the structure excavation .
Where Excavation Common Solid Rock or Unclassified Channel Excavation and Structure Excavation occur at the same location measurement for Channel Excavation will be made only below the lower limits of Excavation and measurement for Structure Excavation will be made only below the lower limits of Channel Excavation .
The removal of authorized material below the elevation of the bottom of the excavation as shown on the Plans will be measured in accordance with Table .A .
TABLE .A STRUCTURE EXCAVATION MULTIPLIERS Vertical Depth Below Bottom of Excavation Indicated on the Plans feet Volume of Structure Excavation Multiplied By Paid as Extra Work Where a foundation or component of a structure is designed or directed to be placed on bedrock an average inch maximum allowance for overbreakage will be allowed for measurement .
Additional overbreakage shall be at the Contractors expense .
Horizontally .
Between vertical planes inches outside the neat lines of footings beams or other structural components and parallel thereto except for the following a .
The horizontal measurements of the Structure Excavation for reinforced concrete boxes shall be the overall width of the box plus inches on each side and the length of the structure plus inches on each end .
b .
The horizontal measurements for corrugated plate arches shall be the width of each abutment plus inches on each side and the length of the arch plus inches on each end .
c. The horizontal measurements for pipes and pipe arches having a diameter or span over inches shall be between vertical planes feet outside the exteriors of each side and the length of the pipes or pipe arches plus inches on each end .
When footings are not used the neat lines shall be the junction line between the new concrete and the old masonry or bedrock .
c Granular Backfill for Structures .
The quantity of Granular Backfill for Structures to be measured for payment will be the number of cubic yards placed in the complete and accepted work within the confines of the limits shown on the Plans or as directed by the Engineer .
When Coarse Aggregate for Concrete or Crushed Gravel for Subbase Fine Graded is substituted for Granular Backfill for Structures it will be measured and paid for as Granular Backfill for Structures . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT .
The accepted quantities for Trench Excavation Trench Excavation of Earth Exploratory Structure Excavation and Granular Backfill for Structures will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per cubic yard for each of the Contract Items specified in the Contract .
Payment will be full compensation for performing the work specified including placement and compaction of backfill disposal or placement in embankments of all surplus material and the cleaning up of the site following completion of construction areas and for furnishing all labor materials tools equipment sheeting bracing and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
Unless otherwise specified Structure Excavation will include all sheeting bracing dewatering and siltation control preparing and submitting Construction Drawings where required and incidentals necessary for properly constructing in the dry a foundation or structural component .
All material removed beneath a vertical depth of feet below the bottom of Structure Excavation limits shown on the Plans or changes in sheeting bracing or dewatering necessitated by excavating below the foot limit will be paid for as Extra Work .
No differentiation will be made in Structure Excavation between the excavation of wet or dry material earth gravel boulders rock old masonry or reinforced concrete .
When exploratory excavation is conducted exclusively for the purpose of locating existing underground utility services andor other structures when directed by the Engineer the costs of such excavation regardless of depth will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price bid per cubic yard for Trench Excavation of Earth Exploratory .
Payment will be full compensation for all labor materials tools equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work including locating and protecting existing underground utility services andor other structures and for restoring the work area to the satisfaction of the Engineer .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Trench Excavation of Earth Cubic Yard .
Trench Excavation of Rock Cubic Yard .
Trench Excavation of Earth Exploratory N.A.B.I .
Cubic Yard .
Structure Excavation Cubic Yard .
Granular Backfill for Structures Cubic Yard SECTION DRILLING AND BLASTING .
DESCRIPTION .
Except as otherwise specified this work shall consist of the drilling and blasting of rock to remain in place. . DRILLING AND BLASTING OF SOLID ROCK .
Holes shall be drilled to the approximate depth and at the approximate spacing shown on the Plans or as directed by the Engineer .
Following the drilling explosives shall be placed in each hole and then detonated .
The amount of explosive shall be sufficient to shatter and rearrange the rock for the full depth of the drill holes .
Blasting shall be done progressively from the lower level to the top level .
The removal of the blasted rock is not required under the work in this Section. . DRILLING AND BLASTING OF SOLID ROCK SUBGRADE .
Subgrade areas shall be shattered to the dimensions shown on the Plans or directed by the Engineer .
The area of blasted rock subgrade shall extend sufficiently beyond the beginning and end of cut areas to ensure the shattering of all rock to a depth of feet below the bottom of subbase material elevation to eliminate water pockets .
After detonation any rock protruding above the bottom of subbase shall be removed .
When directed by the Engineer the Contractor shall excavate a trench across the blasted rock to determine if the rock is broken and rearranged to a depth of feet below the bottom of subbase .
Afterwards the trench shall be backfilled with the rock removed . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT .
The quantity of Drilling and Blasting of Solid Rock to be measured for payment will be the number of linear feet of drill holes drilled and detonated in accordance with this Section .
The quantity of Drilling and Blasting of Solid Rock Subgrade to be measured for payment will be the number of square yards of subgrade plan area drilled and detonated in accordance with this Section measured at the bottom of subbase .
The number of cubic yards of excavation required by the Engineer to inspect the depth of shattered and rearranged rock computed at a maximum width of inches will be measured for payment as Trench Excavation of Earth .
Any area designated as Trench Excavation of Rock will not be included in the measurement and payment for Drilling and Blasting of Solid Rock Subgrade . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT .
The accepted quantities as measured will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per linear foot or square yard as applicable for the specified Contract Items .
Payment will be full compensation for performing the work specified including any necessary stripping of rock below the bottom of subbase and refilling with approved material to the bottom of subbase the removal of blasted subgrade rock that may swell above subgrade and its disposition on the Project as shown in the Plans or as directed by the Engineer .
Excavation and backfill required to inspect the depth of broken rock below subgrade will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per cubic yard for Trench Excavation of Earth .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Drilling and Blasting of Solid RockLinear Foot .
Drilling and Blasting of Solid Rock Subgrade Square Yard SECTION COFFERDAMS .
DESCRIPTION .
This work shall consist of the construction material excavation within dewatering maintenance and removal of cofferdams in accordance with the Contract Documents .
The work will be classified as follows a Cofferdam .
This item shall consist of providing a method for constructing in the dry a specific foundation or other component of a structure in accordance with Contract requirements .
This may involve the design construction maintenance and removal of a watertight structure or may involve alternate methods of dewatering and stabilizing the specific site .
Construction of foundation seals per Contract or as required per Contractor plans and schedule of operations is also within the scope of work for the Cofferdam item .
The Contractor shall obtain any and all necessary permits or clearances for alternate methods .
b Cofferdam Excavation Earth .
This item shall consist of all material excavated within the pay limits as set forth in these Specifications or indicated on the Plans except solid rock mortared stone masonry concrete and boulders measuring .
cubic yards or more .
c Cofferdam Excavation Rock .
This item shall consist of all solid rock material excavated within the pay limits as set forth in these Specifications or indicated on the Plans including all solid rock mortared stone masonry concrete and boulders measuring .
cubic yards or more. . MATERIALS .
Concrete used in a cofferdam foundation seal or for replacing overbreakage shall have a minimum day compressive strength of psi and shall conform to the requirements of Section . . GENERAL CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS .
The locations and elevations for excavation shall be as indicated on the Plans .
The Engineer may order removal of poor foundation material below the normal designated elevation and replacement with an approved material .
All suitable excess excavated material shall be used in the formation of embankments as indicated on the Plans or as directed by the Engineer .
Unsuitable material shall be hauled and disposed of with no additional compensation to the Contractor. . PRESERVATION OF CHANNEL .
Unless otherwise indicated on the Plans or ordered by the Engineer the Contractor in performing the excavation shall confine excavating operations to the site of the proposed structure and to the limits of the cofferdam .
The natural stream bed shall not be disturbed without permission of the Engineer . .
PREPARATION OF FOUNDATION .
The foundation pits shall be excavated so that the footings will be the full lengths and widths indicated on the Plans .
The footings shall be constructed with full horizontal beds .
Unless otherwise specified or authorized by Written Order foundations shall be constructed in the dry .
In the dry means foundations and other structural components being constructed are not in or under water .
The site shall be dewatered to or below the bottom of footing elevation or lowest elevation of a structural component .
The excavation shall continue to either bedrock or the elevation specified for footings on soil .
All loose material shall be removed and all seams in the rock shall be cleaned out and filled with concrete or as directed by the Engineer .
No excavation shall be done below the elevations indicated on the Plans unless directed by the Engineer in writing .
Any material so excavated without authority shall be replaced with concrete or as directed by the Engineer at the Contractors expense .
When the footing is to be constructed on an excavated surface other than rock particular care shall be taken not to disturb the bottom of the excavation .
No excavation shall be performed below the elevations indicated on the Plans unless directed by the Engineer in writing .
Any material excavated without authority shall be replaced with approved backfill which shall be thoroughly compacted in accordance with Section at the Contractors expense .
When poor foundation material is encountered at the foundation design elevation it shall be removed as Cofferdam Excavation Earth or Cofferdam Excavation Rock and replaced with Granular Backfill for Structures or other suitable material as indicated on the Plans or as directed by the Engineer and thoroughly compacted in accordance with Section . . COFFERDAMS .
The Contractor shall prepare detailed plans and a schedule of operations for each cofferdam specified in the Contract .
Construction Drawings shall be submitted in accordance with Section .
a The Professional Engineer is responsible for ensuring that the proposed cofferdam meets the following criteria The design is structurally stable for all conditions to be encountered e.g .
soils water forces and loadings The design and details conform with the Contract and the applicable requirements in the current AASHTO Standard Specifications for Highway Bridges or the current AASHTO LRFD Bridge Design Specifications and their latest revisions The design and details are in conformance with applicable safety codes Adequate size and shape to construct the foundation and structural components specified The cofferdam is adequately watertight for proper performance of the work The foundation seals are adequate to achieve their design function b The submittal shall include plan elevation and section details indicating the following The waterway Information regarding the cofferdam and any indication that a foundation seal is required to ensure the structural integrity of the cofferdam during dewatering and foundation construction and inspection Substructure location Dimensions of any temporary restrictions that are to be placed in the waterway e.g .
barges lines earth dams causeways temporary diversion channels and access bridging The location dimensions clearances and other relevant information for any temporary scaffolding or netting Dewatered heads taking into consideration water level fluctuations Details for screening pumping and filtering discharges from the cofferdam A statement stipulating whether any equipment will be removed at night A schedule or sequence of operations that includes placement of the foundation seal time from placement to dewatering and foundation construction and inspection The Contractor shall be responsible for performing the work in accordance with the submitted details and schedule of operations .
All welding shall be performed per Subsection .. Cofferdam construction shall conform to the current AASHTO LRFD Bridge Construction Specifications and its latest revisions .
Cofferdams shall be constructed so as to protect freshly placed concrete against damage from sudden rising of the water level and to prevent damage to the foundation or other structural component by erosion .
The cofferdam shall be constructed so that no timber bracing or forms will extend into the foundation or other structural component .
In the event the Contractor elects to place fill material in the stream to facilitate access to or be part of a cofferdam operation it shall be clean stone fill. . PUMPING .
Pumping from or dewatering of the interior of any cofferdam enclosure shall be performed so that disturbance of the subsoil or freshly placed concrete will not occur .
Dewatering of a sealed cofferdam will be in conformance with the Contractors sequence or schedule of operations .
Pumping during the construction of a foundation or other structural component shall be from a suitable sump separated from the concrete work .
The discharge from any pumping operation filtration system or settling basin shall conform to the requirements of Section and the Contract . .
INSPECTION OF FOUNDATION PIT .
Immediately following the completion of each foundation pit the Contractor shall notify the Engineer who shall approve the depth of the pit and the nature of the bearing surface before the placement of the concrete. . BEDDING FOR STRUCTURES .
Excavation and preparation of the bed for a structure shall conform to the Specifications for the specific structure being installed . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT .
a Cofferdam .
The quantity to be measured for payment will be on a lump sum basis for each cofferdam specified on the Plans or in the Contract .
b Cofferdam Excavation Earth .
The quantity to be measured for payment will be the number of cubic yards of earth excavated from within the pay limits of the cofferdam as set forth in these Specifications or as shown on the Plans .
The removal of earth excavation authorized by the Engineer below the elevation of the bottom of the excavation as indicated on the Plans will be factored in accordance with Table .A .
TABLE .A COFFERDAM EXCAVATION MULTIPLIERS Vertical Depth Below Bottom of Excavation Indicated on the Plans feet Volume of Cofferdam Excavation Multiplied By Paid as Extra Work c Cofferdam Excavation Rock .
The quantity to be measured for payment will be the number of cubic yards of rock excavated from within the pay limits of the cofferdam as set forth in these Specifications or as shown on the Plans .
The removal of rock excavation authorized by the Engineer below the elevation of the bottom of the excavation as indicated on the Plans will be factored in accordance with the list shown above .
Where a foundation or component of a structure is designed or directed to be placed on bedrock a maximum of inches average allowance for overbreakage will be allowed .
Additional overbreakage will be at the Contractors expense .
d Bottom of Excavation .
The bottom of excavation shall be as indicated on the Plans .
When a foundation seal is specified in the Contract the bottom of excavation shall be considered to be the bottom of the excavation required for the foundation seal .
For a seal proposed by the Contractor no excavation shall be measured for payment below the bottom of excavation as indicated on the Plans . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT .
The accepted quantity of Cofferdam will be paid for at the Contract lump sum price which price shall be full compensation for the preparation of detailed plans and schedule of operations performing the work specified and the furnishing of all labor tools equipment materials and incidentals necessary to complete the work including the cost of altering the cofferdam foundation seals sheeting bracing dewatering installation and maintenance of siltation and sedimentation control measures for treating cofferdam discharge incidentals necessary for properly constructing the foundation or structural component maintaining the cofferdam in a dewatered condition and removing the cofferdam when no longer required .
The accepted quantities of Cofferdam Excavation Earth and Cofferdam Excavation Rock will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per cubic yard for each of the Pay Items in the Contract which price shall be full compensation for performing the work specified and the furnishing of all labor materials tools equipment disposal of surplus material and any other incidentals necessary to complete the work .
Payment for Cofferdam will be made as follows a A payment of of the lump sum bid price will be made when excavation within the limits of the structural unit is completed and the cofferdam has been successfully dewatered .
b The remaining of the lump sum price will be paid when the cofferdam is completely removed or if the Contract Documents require the cofferdam to be left in place when the associated foundation or other component of a structure is completed .
If the Engineer by Written Order requires that the cofferdam be left in place and this requirement is not specified in the Contract Documents a Supplemental Agreement will be processed in accordance with Section .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Cofferdam Excavation Earth Cubic Yard .
Cofferdam Excavation Rock Cubic Yard .
Cofferdam Lump Sum SECTION COLD PLANING .
DESCRIPTION .
This work shall consist of the removal disposal and cleanup of bituminous pavements by coarsemilling or finemilling. . EQUIPMENT AND OPERATION .
The equipment shall be powerdriven selfpropelled and of a size and shape to allow traffic safe passage through areas adjacent to the work .
The equipment shall have grade and slope controls capable of operating from a ski and based on mechanical or sonic operation .
It shall be able to remove bituminous pavement to an accuracy of inch with conveyors capable of side or front loading to transfer the removed material from the roadway to a truck .
A lighting system shall be furnished for night work as necessary .
The equipment shall have a positive means for controlling cross slope elevations .
The equipment shall have sufficient weight to perform milling without lifting and sufficient and positive down pressure on the drum assembly at all times when milling .
The equipment shall also have an effective means of preventing dust from escaping into the air .
a CoarseMilling Equipment .
Equipment used for coarsemilling shall have a properly maintained cutting head that ensures that the depth of cut does not vary by more than inch throughout the width of the head .
b FineMilling Equipment .
Equipment used for fine or micromilling shall meet the following requirements Equipment shall deploy a cutting head with a carbide or PCD polycrystalline diamond tipped cutting teeth designed for micromilling bituminous pavement to close tolerances .
The cutting head shall be properly maintained so that the depth of cut is within a tolerance of inch throughout the width of the head with a center to center transverse pattern of inch between strike areas .
The grinding and texturing mandrel shall have multiple wraps of flighting with a weld on or quick change block system that accepts carbide or PCD tipped cutting bits .
The carbide or PCD bits shall be arranged in a manner that is capable of producing a final pavement surface having a transverse pattern of inch center to center of each strike area and a target difference between ridge and valley RVD measurement of the mat surface shall not exceed inch .
Tips of the carbide or PCD teeth are to be spaced at a maximum inch axial distance between the tips of each tooth .
Bituminous surfaces adjacent to objects such as drop inlets and curbs that are inaccessible to milling equipment shall be milled with equipment designed for that purpose and approved by the Engineer. . GENERAL CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS .
The bituminous surface shall be removed to the depth width and crossslope as shown on the Plans or as directed by the Engineer .
The milling depth shall not vary from the typical crosssection depth by more than inch .
The milling operation shall produce a uniform surface and maintain a constant cross slope between extremities in each lane and shoulder .
Unless otherwise specified all milled material including dust and other material remaining on the milled surface after milling shall become the property of the Contractor and shall be removed from the roadway immediately and disposed of properly .
A Power Broom Type II shall be used to cleanup the milled surface after coarsemilling and a Power Broom Type III shall be used to cleanup the milled surface after finemilling .
The milled surface shall be cleaned prior to allowing traffic onto the milled surface and to the satisfaction of the Engineer .
The Contractor shall use caution when milling operations occur on bridge decks .
Should any damage occur to the deck or membrane as a result of milling operations the Engineer will contact the VTrans Construction Structures Engineer to provide an assessment of the damage and recommend any necessary repairs .
All damages determined to be the fault of the Contractor shall be repaired by the Contractor at no cost to the State .
When traffic shall be maintained for any period of time on a milled area the following conditions apply a All butt joints inch deep or greater shall have a temporary taper or wedge of bituminous concrete pavement installed at a minimum slope of VH .
Tapers andor wedges shall be in place prior to allowing traffic on the butt joint .
Longitudinal edges greater than inches in depth and located at ramp areas shall be tapered a minimum of feet .
The Contractor shall be responsible for maintaining and repairing wedges andor tapers throughout their use to the satisfaction of the Engineer .
Tapers andor wedges shall be totally removed prior to placing permanent pavement at the respective butt joint .
All costs associated with installing maintaining and removing temporary tapers andor wedges will not be paid for directly but will be considered incidental to the applicable milling Contract Item .
b The Contractor shall repave any milled areas within Calendar Days of milling or when directed by the Engineer .
Should the area remain unpaved for a period longer than specified herein without the approval of the Engineer no payment whatsoever will be made for the milled areas left exposed in excess of Calendar Days .
If the Contractor lays down temporary pavement to avoid the above nonpayment for milling temporary pavement and subsequent milling shall be at the Contractors expense .
c Milled areas susceptible to ponding of water shall be drained by cutting slots through the adjoining nonmilled area .
The slots shall then be filled with materials satisfactory to the Engineer .
All costs of cutting and filling the slots will not be paid for directly but will be considered incidental to the applicable Cold Planing Contract Item. . FINEMILLING .
Finemilling operations shall be performed as per design with each travel lane being milled full width in a maximum of two passes of the finemilling equipment .
Substantially all of the pavement surface shall be textured .
Extra depth finemilling of isolated low spots will not be necessary if it requires lowering of the overall profile of the pavement .
The accumulated total of excluded areas shall not exceed of the total area to be milled .
In all cases the maximum depth of bituminous pavement removal shall be inches .
The operation shall result in a surface cross slope that conforms to existing or as shown on the Plans . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT .
The quantity of CoarseMilling Bituminous Pavement and FineMilling Bituminous Pavement to be measured for payment will be the number of square yards of surface from which bituminous pavement has been removed on the Plans . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT .
The accepted quantity of CoarseMilling Bituminous Pavement and FineMilling Bituminous Pavement will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per square yard .
Payment will be full compensation for furnishing all labor tools and equipment including the Power Broom Type II and Power Broom Type III necessary to complete the work .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
CoarseMilling Bituminous Pavement Square Yard .
FineMilling Bituminous Pavement Square Yard SECTION THIS SECTION RESERVED SECTION THIS SECTION RESERVED SECTION MILLED RUMBLE STRIPS .
DESCRIPTION .
This work shall consist of texturing bituminous concrete pavement to construct rumble strips disposing of waste millings and cleaning up the pavement. . EQUIPMENT .
The equipment for milling rumble strips shall consist of a power operated machine with a rotary type cutting head of a size that will provide milled depressions to the dimensions as shown on the Plans .
The cutting heads shall have cutting tips arranged to provide a smooth cut .
The cutting heads shall be on a suspension independent from that of the power unit to allow the tool to selfalign with the slope andor any irregularities of the surface being milled .
The cutting tool shall be equipped with guides to provide consistent alignment of each cut in relation to the roadway and to provide uniformity and consistency throughout the Project .
Equipment that tears distorts or otherwise damages the pavement adjacent to the milled depressions will not be allowed. . GENERAL CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS .
Rumble strips shall be milled to the finished dimensions locations and tolerances shown on the Plans in accordance with these Specifications or as directed by the Engineer .
Unless otherwise specified the milled material shall become the property of the Contractor .
All material shall be removed from the roadway immediately with a Type II Power Broom and shall become property of the Contractor . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT .
The quantity of Milled Rumble Strips to be measured for payment will be the longitudinal length in linear feet of treated surface measured .
The measurement will include the nonmilled lengths between adjacent strips .
Gaps or breaks greater than feet will not be measured for payment . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT .
The accepted quantity of Milled Rumble Strips will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per linear foot .
Payment shall be full compensation for furnishing all labor tools and equipment including the Type II Power Broom necessary to complete the work .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Milled Rumble Strips Linear Foot SECTION THIS SECTION RESERVED DIVISION SUBBASE AND BASE COURSES SECTION SUBBASE .
DESCRIPTION .
This work shall consist of furnishing and placing one or more courses of approved gravel crushed gravel dense graded crushed stone or other proportioned material on a prepared surface or at other locations. . MATERIALS .
Materials shall meet the requirements of the following Subsections Coarse Aggregate for Concrete .
Gravel for Subbase .
Crushed Gravel for Subbase .
Dense Graded Crushed Stone for Subbase .
Certifications required shall be submitted in conformance with the Agencys Materials Sampling Manual .
At the option of the Contractor unless otherwise specified in the Contract Processed Glass Aggregate PGA or Recycled Concrete Aggregate RCA may be used to partially replace natural aggregate in materials specified to meet the requirements of Subsection .
Subsection .
and Subsection ..
In no case shall PGA and RCA be blended together .
PGA shall be a crushed and screened material with passing a inch .
mm sieve .
Not more than of the material passing the No. . mm sieve shall pass a No. . mm sieve .
Materials used to produce PGA shall consist of recycled glass food or beverage containers .
Small amounts less than total of china dishes ceramics plate window or mirror glass or other glass products will be allowed in PGA .
The PGA material shall not contain more than trace amounts of screw tops plastic cap rings or other contaminants .
Amounts of contaminants greater than by weight shall be grounds for rejection of the entire PGA batch .
Glass containers containing or having contained toxic or hazardous materials will not be allowed and when present shall be grounds for rejecting the entire stockpile of PGA or PGA subbase blends .
Materials used to produce RCA shall consist of recycled concrete that has been crushed to aggregate dimensions of inches or less .
Small amounts of brick block or mortar may be present in the RCA at a level not to exceed a total of by weight .
The RCA material shall not contain more than trace amounts of wire steel or plastic that were associated with the original placement of the concrete bituminous material or unreacted cementitious materials .
No additional wire steel or plastic may be added to the RCA .
No discernable amounts of oils fats soaps surfactants or organic contaminants shall be present in the RCA .
Hazardous materials or concrete structures used to contain hazardous materials will not be allowed and when present shall be grounds for rejection of the entire stockpile of RCA or RCA subbase blends .
PGA and RCA materials shall be subjected to process control testing .
PGA subbase blends shall not contain more than by weight of PGA .
RCA subbase blends shall not contain more than RCA .
The final blend shall conform to the specified gradation for the subbase material .
The blending process shall be complete to ensure that as thorough a distribution and as uniform a mixture as practicable has been obtained .
Process control tests shall be performed at a minimum frequency of one test per cubic yards of material produced by a stable process .
A copy of each test result shall be given to the Engineer .
Prior to the use of any PGA subbase blend the Contractor shall submit in writing for preliminary approval by the Engineer information identifying the sources and locations from which PGA material to be used on the Project will be obtained .
The Contractor shall also submit certified test results verifying that the PGA material will be in compliance with the Contract requirements .
Once the sources of PGA are approved Quality Assurance samples may be taken by the Engineer .
PGA subbase blends must be approved for use on the Project by the Engineer in writing prior to being placed on a Project .
Inplace blending of PGA with other materials will not be permitted .
The supplier of PGA shall certify in writing to the Engineer that the crushed glass material to be used does not contain toxic or hazardous substances .
The supplier of RCA shall certify in writing to the Engineer that the concrete to be used does not contain toxic or hazardous substances .
The blended subbase material shall meet all specified gradation and cleanliness requirements .
When specified for use on the Project or as directed by the Engineer Subbase RAP shall include coldplaned grindings which have been screened or crushed by the Contractor in order that passes the inch .
mm sieve prior to blending .
The grindings shall be blended in equal proportions by weight with material meeting the requirements of Subbase of Crushed Gravel Fine Graded as specified in Table .B. . GENERAL CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS .
The subbase material shall be placed on a prepared surface with an approved spreader box or by use of other approved mechanical spreading equipment .
Dumping directly on the subgrade will not be permitted .
A bulldozer may be used instead of a spreader box provided that the subbase material is first placed on the previously laid subbase and then completely removed from the area where it was first deposited .
Should segregation of the subbase occur the Contractor shall remove and replace the material or rework it until uniform grading is obtained .
If material below subgrade becomes intermixed with the subbase resulting in an unacceptable product the mixture shall be removed and replaced with new subbase material .
The maximum compacted layer thickness for all subbase materials is inches .
Where the finished depth of the subbase is to be greater than inches it shall be placed and compacted in two or more layers of approximately equal thickness .
In the placement of layers all joints shall be staggered at least inches .
After each layer of subbase material is placed it shall be graded to obtain a smooth even surface as specified in Subsection ..
Following grading operations the subbase shall be thoroughly compacted as specified in Subsection ..
If required water shall be uniformly applied over the subbase materials during compaction in the amount necessary for proper consolidation .
Materials containing PGA or RCA shall be compacted in the same manner as materials that do not contain recycled materials .
Care will be taken to prevent excessive moisture contents in subbase materials prior to compaction .
If needed the Contractor may use material meeting the requirements of Table .B as filler to achieve the design grade when the variation of the surface is less than inch .
When it is necessary to maintain traffic over the subbase of the width of the roadway shall be constructed at a time .
The portion under construction shall have the subbase material placed graded and compacted before opening to traffic .
Subsequent traffic damage to the material shall be entirely the Contractors responsibility .
If the subbase loses its shape the Contractor shall loosen regrade and compact as necessary .
When it is necessary to maintain traffic over the subbase or where construction hauling occurs over the subbase the upper inches of subbase shall be scarified to restore permeability in the subbase surface compacted and regraded as required or replaced just prior to the placement of any pavement .
If roadway shoulders are to remain unpaved subbase or other designated material to be placed in the shoulder area after final roadway paving shall be placed and compacted in accordance with Subsection .. .
SPECIFIC CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS .
a Subbase of Gravel .
Only uniformly graded gravel from the pit shall be used .
The Contractor shall manipulate the material in the pit to eliminate nonuniformly graded pockets of material .
b Subbase of Crushed Gravel .
When stockpiling care shall be taken to prevent segregation in the pile .
c Subbase of Dense Graded Crushed Stone .
When stockpiling care shall be taken to prevent segregation in the pile . .
SURFACE TOLERANCE .
The surface of the compacted subbase will be tested by the Engineer at selected locations .
The variation of the surface shall at no point exceed inch .
This variation shall not be maintained for a distance longer than feet .
The required crown and superelevation shall be maintained .
All humps or depressions exceeding the specified tolerances shall be corrected by reshaping or removing defective work and replacing it with new material as directed by the Engineer .
Any new material used to replace removed material shall meet the applicable gradation Specification listed in Subsection .. . COMPACTION .
Compaction of each layer shall continue until a density of not less than of the maximum dry density has been achieved .
When cubic yards or more of subbase material is to be placed as part of the Contract the maximum dry density shall be determined by the Contractor in accordance with AASHTO T Method D as modified by the Agencys Materials Section .
Laboratory moisturedensity tests shall be performed to ensure a standard error of the mean maximum dry density of less than one pound per cubic foot .
This will necessitate at least five but no more than ten replications of the test .
The Contractor shall provide the Engineer with all test results and calculations for determining the maximum dry density at least days prior to subbase placement The maximum dry density shall be determined after any change in source regardless of quantity and confirmed by repetition of the selected test method at a frequency of cubic yards when the prescribed standard error can be attained by five or less replicate tests .
If more than five replicate tests are required to meet the prescribed standard error the maximum dry density shall be confirmed at a frequency of every cubic yards .
The Engineer may reduce this frequency with the approval of the Geotechnical Engineering Manager after the initial two maximum dry density determinations .
When less than cubic yards of subbase material is to be placed as part of the Contract the maximum dry density will be determined by the Agency in accordance with AASHTO T Method D as modified by the Agencys Materials Section .
Field density testing will be performed by the Agency in accordance with AASHTO T at locations determined by the Engineer .
Compaction operations shall proceed such that the target field density as determined in accordance with this Subsection is achieved . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT .
The quantity of subbase to be measured for payment will be the number of cubic yards of the type specified for use in the complete and accepted work as determined by the plan dimensions of the compacted material including any filler material used to achieve the design grade .
When specified to be paid by weight the quantity of Subbase of Crushed Gravel Fine Graded to be measured for payment will be the number of tons of material in place in the complete and accepted work as determined from the load tickets .
The quantity of Subbase RAP to be measured for payment will be the number of tons of material in place in the complete and accepted work as determined from the load tickets .
When subbase material is required for extra depth at bridge approaches the quantity to be measured for payment will be the number of cubic yards measured in place for this purpose between the lines shown on the Plans .
Materials containing PGA or RCA will be measured in the same manner as subbase materials that do not contain PGA or RCA . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT .
The accepted quantity of subbase will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per cubic yard or ton for the type specified .
Payment will be full compensation for furnishing blending transporting testing placing grading and compacting the material specified and for furnishing all labor tools equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
No additional payment will be made for filler material used as a replacement for the specified subbase material .
No payment will be made for the following a Material forced into or mixed with the subgrade material .
b Material placed to a depth greater than shown on the Plans .
c Water used to obtain required compaction .
d Removal and replacement of subbase material .
e Scarifying recompacting or regrading of subgrade or subbase layers when required .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Subbase of Gravel Cubic Yard .
Subbase of Crushed Gravel Coarse Graded Cubic Yard .
Subbase of Crushed Gravel Fine Graded Cubic Yard .
Subbase of Crushed Gravel Fine Graded Ton .
Subbase of Dense Graded Crushed Stone Cubic Yard .
Subbase RAP Ton SECTION THIS SECTION RESERVED SECTION FULL DEPTH RECLAMATION FDR .
DESCRIPTION .
This work shall consist of pulverizing the existing pavement together with underlying base course material to the depth and width specified on the Plans or in the Contract adding aggregate materials as required or as ordered by the Engineer adding the stabilizing agent indicated on the Plans mixing the components thoroughly and shaping and compacting the stabilized material to the desired grade and density. . MATERIALS .
Materials shall meet the requirements of the following Subsections Crushed Gravel for Subbase .
Water .
Calcium Chloride .
The pulverized material shall consist of the existing pavement blended with underlying subbase material andor additional aggregate material and shall conform to the gradation requirements of Table .A .
TABLE .A FDR GRADATION REQUIREMENTS Sieve Designation Percentage by Mass Weight Passing Square Mesh Sieves inch .
mm inch .
mm No. . mm Additional aggregate material added to make up grading deficiencies andor to correct roadway geometry shall meet the requirements of Subsection .. . EQUIPMENT .
Pulverization shall be accomplished with a machine having positive depth control adjustments and capable of reducing the pavement material to the specified size .
The pulverizing equipment shall meet the approval of the Engineer .
Equipment such as a milling machine or a rock crushing plant will not be permitted .
The mixer shall be a selfpropelled mixer .
The mixing rotor or rotors shall have positive depth control to ensure a uniform depth of mixing .
When Stabilization Asphalt is designated as the stabilizing agent the mixer shall also be a combined mixer and liquid distributor .
The mixer shall meet the approval of the Engineer .
The equipment for distributing the designated stabilizing agent shall be uniformly adjustable and shall be equipped to accurately verify the rate of application of the stabilizing agent at any time .
The rollers used to compact the FDR material shall be as specified in Subsection ..
The power grader and any replacement graders shall have grade control automation. . CONSTRUCTION .
The moisture content of the pulverized materials shall be uniform and within the range approved by the Agencys Geotechnical Engineering Manager prior to the addition of the stabilizing agent .
If necessary the materials shall be manipulated with equipment approved by the Engineer to decrease the moisture content or moisture shall be added to increase the moisture content to bring it into an approved range .
The pulverized reclaimed base material shall be stabilized by thoroughly mixing the stabilizing agent with the pulverized material and regrading and compacting the resulting mixture .
When a stabilizing agent is not exclusively specified on the Plans water shall be used as that agent to meet all requirements of this Section .
When a dust control agent is not exclusively specified on the Plans water andor calcium chloride shall be used as that agent to meet all requirements of this Section .
Stabilization with water shall not be performed during rainstorms nor when the ambient air temperature is below F. The Contractor shall pulverize only that area of pavement that can be stabilized during the same Working Day . .
TESTING .
The Contractor shall perform all process control and quality control sampling and testing .
Process control sampling and testing shall involve taking a set of four representative excavated samples from the test section after the test section has been pulverized .
The four samples shall be taken at random representing the fourquarter segments of the test section .
The four samples shall be sieved to determine if the process can produce the required gradation or if additional materials must be added .
Following the completion of the sieve analysis using the AASHTO T procedure modified to include air drying of the material only the materials shall be physically combined to produce a representative sample .
A moisturedensity curve representing the combined sample shall be generated in accordance with AASTHO T Method C using a minimum of five different moisture contents to determine the maximum density and optimum moisture .
The Contractor shall perform quality control tests for density using a nuclear gauge in accordance with AASHTO T Method B per compacted lift of stabilized material .
A minimum of nuclear gauge tests per lane mile of compacted reclaimed base material shall be performed .
Additional tests shall be performed as necessary or as directed by the Engineer .
The Contractor shall verify that the minimum target density is maintained prior to resurfacing .
The Contractor shall also perform quality control tests for uniform gradation of the pulverized material at a minimum rate of two tests per lane mile .
The Contractor shall provide the Engineer with written copies of all process control and quality control results including test locations .
These test results will not be used to determine acceptance of the FDR material .
Acceptance testing will be performed by Agency personnel. . TEST SECTION .
The Contractor shall construct a test section to assure the Engineer that the Contractors equipment and procedures are suitable for the work specified and capable of achieving the minimum target density approved by the Engineer .
The test section shall be full roadway width and of a length approved by the Engineer .
No further recycling shall be performed until all aspects of the test section and the target density are approved by the Engineer .
The Contractor shall use the same equipment for building both the accepted test sections and performing the FDR work on the Project unless equipment substitution is approved by the Engineer .
The Engineer may require an additional test section and additional process control sampling to investigate the suitability of substituted or changed equipment .
If the test section does not meet the requirements of this Specification or the density achieved does not meet the minimum target density then the Contractor shall modify the procedure and either construct another test section or reconstruct the original test section until suitable results are obtained. . SHAPING AND COMPACTING .
Shaping and compacting shall be done immediately after pulverizing .
The base material shall be finished within a grade tolerance of inch provided that this deviation is not maintained for a distance longer than feet and provided that the required crown or superelevation is maintained .
When additional aggregate material is added to the previously reclaimed roadway to correct geometric deficiencies said material shall be subject to a second pass of the reclamation equipment to achieve a homogenous subbase and shall be shaped graded and compacted .
The Contractor shall maintain the centerline location of the roadway .
The Contractor shall also be responsible for the necessary survey required to reestablish banking as shown on the Plans or as directed by the Engineer .
Compaction of the FDR shall be accomplished by successive passes of a vibratory sheepsfoot or padfoot roller of at least tons of dynamic force .
Final rolling shall be accomplished by a smooth steel wheel vibratory roller of at least tons of dynamic force .
The material shall be compacted to achieve at least the minimum target density approved by the Engineer .
The optimum moisture content shall be maintained throughout the duration of the Project stabilizing and compaction process .
The minimum target density during construction shall be of the maximum density upon approval by the Engineer in accordance with Subsection .
and Subsection .. . CURING AND STABILITY .
The completed and cured FDR may be opened to traffic as approved by the Engineer .
Required density and moisture content of the finished base shall be maintained until it is paved over .
Any imperfections discovered shall be repaired by the Contractor as directed by the Engineer at no additional cost to the Agency .
The stabilized material shall be allowed to cure to a condition such that the free moisture content is reduced to .
or less before bituminous concrete pavement is placed on it . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT .
The quantity of FDR to be measured for payment will be the number of square yards constructed to the depth specified complete in place in the accepted work .
No allowance will be made for overlapping areas .
The quantity of additional aggregate material used to correct gradation or geometric deficiencies to be measured for payment will be the number of tons of Subbase of Crushed Gravel Fine Graded complete in place in the accepted work as determined by weigh tickets .
If the depth of base to be stabilized must be adjusted in the field the first inches of additional or decreased depth will not be paid for directly but will be considered incidental to the FDR item .
If the change in depth is greater than inches the number of square yards pulverized at the revised depth will be multiplied by the result of dividing the total depth actually pulverized by the original depth designated on the Plans to create an equivalent number of square yards for which payment will then be made . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT .
The accepted quantity of FDR will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per square yard .
Payment shall be full compensation for furnishing handling transporting and placing the necessary materials pulverizing adding or removing moisture shaping placing and compacting the designated materials constructing tests strips conducting tests maintaining the finished base until it is paved over and for furnishing all labor tools equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
No additional compensation will be provided for multiple passes of the reclamation equipment and additional shaping grading and compacting .
Water used to adjust the moisture content prior to stabilization for stabilization when water is used as the stabilizing agent for compacting the pulverized material and for dust control after the reclamation will not be paid for directly but will be considered incidental to the FDR item .
Calcium chloride used for dust control after the reclamation will not be paid for directly but will be considered incidental to the FDR item .
The accepted quantity of Subbase of Crushed Gravel Fine Graded used to correct gradation or geometric deficiencies will be paid for under the appropriate Contract item .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Full Depth Reclamation FDR Square Yard This Page Intentionally Left Blank DIVISION SURFACE COURSES AND PAVEMENT SECTION AGGREGATE SURFACE COURSE .
DESCRIPTION .
This work shall consist of furnishing and placing a wearing course of approved aggregate on a prepared surface. . MATERIALS .
Materials shall meet the requirements of the following Subsections Aggregate for Surface Course and Shoulders . .
PLACING .
The aggregate shall be placed and properly shaped using equipment that allows the typical crosssection and design grade to be attained .
Should aggregate segregation occur the Contractor shall remove and replace the segregated material or manipulate it until uniform gradation is obtained .
The maximum layer thickness for placement of any aggregate surface material shall be inches after compaction .
All layers shall be placed and compacted at approximately equal thickness .
In the placement of layers all joints shall be staggered at least inches .
After each layer of surface material is placed it shall be thoroughly compacted to a uniform density of not less than of the maximum dry density as determined by AASHTO T Method C. Suitable and effective equipment meeting the approval of the Engineer shall be used to obtain a true and even surface during compaction .
All holes or depressions found during the compacting shall be filled with additional material reworked and compacted .
If required water shall be uniformly applied over the aggregate material during compaction in an amount necessary to produce proper consolidation .
The aggregate shall be thoroughly compacted by an approved power roller with a minimum weight of tons by an approved rubbertired roller or by other approved methods . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT .
The quantity of Aggregate Surface Course to be measured for payment will be the number of cubic yards used in the complete and accepted work as determined by the Plan dimensions of the compacted material or as ordered by the Engineer .
No allowance will be made for material placed to a depth greater than that shown on the Plans unless ordered by the Engineer . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT .
The accepted quantity of Aggregate Surface Course will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per cubic yard .
Payment will be full compensation for performing the work specified and for furnishing all materials labor tools equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
Water used for obtaining the required compaction will not be paid for separately but will be considered incidental to the item Aggregate Surface Course .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Aggregate Surface Course Cubic Yard SECTION AGGREGATE SHOULDERS .
DESCRIPTION .
This work shall consist of furnishing placing and compacting material for Aggregate Shoulders on a prepared surface. . MATERIALS .
Materials for Aggregate Shoulders and Aggregate Shoulders RAP shall meet the requirements of the following Subsections Aggregate for Surface Course and Shoulders . . PLACEMENT .
Aggregate Shoulders shall be placed with equipment capable of placing the material in accordance with the Plans .
The Contractor shall demonstrate to the Engineer the proposed placement procedures .
If deemed necessary by the Engineer the procedures shall be adjusted to avoid damage to the wearing course .
It shall be the Contractors responsible to repair any damage to the wearing course to the satisfaction of the Engineer at no additional cost to the Agency .
Unless otherwise directed by the Engineer or shown on the Plans Aggregate Shoulders shall be placed in one course and shall not be placed until the adjacent wearing course has been completed .
The maximum layer thickness for placement of material shall be inches after compaction .
When multiple layers are required all layers shall be placed in approximately equal thicknesses .
All layers of Aggregate Shoulders shall be compacted to of the maximum dry density determined by AASHTO T Method C or to the satisfaction of the Engineer .
This provision shall apply in such cases that the shoulder material has a VH slope or flatter and a minimum of a half width of a roller drum can traverse the material .
Otherwise the material shall be compacted as directed by the Engineer .
The Contractor shall correct any segregated material to the satisfaction of the Engineer at no additional cost to the Agency .
All material shall have a true and even surface as shown in the Plans .
All holes or depressions found prior to acceptance of the Project shall be filled with additional material reworked and compacted as necessary .
A printed load ticket indicating truck identification date and time of delivery and weight shall be furnished to the Engineer with each load delivered to the Project . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT .
The quantity of Aggregate Shoulders and Aggregate Shoulders RAP to be measured for payment will be the number of tons used in the complete and accepted work as determined from load tickets .
Partial loads shall be paid for on a prorated basis . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT .
The accepted quantity of Aggregate Shoulders and Aggregate Shoulders RAP will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per ton .
Payment will be full compensation for performing the work specified and for furnishing all materials labor tools equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
Water used for obtaining the required compaction will not be paid for separately but will be considered incidental to the Aggregate Shoulders item in the Contract .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Aggregate Shoulders Ton .
Aggregate Shoulders RAP Ton SECTION AGGREGATE SHOULDERS RAP WITH RAS .
DESCRIPTION .
This work shall consist of furnishing placing and compacting material for Aggregate Shoulders RAP with RAS on a prepared surface. . MATERIALS .
Materials for Aggregate Shoulders RAP with RAS shall meet the requirements of the following Subsections Aggregate for Surface Course and Shoulders .
Water .
Aggregate Shoulders RAP with RAS shall contain by weight of Recycled Asphalt Shingles RAS .
RAS shall be produced at a properly permitted facility and meet the requirements of AASHTO MP . . EQUIPMENT .
Aggregate Shoulders RAP with RAS shall be placed and compacted with equipment capable of meeting the maximum dry density requirements as specified in Subsection .. For compaction around mailboxes driveways and other obstacles equipment designed for that purpose shall be used and approved by the Engineer . .
PRELIMINARY CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS .
The Contractor shall submit documentation to the Engineer verifying that the gradation requirements specified herein have been satisfied for each source of material intended for use. . CONSTRUCTION .
The Contractor shall demonstrate to the Engineer the proposed placement procedures .
If deemed necessary by the Engineer the procedures shall be adjusted to avoid damage to the wearing course .
It shall be the Contractors responsibility to repair any damage to the wearing course to the satisfaction of the Engineer at no additional cost to the Agency .
Unless otherwise directed by the Engineer or shown on the Plans Aggregate Shoulders RAP with RAS shall be placed in one course and shall not be placed until the adjacent wearing course has been completed .
The maximum layer thickness for placement of material shall be inches after compaction .
When multiple layers are required all layers shall be placed in approximately equal thicknesses .
All layers of Aggregate Shoulders RAP with RAS shall be compacted to of the maximum dry density as determined by AASHTO T Method C or to the satisfaction of the Engineer .
This provision shall apply in such cases that the shoulder material has a VH slope or flatter and a minimum of a half width of a roller drum can traverse the material .
Otherwise the material shall be compacted as directed by the Engineer .
The Contractor shall correct any segregated material to the satisfaction of the Engineer at no additional cost to the Agency .
All material shall have a true and even surface as shown in the Plans .
All holes or depressions found prior to acceptance of the Project shall be filled with additional material reworked and compacted as necessary .
A printed load ticket indicating truck identification date and time of delivery and weight shall be furnished to the Engineer with each load delivered to the Project. . QUALITY CONTROL PROGRAM .
The work to be completed by the Contractor under this item shall be governed by a Quality Control Program completed by the Contractor .
The quality control program shall have a Quality Control QC Plan process control measures and qualified personnel to record and act on the results of the program .
The Contractor shall submit the QC Plan a minimum of Calendar Days prior to commencing placement of the material .
The QC Plan shall address each phase of the construction including surface preparation manufacture of the RAP manufacture of the RAS blending of the RAS and RAP placement and compaction of the material .
QC tests included in the QC Plan shall include moisture content maximum dry density gradation and blend verification .
The QC Plan shall address all reasonably anticipated factors including but not limited to weather materials quality material availability traffic equipment availability and materials delivery .
The Contractor shall define an appropriate sampling and testing frequency for quality control purposes .
The Contractor is responsible for field confirmation of lab conditions and revision of the mix design to achieve maximum dry density condition of the inplace product .
a QC Plan Administrator .
The QC Plan Administrator shall be identified in the QC Plan as being qualified by way of past experience with aggregate shoulder placement coupled with NorthEast Transportation Technician Certification Program NETTCP certification for aggregate technician or aggregate field technician or have it be alternately demonstrated that field staff through supervision and under responsible charge of the plan administrator has such qualifications or equivalent credentials .
b Quality Control Records .
Quality control records shall include all sampling events testing results and process changes with accurate time and location data and available upon request by the Engineer .
All QC records shall be bound and submitted at the completion of the Project .
c Minimum Process Control Parameters .
Minimum process control parameters are Material sampling process and frequency .
Gradation results .
Moisture content prior to placement .
RAS percentage by weight .
Final density after compaction . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT .
The quantity of Aggregate Shoulders RAP with RAS to be measured for payment will be the number of tons used in the complete and accepted work as determined from load tickets . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT .
The accepted quantity of Aggregate Shoulders RAP with RAS will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per ton .
Payment will be full compensation for performing the work specified and for furnishing all materials labor tools equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
Water used for obtaining the required compaction will not be paid for separately but will be considered incidental to Aggregate Shoulders RAP with RAS .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Aggregate Shoulders RAP with RAS Ton SECTION SURFACE TREATMENT MATERIALS .
DESCRIPTION .
This work shall consist of furnishing and applying bituminous treatment when required on an approved surface. . MATERIALS .
Materials shall meet the requirements of the following Subsections Bituminous Material .
Emulsified Asphalt .
Application Temperatures .
All additives for emulsified asphalts must be approved prior to their use . .
WEATHER LIMITATIONS .
Bituminous material shall be applied only when the following conditions prevail .
a The air and surface temperature upon which the bituminous material is to be applied is at least F in the shade and rising .
b The road surface is sufficiently dry .
c Weather conditions or other conditions are favorable and are expected to remain so for the performance of satisfactory work. . EQUIPMENT .
The equipment used by the Contractor shall include transporting equipment a bituminous distributor and equipment for heating bituminous material .
a Distributor .
The distributor shall be so designed equipped maintained and operated that bituminous material at even heat may be applied uniformly on variable widths of surfaces up to feet at the specified rate for the item being placed .
Distributor equipment shall include suitable hand spray nozzle and hose a tachometer pressure gauges accurate volume measuring devices or a calibrated tank and a thermometer for measuring temperatures of tank contents .
Distributors shall be equipped with a power unit for the pump and full circulation spray bars adjustable laterally and vertically .
Distributors may be required to apply a foot wide strip at one time .
The weight of the loaded distributor shall not exceed the legal load limit .
Each pressure distributor shall be equipped with a measuring stick .
Traveling or stationary plants or other equipment of proven performance may be used by the Contractor instead of the specified equipment if approved .
b Transporting Equipment .
Tanks for motor transport trucks shall be made of either steel or aluminum with a minimum capacity of gallons insulated equipped with baffle plates to prevent surging and equipped with the necessary units to heat the bituminous content in accordance with these Specifications .
Heating of motor transport truck tanks by distributors to bring the material to the proper temperature will not be permitted .
The Contractor shall furnish the necessary heating units for the motor transport trucks and the operators for the heating units . .
PREPARATION OF SURFACES .
All surfaces to be treated shall be patched cleaned of loose or objectionable material and free of irregularities to provide a reasonably smooth and uniform surface . .
APPLICATION OF BITUMINOUS MATERIALS .
The application rates of bituminous material shall be as defined in the Contract Documents .
The application shall not be made on more than of the width of the road surface at a time unless all traffic is detoured in which case the application may be full width .
a Emulsified Asphalt .
Emulsified asphalt shall be applied between the temperature ranges specified in Subsection .
by pressure distributors or other methods approved by the Engineer. . TRAFFIC CONTROL .
To control traffic during bituminous surface treatment operations flaggers shall be used in accordance with Section . .
THIS SUBSECTION RESERVED. . PROTECTION OF STRUCTURES AND TREES .
The Contractor shall use care in applying bituminous material and protecting surfaces of adjacent structures and trees from being spattered with the material . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT .
The quantity of Emulsified Asphalt to be measured for payment will be the number of hundredweight CWT used in the complete and accepted work . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT .
The accepted quantity of Emulsified Asphalt will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per hundredweight CWT .
Payment will be full compensation for furnishing transporting and placing the Emulsified Asphalt and for furnishing all materials signs traffic control labor tools equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Emulsified Asphalt CWT SECTION BITUMINOUS CONCRETE PAVEMENT .
DESCRIPTION .
This work shall consist of constructing one or more courses of bituminous mixture on a prepared foundation in accordance with these Specifications and the specific requirements of the type of surface being placed and in conformance with the lines grades thicknesses and typical crosssections shown on the Plans or established by the Engineer. . MATERIALS .
Materials shall meet the requirements of the following Subsections PerformanceGraded Asphalt Binder .
Emulsified Asphalt .
Aggregate for Bituminous Concrete Pavement .a The grade of performancegraded PG asphalt binder used to produce bituminous concrete pavement shall be as specified in Table .C or Table .F unless otherwise specified in the Contract Documents .
.A COMPOSITION OF MIXTURE MARSHALL .
a Gradation .
For each pavement type the materials shall be combined and graded to meet the limits specified in Table .A .
TABLE .A MATERIAL SPECIFICATION RANGES MARSHALL Mix Type Type I Type II Type III Type IV Type VI Percentage by Mass Weight Passing Square Mesh Sieves Minimum Maximum inch .
mm inch .
mm inch .
mm inch .
mm inch .
mm No. . mm No. . mm No. . mm No. . mm No. . mm No. . mm . . . . . . . . . . Material Composition of Total Mix Minimum Maximum Total Aggregates of Total Mix Bitumen of Total Mix . . . . . . . . . . b Design Criteria .
The materials shall be combined and graded to meet the criteria specified in Table .B .
TABLE .B DESIGN CRITERIA MARSHALL Marshall Bituminous Concrete Pavement Blow Count Medium Duty Bituminous Concrete Pavement blowsside Bituminous Concrete Pavement blowsside Air Voids . . . . VMA Type I . min. . min .
VMA Type II .
min. . min .
VMA Type III .
min. . min .
VMA Type IV .
min. . min .
Stability Pounds min .
min .
Flow .
inches . . . . Stone Screenings fine aggregate portion Passing the No. . mm Sieve .
min. . min .
Voids in Mineral Aggregate TABLE .C PG BINDER GRADE SELECTION MARSHALL RAP Content Binder Grade RAP .
PG .
RAP .
PG .
RAP .
TBD The Contractor shall determine the grade of PG binder necessary so that when combined with the RAP asphalt cement the composite asphalt material grade meets the requirements of PG as a minimum .
The maximum acceptable low end temperature is C F and the minimum acceptable high end temperature is C F. The Engineer will sample haul units from the plant and have the material extracted for grading at the Agencys Materials Section Central Laboratory in Berlin VT to verify the binder grade of the mix being supplied .
The Contractors Quality Control Plan shall specify a grading frequency and include an action plan to implement when test results verify that the grade of PG binder does not meet the requirements of PG .
Air Voids VA .
The percent of air voids in the mixture shall be calculated by the following formula 𝑈𝐴 𝐺𝑚𝑚 𝐺𝑚𝑏 𝐺𝑚𝑚 where VA Percent air voids Gmm Maximum specific gravity of uncompacted mixture AASHTO T Gmb Bulk specific gravity of compacted mixture AASHTO T Method A The mix design shall have a fillerasphalt ratio ranging between .
and .. c Mix Design .
The Marshall Method of Mix Design will be used to develop a mix that will meet the specified Design Criteria .
A copy of all test data used in developing the mix design including graphs may be required with the submittal of the mix design .
The jobmix formula for each mixture shall establish a single percentage of aggregate passing each sieve and a single percentage of bituminous material to be added to the aggregate .
No change in the jobmix formula may be made without the written approval of the Engineer .
The jobmix formula must fall within the master range of the Specification as shown in Subsection .Aa .
No work shall be started until the Contractor has submitted and the Engineer has approved a mix design including cold feed gradations mixing times the percentage of each ingredient including bitumen the jobmix formula from such a combination and the optimum mixing and compaction temperatures as required in the Marshall Method of Mix Design .
For mix designs containing RAP the dry and wet mixing times shall be adjusted to assure moisture from the RAP is completely dissipated prior to adding the liquid PG binder .
The Engineer may approve changes in the designs jobmix formula or discontinue use of the design if placement finishing or compaction characteristics are determined to be unsatisfactory by the Engineer .
At the time the above mix design is submitted the Contractor shall indicate and make available for sampling and testing the PG asphalt binder and stockpiles of all aggregates proposed for use .
A minimum of Working Days will be allowed for testing and evaluation of the submitted mix design .
Once a mix design is approved the jobmix formula is valid until a change is made in aggregate source or PG asphalt binder grade .
If a change is made in aggregate source or PG asphalt binder grade a new mix design shall be submitted and a minimum Working Day evaluation period will be allowed prior to resuming production .
If a change is proposed to be made in the PG asphalt binder supplier it shall be from an approved supplier and be in accordance with the most current VTrans mix design submittal policy .
.B COMPOSITION OF MIXTURE SUPERPAVE .
a Gradation .
For each pavement type the materials shall be combined and graded to meet the limits specified in Table .D .
TABLE .D MATERIAL SPECIFICATION RANGES SUPERPAVE Mix Type and Nominal Maximum Aggregate Size in .
Type MS Type IS Type IIS Type IIIS Type IVS Type VS Type VIS Percentage by Mass Weight Passing Square Mesh Sieves Minimum Maximum inch .
mm X inch .
mm X inch .
mm X X inch .
mm X X inch .
mm X X X inch .
mm X X inch .
mm No. . mm X X No. . mm No. . mm No. . mm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Asphalt Cement Content Minimum Minimum Asphalt Cement Content .
All Superpave mixes shall meet the requirements of AASHTO M . b Design Criteria .
The number of Gyrations at Ndesign for example or gyrations is determined by the Agency and shall be as detailed on the Plans .
Design criteria for Superpave mixtures shall be as specified in Table .E and Table .F .
TABLE .E DESIGN CRITERIA SUPERPAVE Mix Type and Nominal Maximum Aggregate Size in .
Type MS Type IS Type IIS Type IIIS Type IVS Type VS Type VIS Voids in Mineral Aggregate .
min. . min. . min .
min. . min. . min. . min .
Dust Proportion Range fillerasphalt ratio dry sieve . . . . . . . . . . . . Air Voids . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Compaction Parameters by Traffic Level Traffic Level ESALs any mix type Compaction Parameters Ninitial Ndesign Nmax Ninitial Ndesign Nmax Ninitial Ndesign Nmax Where Type IVB bituminous material is included in the Project Plans it shall be defined as Type IVS Superpave bituminous concrete as specified herein with the exceptions that Type IVB material shall have a target air voids value of .
and shall not contain any recycled asphalt materials .
TABLE .F PG BINDER GRADE SELECTION SUPERPAVE RAP Content Binder Grade RAP .
PG .
RAP .
PG .
RAP .
TBD The Contractor shall determine the grade of PG binder necessary so that when combined with the RAP asphalt cement the composite asphalt material grade meets the requirements of PG as a minimum .
The maximum acceptable low end temperature is C F and the minimum acceptable high end temperature is C F. The Engineer will sample haul units from the plant and have the material extracted for grading at the Agencys Materials Section Central Laboratory in Berlin VT to verify the binder grade of the mix being supplied .
The Contractors Quality Control Plan shall specify a grading frequency and include an action plan to implement when test results verify that the grade of PG binder does not meet the requirements of PG .
The following relationships are used to derive the various design criteria test properties .
Refer to AASHTO R Superpave Volumetric Design for Asphalt Mixtures for more information .
Air Voids VA .
The percent of air voids of the mixture shall be calculated by the following formula 𝑈𝐴 𝐺𝑚𝑚 𝐺𝑚𝑏 𝐺𝑚𝑚 where VA Percent air voids Gmm Maximum specific gravity of uncompacted mixture AASHTO T Gmb Bulk specific gravity of compacted mixture AASHTO T Method A Dust Proportion DP .
The proportion of dust in the mixture shall be calculated by the following formulae 𝐴𝑃 𝑃. 𝑃𝑏𝑒 where DP Dust Proportion P. Percent by mass of the material passing the No. . mm sieve Pbe Percent by mass of effective asphalt binder content of mix and 𝑃𝑏𝑒 𝑃𝑏 𝑃𝑠 𝐴𝑏 𝐴𝑠𝑒 𝐴𝑠𝑏 𝐴𝑠𝑒 𝐴𝑠𝑏 where Pb Asphalt content percentage of total mass of mixture Ps Aggregate content percentage of total mass of mixture Gb Specific gravity of asphalt cement Gse Effective specific gravity of aggregate Gsb Bulk specific gravity of aggregate Voids in Mineral Aggregate VMA .
Voids in mineral aggregate shall be calculated by the following formula V𝐿𝐴 𝐴𝑚𝑏 𝑃𝑠 𝐴𝑠𝑏 where VMA Voids in Mineral Aggregate Gmb Bulk specific gravity of compacted mixture AASHTO T Method A Ps Aggregate content percentage of total mass of mixture Gsb Bulk specific gravity of aggregate c Mix Design .
For Superpave bituminous concrete pavement mixes AASHTO R Superpave Volumetric Design for Asphalt Mixtures will be the method used to develop a mix that will meet the specified Design Criteria in accordance with AASHTO M Superpave Volumetric Mix Design .
A copy of all design test data used in developing the mix design including graphs may be required with the submittal of the mix design or anytime following as directed by the Engineer .
The four principal parts of the Superpave Mix Design Method are Select materials aggregate and PG asphalt binder Select design aggregate structure Select design asphalt binder content Evaluate moisture sensitivity using AASHTO T Resistance of Compacted Asphalt Mixtures to MoistureInduced Damage with a Tensile Strength Ratio TSR minimum criterion of The jobmix formula JMF for each mixture shall establish a single percentage of aggregate passing each sieve a single percentage of bituminous material to be added to the aggregate and a single percentage for VMA .
No change in the jobmix formula may be made without the written approval of the Engineer .
The JMF must fall within the master range of the Specification as shown in Subsection .Ba and Subsection .Bb .
The JMF shall include values for the following sieves inch .
mm inch .
mm inch .
mm inch .
mm inch .
mm inch .
mm inch .
mm No. . mm No. . mm No. . mm No. . mm No. . mm No. . mm and No. . mm .
Mix designs shall be submitted in accordance with the most current version of the VTrans HMA mix design submittal policy .
No work shall be started until the Contractor has submitted and the Engineer has approved a mix design including cold feed gradations mixing times the percentage of each ingredient including bitumen the JMF from such a combination and the optimum mixing and compaction temperatures as required by AASHTO M . The stockpile gradation data shall be derived by wet sieve analysis .
For mix designs containing RAP the dry and wet mixing times shall be adjusted to assure moisture from the RAP is completely dissipated prior to adding the liquid PG binder .
The Engineer may approve changes in the designs jobmix formula or discontinue use of the design if placement finishing or compaction characteristics are determined unsatisfactory by the Engineer .
At the time the above mix design is submitted the Contractor shall indicate and make available for sampling and testing the PG asphalt binder and stockpiles of all aggregates proposed for use .
A minimum of three weeks shall be allowed for the testing and evaluation of the submitted mix design .
Once a mix design is approved the JMF is valid until a change is made in aggregate source or PG binder grade .
If a change is made in aggregate source or PG asphalt binder grade a new mix design shall be submitted and a minimum threeweek evaluation period shall be allowed prior to resuming production .
If a change is proposed to be made in the PG asphalt binder supplier it shall be from an approved supplier and be in accordance with the most current VTrans mix design submittal policy .
.C REQUIREMENTS FOR BOTH MARSHALL AND SUPERPAVE BITUMINOUS MIXTURES .
a Control of Mixtures .
The plant shall be operated so that no intentional deviations are made from the jobmix formula .
The production of the actual mixture shall not vary from the jobmix formula by more than tolerances specified in Table .G .
TABLE .G JOBMIX FORMULA PRODUCTION TOLERANCES JobMix Formula Property Tolerance Aggregate retained on the No. . mm sieve and above .
Aggregate passing the No. . mm sieve and retained on the No. . mm sieve .
Aggregate passing the No. . mm sieve .
Temperature of mixture F Air voids All mixes except Type IVB . . Air voids Type IVB . . Voids in mineral aggregate .
The quantity of PG asphalt binder introduced into the mixer shall be that quantity specified as a percentage in the accepted JMF for batch plants and will be accepted based on the mass weight on the printed weigh slip .
For the use of drummix and continuous mixing plants the quantity of PG asphalt binder shall be specified as a percentage in the accepted JMF and will be accepted based on the percentage printed on the demand ticket from the approved automatic digital recording device in the plant .
The Contractor shall provide Quality Control adequate to produce work of acceptable quality .
The Contractor shall perform Quality Control sampling testing and inspection during all phases of the work at a rate sufficient to assure that the work conforms to the Contract requirements and the minimum guidelines specified .
The Engineer will not sample or test for Quality Control or assist in controlling the Contractors production operations .
The Contractor shall provide personnel and testing equipment capable of providing a product which conforms to specified requirements .
Continual production of non conforming work at a reduced price in lieu of adjustments to bring work into conformance shall not be allowed .
b Method Specifications Acceptance Testing .
For those Contracts having tons or fewer of any individual mix typedesign of bituminous concrete mixture control of those mixtures will be analyzed using the following parameters If an analyzed sample is outside of the testing tolerances andor other design criteria immediate adjustments shall be made by the Contractor .
After the adjustment the resulting mix will be sampled and tested for compliance with these Specifications .
A second consecutive failing test sample will be cause for the facility to immediately cease production .
In this event additional adjustments shall be made and tested by the Contractor on a trial basis until the deficiency is corrected .
With the permission of the Engineer the plant may continue production pending results of these tests but if the Engineer deems that it is in the best interest of the Project they may at any time order plant production stopped .
It shall be the responsibility of the Contractor to conduct whatever process control the Contractor deems necessary .
Acceptance sampling and testing will be conducted by Agency personnel in accordance with the Agencys Quality Assurance Program .
c Quality Assurance QA Acceptance Testing .
For those Contracts having more than tons of any individual mix typedesign of bituminous concrete mixture control of those mixtures will be analyzed by utilizing the procedure below .
For those Contracts having multiple individual Projects not meeting the ton threshold QA testing protocol may be waived by the Engineer .
Bituminous materials designated for acceptance under QA provisions will be randomly sampled and tested in accordance with the recommended acceptance guidelines specified for the applicable Contract item .
Samples may also be taken any time the material appears defective or when the Engineer determines that a change in the process or product has occurred .
Acceptance tests will govern in all cases for determination of pay factors without regard to quality control tests .
General .
Bituminous concrete mixtures will be sampled once per sublot on a statistically random basis tested and evaluated by the Agency for each mix design for the Contract in accordance with the acceptance criteria specified in Table .H .
TABLE .H ACCEPTANCE CRITERIA Property Point of Sampling Lot Size Sublot Size Test Methods Air voids Truck at plant tons tons AASHTO T AASHTO T AASHTO T For Marshall mixtures air voids will be determined by the methods defined in Chapter of the Asphalt Institute MS Manual .
Lot Size .
For evaluating acceptance test properties the representative tonnage of bituminous material within each lot will be tons .
The final resultant partial lot will be processed as a full lot if it consists of four or more acceptance samples .
If the final resultant partial lot consists of fewer than four acceptance samples it will be combined with the previous lot .
Sublot Size .
A sublot will be tons except for the final sublot of a partial lot which will consist of the quantity of material required to complete the partial lot .
If fewer than four samples have been obtained at the time a lot is completed excluding terminated lots as defined in Subsection .Chj .
the material in the shortened lot will be included as a part of an adjacent lot and a pay factor computed for the combined lots .
Generally this involves combining results of the shortened lot with the results of the subsequent lots test results .
However if this occurs on the last lot of production these results will be combined with the most recent lots results for a revised determination .
The Engineer may reject material which appears to be obviously defective based on visual inspection .
Such rejected material shall not be used in the work .
d Evaluation for Acceptance .
Items specified to be sampled and tested for QA purposes will be evaluated for acceptance in accordance with the guidelines specified for those Contract items .
All acceptance test results for a lot as defined in the Specification will be analyzed collectively and statistically by the Quality Level Analysis Percent Within Limits Method using the procedures listed below to determine the total estimated percent of the lot that is within Specification limits .
Quality Level Analysis Percent Within Limits is a statistical procedure for estimating the percent compliance with a Specification and is affected by shifts in the Arithmetic Mean 𝑥 of the test results and by the Sample Standard Deviation s. The steps in the procedure are as follows Compute the Upper Quality Index Qu using the following formula 𝑃𝑢 𝑈𝑃𝐿 𝑥 s where Qu Upper quality index USL Upper Specification Limit 𝑥 Arithmetic mean of the test results s Sample standard deviation Compute the Lower Quality Index QL using the following formula 𝑃𝐿 𝑥 𝐿𝑃𝐿 s where Qu Lower quality index 𝑥 Arithmetic mean of the test results LSL Lower Specification Limit s Sample standard deviation Determine the Percent Within the Upper Specification Limit PWLU which corresponds to a given Upper Quality Index QU from references available through the Engineer .
Note If a USL is not specified the PWLU will be .
Determine the Percent Within the Lower Specification Limit PWLL which corresponds to a given Lower Quality Index QL from references available through the Engineer .
Note If an LSL is not specified the PWLL will be .
Determine the Total Percent Within Specification Limits PWL using the following formula 𝑃𝑈𝐿 𝑃𝑈𝐿𝑈 𝑃𝑈𝐿𝐿 Compare the Total Percent Within Specification Limits PWL to the applicable Rejectable Quality Level RQL .
The RQL is the PWL value below which the material is deemed unacceptable .
Determine the Pay Factor PF for the lot from the process or equation applicable to the specific Contract item .
Results from the above calculations shall be reported to the decimal precision and rounded per the following procedures a .
For decimal precision report all Standard Deviation calculations to .
all Pay Factor calculations to .
and use the Precision as Displayed option when working with Excel spreadsheets .
b .
For rounding the use of AASHTO Rounding Rule D shall be discontinued .
Instead when rounding if the first digit to the right of the number to be rounded is greater than or equal to then the number shall be rounded away from zero to the next number with larger magnitude .
If the digit to the right of the number to be rounded is less than then the number shall remain the same .
For example for rounding to the nearest one decimal . . rounds to . . rounds to . . rounds to . . rounds to .
e Pay Factor PF Determination .
Where the air voids PWL value as defined in Subsection .Cd equals or exceeds the Rejectable Quality Level RQL for air voids of the PF for each lot of bituminous concrete mixture based on test results will be determined using the following equation 𝑃𝐴𝐴𝑈 .
𝑃𝑈𝐿 .
where PFAV Air voids pay factor PWL Total Percent Within Specification Limits f Rejectable Material .
The Contractor may at any time elect to remove any defective material and replace it with new material at no expense to the Agency .
Any such new material will be sampled tested and evaluated for acceptance .
For those lots with an air voids PWL less than and greater than or equal to the PF for each lot of bituminous concrete mixture based on air voids test results will be determined using the following equation 𝑃𝐴𝐴𝑈 .
𝑃𝑈𝐿 .
where PFAV Air voids pay factor PWL Total Percent Within Specification Limits For those lots with an air voids PWL less than the Engineer will require complete removal of the representative lot and replacement with mix meeting Contract requirements at no additional cost to the Agency .
g Boxed Samples .
If Inspectors are not available to perform their daily inspection duties then box samples will be taken by the Engineer at the Project site to afford verification of mixture properties .
Boxed samples will be processed at the Agencys Materials Section Central Laboratory .
h Contractor Quality Control Plan .
If Quality Assurance Specifications apply the Contractor shall provide maintain and operate in accordance with a Project Quality Control Plan hereinafter referred to as the QC Plan sufficient to ensure a product meeting the Contract requirements .
The QC Plan shall include all personnel equipment supplies and facilities necessary to obtain samples perform tests and otherwise control the quality of the product to meet specified requirements .
The QC Plan shall be a single document in two parts and address all elements that affect the quality of plant mix and laydown operations .
An example outline is available through the Agencys Materials Section Central Laboratory Bituminous Concrete Section .
General .
Both parts of The QC Plan shall meet the following requirements a .
The Contractor shall be prepared to present and discuss at the preconstruction conference quality control responsibilities for the specific Contract items .
The Contractor shall submit the QC Plan to the Engineer for approval at least Working Days prior to the start of related work .
The Contractor shall not start work on the subject items without an approved QC Plan .
b .
All Contractor Process Quality Control testing under the QC Plan shall be performed by qualified technicians in laboratories approved by the Materials Manager .
Technician qualifications shall be as described in Subsection .Ch .
c. Laboratory facilities shall be kept clean and all equipment shall be maintained in proper working condition .
Major pieces of equipment shall be calibrated andor verified in accordance with the schedule provided by Subsection .Ci .
Records indicating equipment condition and calibration status shall be maintained in the Laboratory .
d. The Engineer shall be permitted unrestricted access to inspect and review the Contractors Laboratory facility .
The Engineer will advise the Contractor of any noted deficiencies concerning the Laboratory facility equipment supplies or testing personnel and procedures .
Deficiencies shall be grounds for the Engineer to order an immediate stop to incorporating materials into the work until deficiencies are corrected .
e. The individual administering the QC Plan must be a fulltime employee of or a consultant engaged by the Contractor .
The individual shall have full authority to institute any and all actions necessary for the successful operation of the Plan .
f. The QC Plan shall contain a system for sampling that assures all material being produced has an equal chance of being selected for testing .
The Engineer shall be provided the opportunity to witness all sampling .
When directed by the Engineer the Contractor shall sample and test any material which appears inconsistent with similar material being sampled unless such material is voluntarily removed and replaced or the resulting deficiency otherwise corrected by the Contractor .
All sampling and testing shall be in accordance with Agency AASHTO or ASTM procedures .
g. All testing shall be performed in accordance with the acceptance test procedures applicable to the specified Contract items or other methods specified in the approved QC Plan .
Should acceptance test procedures not be applicable to quality control tests the QC Plan shall stipulate the test procedures to be utilized .
Upon request the Contractor shall provide copies of all test results on forms meeting the approval of the Engineer .
h. The Contractor shall maintain complete records of all Process Quality Control tests and inspections .
Quality control tests that are initiated but not run to completion shall be incorporated into the records with all available information that was derived .
The records shall be available to the Engineer for review and copies furnished upon request .
A complete set of all such documents shall be provided upon completion of the Contract .
Control Charts acceptable to the Engineer shall be maintained and kept current at a location satisfactory to the Engineer .
At a minimum the Control Charts shall identify the Project number the Contract item number the test numbers each test parameter and the upper and lower Specification limits that triggers either action or production suspension activities .
These limits shall be identified and applicable to each QC test parameter .
i .
The Engineer may stop work or production operations at any time that the QC Plan is not being followed by the Contractor .
j .
Under such conditions where two sublot test results indicate that the lot will result in a substandard Percent Within Limits PWL the Contractor may request that a third test herein termed a Lot Termination Test be taken .
If a lot is terminated via a lot termination test the lot shall be closed and evaluated based on the three available test results and not combined with any adjacent lots .
After performing a lot termination test all production operations shall immediately be terminated for that day .
The Contractor shall secure the Engineers approval and concurrence prior to performing said test .
This test shall not be cause for switching to low production activities as defined in Subsection .Chk .
k. Upon an advance request of hours and subsequent approval by the Engineer the Contractor may perform production activities outside of the requirements of the QC Plan in the instance those activities involve low production activities .
For this Section low production activities are defined as those not associated with mainline activities and up to a maximum daily production of tons of bituminous mixture .
Materials being produced for low production activities will be tested under the Method Specification provisions of Subsection .Cb and shall comply with all applicable Specifications for the mix type being produced .
Part I .
The Plant Mix QC Plan shall include but not be limited to the following a. JobMix Formulas b. Bituminous Concrete Mix Plant details c. Stockpile management d. Name of the QC Plan Administrator e. Name of Process Control Technicians f. Mixing g. Frequency and tests for Quality Control h. For mix designs containing more than RAP indicate the RAP percentage PG Grade of virgin binder determined testing frequency of mix to verify composite PG Grade and actions to be taken when test results are outside of PG Grade limits .
i .
The QC Plan shall identify the following personnel with the specified minimum requirements and qualifications .
QC Plan Administrator .
This individual shall be a Quality Assurance Technologist certified by the New England Transportation Technician Certification Program NETTCP . .
Process Control Technician PCT .
This individual shall be certified as a Hot Mix Asphalt HMA Plant Technician by NETTCP .
The PCT may have an interim certification from NETTCP as an HMA Plant Technician .
Alternatively the PCT may be a trainee performing duties under the direct supervision of a NETTCP certified technician as specified in the VTrans approved QC Plan .
In this case the QC Plan should address the following i .
A training period shall continue for a minimum of Working Days at which point the supervising certified technician shall sign off on the trainee .
ii .
Upon completion of the training period and having been validated signed off the trainee will be qualified to work on QA projects without direct supervision for the remainder of the current Construction Season .
iii .
The PCT shall utilize test results and other quality control practices to ensure the quality of aggregates and other mix components and control proportioning to meet the jobmix formulas .
The PCT shall periodically inspect all equipment used in mixing to ensure it is operating properly and that mixing conforms to the mix designs and other Contract requirements .
iv .
The QC Plan shall specify how these duties and responsibilities are to be accomplished and documented and whether more than one PCT is required .
The QC Plan shall include the criteria utilized by the PCT to correct or reject materials not meeting Contract requirements .
The QC Plan shall detail the coordination of the activities of the QC Plan Administrator and the PCT .
The QC Plan Administrator shall be available to respond to the Engineer within one hour of a request .
v. Bituminous concrete pavement shall be sampled tested and evaluated by the Contractor for each mix typedesign for each Project on a continuous production basis in accordance with the minimum quality control guidelines specified in Table .I .
Upon approval of the Engineer the Contractor may utilize innovative equipment or techniques not included in the Specifications to produce or monitor the production of the mix .
Part II .
Mix Laydown Field Control shall conform to the requirements of Subsection .
and be incorporated into the Project QC plan .
TABLE .I MINIMUM QUALITY CONTROL CRITERIA Test Action Frequency Test Method Temperature of mix per tons at plant truck Verified thermometer Air voids per tons AASHTO T AASHTO T AASHTO T Cold feed gradation per day AASHTO T Cold feed percentage fractured face and thin and elongated particles Day of initial paving and per week ASTM D PG asphalt binder content per tons Batch slip Extracted gradations per tons AASHTO T AASHTO T AASHTO T Fine aggregate and coarse aggregate moisture content times daily minimum AASHTO T Recycled asphalt pavement RAP moisture content times daily minimum AASHTO T Fine aggregate coarse aggregate and RAP specific gravities Day of initial paving and one per week AASHTO T AASHTO T RAP PG asphalt binder content per day AASHTO T AASHTO T Determine composite PG binder grade per tons AASHTO R Fractured faces for gravel sources only .
Thin and elongated percentage for all particles retained on the No. . mm sieve and above .
This requirement is for drummix and continuous mixing plants only .
Evenly spaced intervals throughout the day and when new material is being added to the stockpiles and utilized in the mix .
Or per every tons whichever is more frequent .
Current within the previous to days specific gravities will need to be supplied prior to beginning paving operations .
New specific gravities will be required when either absorbed asphalt is determined to be zero a negative value or at the request of the Engineer .
For mix containing more than RAP .
For Marshall mixtures air voids will be determined by the methods defined in Chapter of the Asphalt Institute MS Manual .
i Bituminous Concrete Lab Calibration and Verification Procedures .
This subpart Table .J and Table .K provide a summary of procedures for both required internal Laboratory calibration and verification and required external independent Laboratory calibration services .
TABLE .J INTERNAL CALIBRATION AND VERIFICATION REQUIREMENTS VTrans Procedure Number Calibration CVerification V Item Frequency months General Purpose Drying Oven V Temperature Measuring Devices V c Temperature Measuring Devices ASTM E ASTM E ASTM E E M C f Temperature Measuring Devices Reference ASTM E ASTM E ASTM E E M C Sieves V Marshall Compaction Molds AASHTO T V Superpave Gyratory Compaction Molds and Gyratory Compactor AASHTO T V Vacuum System AASHTO T V Timers Mechanical Sieve Shaker C m Marshall StabilityFlow Apparatus AASHTO T C Marshall Molds Manual Hammer Breaking Heads Pedestal AASHTO T V TABLE .K EXTERNAL CALIBRATION AND VERIFICATION REQUIREMENTS Calibration C Verification V Item Frequency months Scales C For the purposes of this Subsection calibrations are performed on equipment that can be adjusted into compliance .
Verifications are completed on fixedcondition equipment or equipment that requires outside calibration typically by a manufacturer or calibration service .
Laboratory records that include the date service person equipment calibrated or verified and the procedure used for calibration andor verification and equipment condition shall be maintained in the Laboratory .
Equipment determined unsuitable for use will be marked out of service .
Tests performed on equipment marginally meeting Specifications shall include a note on the results sheet indicating such .
Example calibration and verification procedures noted above are available from the Agencys Materials Section .
Alternate procedures approved in advance by the Materials Manager are allowable and anticipated . .
WEATHER AND SEASONAL LIMITATIONS .
Bituminous material shall not be placed when the ambient air temperature and existing surface temperature at the paving site in the shade and away from artificial heat is below F for courses inches or greater in compacted thickness or below F for courses less than inches in compacted thickness .
The minimum delivery placement and compaction temperatures must be reviewed to accommodate the reduced temperature of Warm Mix Asphalt WMA .
The minimum ambient air and existing surface temperature limitations may be lowered to F for WMA .
Bituminous material shall not be placed on a wet or frozen surface or when weather or other conditions would prevent the proper handling finishing or compacting of the material unless otherwise approved by the Engineer .
For paving operations including placement of temporary pavements the year shall be divided into two seasons InSeason and ExtendedSeason .
The dates of those seasons shall be as follows a Temporary Leveling Base and Intermediate Courses .
InSeason paving is defined as occurring from May st to November st inclusive .
ExtendedSeason paving is defined as occurring from November nd to April th inclusive .
b Final Wearing and Surface Courses .
InSeason paving is defined as occurring from May th to October th inclusive .
ExtendedSeason paving is defined as occurring from October th to May th inclusive .
The following requirements shall apply unless otherwise authorized or directed by the Engineer Should paving operations be scheduled during the ExtendedSeason the Contractor must submit an ExtendedSeason Paving Plan for the Project that addresses minimum delivered mix temperature considering WMA PMA or other additives maximum paver speed enhanced rolling patterns and the method to balance mixture delivery and placement operations .
Paving during ExtendedSeason shall not commence until the Engineer has approved the plan. . BITUMINOUS MIXING PLANT AND TESTING .
Sufficient storage space shall be provided for each size of aggregate .
The different aggregate sizes shall be kept separated until they have been delivered to the cold storage bins .
The storage yard shall be maintained in a neat and orderly state and the separate stockpiles shall be readily accessible for sampling .
All existing plants shall be inspected and obtain approval each Construction Season by an Authorized Representative of the Agency .
Written notification shall be given for any plant which has not been inspected so that an Authorized Representative of the Agency may inspect and approve said plant prior to any mixing operation for Agency Projects .
A minimum of Working Days shall be allowed for the scheduling of the inspections .
The plant shall be in operation at the time of inspection .
Scales shall meet all Specifications tolerances and regulations which have been or may be adopted periodically by the Secretary of the Vermont Agency of Agriculture Food and Markets and shall be subject to approval by the Engineer .
The scales shall be checked and sealed as deemed necessary to ensure accuracy .
Producers located outside Vermont shall conform to all annual hopper scale mass measurement and seal requirements of their respective State or location .
Plants used for the preparation of bituminous mixtures shall conform to all requirements specified in Subsection .a except that scale requirements shall apply only where mass weight proportioning is used .
In addition batch mixing plants shall conform to the requirements specified in Subsection .b and drummix and continuous mix plants shall conform to the requirements specified in Subsection .c .
a Requirements for All Plants .
The Contractor shall give the Engineer and Bituminous Concrete Field Unit Supervisor a Working Day notice of intent to produce bituminous mixture so that arrangements can be made for plant inspection and control .
The plants shall be so designed coordinated and operated as to produce a uniform mixture within the mix design approved for the Project .
The Contractor shall indemnify and hold the State harmless for any hazardous waste generated from plant operations in producing materials for use in Agency Contracts .
The Contractor shall be responsible for properly disposing of such waste at no additional cost to the State .
All plants shall have automatic controls which coordinate the proportioning timing and discharge of mixture by the operation of a single switch or button .
In addition to these controls the plant shall have an approved recording system .
The recording system shall be capable of printing the total net weight of the load .
Each weigh slip shall be automatically printed with the date and time of batching shall show Project and truck identification and shall indicate the approved mix design number being produced .
All originals of recorded data pertaining to the weighing or proportioning of bituminous concrete after recording shall become the property of the Agency .
Truck Scales .
Approved truck scales shall be provided at each plant .
The scale platform shall be of such length and width that it will conveniently accommodate all trucks or other approved hauling equipment .
The entire vehicle load must rest on the scale platform and be weighed as one draft .
These scales may be used for spot checking the accuracy of the recording equipment .
Any variance exceeding .
of the net weight shall result in immediate corrective action by the Contractor .
A weatherproof building of sufficient size to house the scale operator and the Inspector shall be provided .
It shall have adequate lighting both natural and artificial and it shall be adequately and safely heated .
Equipment for Preparation of Bituminous Material .
Tanks for storage of bituminous material shall be insulated and capable of heating the material under effective and positive control at all times to the temperature requirements set forth in the Specifications .
The heating system shall provide uniform heating of the entire contents of the tanks .
Heating shall be accomplished by steam or oil coils electricity or other means so that no flame shall come in contact with the heating tank .
A circulating system for bituminous material shall be of adequate capacity to provide proper and continuous circulation between the storage tank and the proportioning units during the entire operating period .
The discharge end of the circulating pipe shall be maintained below the surface of the bituminous material in the storage tank to prevent the discharging of hot bituminous material into the open air .
All pipe lines and fittings shall be steam or oiljacketed or otherwise properly insulated to prevent heat loss .
Feeder for Dryer .
The plant shall be provided with an accurate mechanical means for uniformly feeding the mineral aggregate into the dryer so that the proper uniform production and uniform temperatures will be obtained .
Dryer .
The dryer shall be capable of heating and drying the mineral aggregates to Specification requirements without leaving any visible unburned oil or carbon residue on the Aggregate when it is discharged from the dryer .
Black smoke from the exhaust stack shall not be permitted .
Drying shall continue until all moisture is removed .
If unusually wet aggregate is being used the input to the dryer shall be reduced to an amount which the dryer is capable of drying .
Screens .
Plant screens shall have the capacity and size range to separate the aggregates into sizes for proportioning so that they may be recombined within the limits of the Specifications .
Cold Storage Bins .
The plant shall have cold storage bins of sufficient capacity to ensure a uniform and continuous operation .
The bins shall be so constructed as to prevent any intermingling of aggregate from one bin to another .
The use of loaders or trucks which are larger in width than the bins being charged shall not be allowed .
The blending of two or more aggregates in the same bin shall not be permitted .
For all bituminous concrete supplied for use on Agency Projects uniform feeding of all fine aggregates shall be accomplished using a variablespeed continuous belt feeder on each cold storage bin of fine aggregate .
Hot Storage Bins .
The plant shall have hot storage bins of sufficient capacity to supply the mixer when it is operating at full capacity .
The hot storage system shall consist of at least four bins arranged to ensure separate and adequate storage of appropriate fractions of the aggregate .
Each hot storage bin shall be provided with a freeflowing overflow pipe of such size and at such a location as to prevent backing up of material into other bins or into contact with the screen .
This overflow material shall not be fed back into the system or into any accepted stockpiles .
All hot storage bins shall be equipped with a sensor device to indicate the position of the aggregate in the bins at the lower quarter point .
Adequate additional dry storage shall be provided when mineral filler is required .
The system shall have a device to feed the mineral filler accurately and uniformly at adjustable rates consistent with the percentage required .
The feeder shall be interlocked so that production is interrupted if the bin becomes empty or the flow is obstructed .
Adequate and convenient facilities shall be provided to obtain representative aggregate samples from each bin .
Hot bins are not applicable to drummix or continuous mix plants .
Bitumen Control Unit .
Satisfactory means either by weighing or metering shall be provided to obtain the proper amount of bitumen .
Metering devices for bitumen shall be accurate to within plus or minus of the amount of bitumen delivered when tested for accuracy .
The section of the bitumen flow line between the charging valve and the spray bar shall be provided with a threeway valve and outlet whereby the rate of delivery of the metering device may be checked by actual weight .
Suitable means shall be provided either by steam oiljacketing or other insulation for maintaining the specified temperatures of the bitumen in the pipe lines meters weigh buckets spray bars and other containers or flow lines .
Thermometric Equipment .
An armored thermometer shall be fixed in the bituminous feed line at a suitable location near the discharge valve at the mixer unit for accurately indicating the temperature of the bitumen .
The plant shall also be equipped with an approved recording thermometer pyrometers or other approved recording thermometric instruments placed at the discharge chute of the dryer .
The Engineer may reject questionable thermometric instruments may direct replacement of any instrument with an approved temperature recording apparatus and may further require that daily temperature charts be filed with the Engineer .
Control of Mixing Time .
The plant shall be equipped with positive means to govern the time of mixing and to maintain a constant mixing time .
Dust Collectors .
The plant shall be equipped with adequate dust collectors so that exhaust will not be dispersed into the atmosphere .
Provisions shall be made to waste or uniformly reintroduce all or any part of the heavier dust particles from primary collectors into the flow of aggregate .
The introduction of baghouse fines into bituminous concrete mixes will be allowed when the fines are introduced by an approved metering or weighing system which uniformly introduces the fines .
The Engineer has the authority to withdraw the approval for use of baghouse fines at any time that the bituminous concrete pavement mix provided by the Contractor is unsatisfactory as determined by the Engineer .
Testing Facilities .
The Contractor shall provide a weatherproof building with at least square feet of floor space in which to house and use the testing equipment .
The construction of the facility shall be such that while in use the operation sensitivity and accuracy of testing equipment is not affected .
If not all testing equipment can be housed in this space the use of a supplemental workspace may be allowed .
Supplemental workspace and its location must be approved by the Engineer .
Any testing facilities being constructed renovated or relocated shall have a minimum floor space of square feet and accommodate all testing equipment .
Construction plans and designs for facilities shall be provided to the Materials Manager prior to construction for review and feedback regarding the location layout and adequacy of the building .
Testing facilities shall be maintained for the use of the Agency Engineers or Inspectors and shall be located so that details of the Contractors plant are plainly visible from at least one window of the building .
Adequate lighting heating ventilation and electrical connections shall be provided hours per day .
The method of heating shall be such that a minimum temperature of F will always be maintained .
Sanitary toilet facilities with lavatory and proper sewage disposal shall be furnished for the use of Agency personnel .
Cleaning supplies shall be furnished by the Contractor .
Private telephone service dedicated for the use of Agency personnel shall be provided in the Laboratory .
An internet connection that delivers a minimum download speed of Mbps without utilizing compression algorithms shall be provided in the Laboratory and dedicated for the use of Agency personnel .
The connection bandwidth speed shall be verifiable using an online speed test .
The Contractor must have its office space separate from the office space used by Agency personnel .
The Contractors office space shall be located to afford privacy to Agency personnel .
The Laboratory shall be equipped with a monitoring system readout that provides realtime access to active Agency Projects production status .
The system shall accumulate and provide the following information via digital display Project name and number truck number ticket number product description and accumulated Project daily quantity and load quantity accurate to the nearest ton .
The display shall be continually updated by the plants recording system .
Waivers may be considered for plants with production capacities not capable of exceeding tons per hour .
Facilities shall be equipped with the following standard commercial equipment with substitutes allowed upon approval of the Engineer Air conditioner sized for the volume of the building capable of maintaining a maximum temperature below F pound minimum capacity fire extinguishers either ABC Dry Chemical or Carbon Dioxide of standard commercial quality First aid kit adequately stocked Standard office desk feet feet minimum dimensions Adjustable office chair Bench sections and storage compartments benches shall be approximately inches high inches wide and feet long Exhaust fan and hood approved for the adequate removal of silica exhaust fan shall be a highvolume axial flow type with a minimum diameter of inches Water cooler supplied with potable water Sink with faucet located within the office and supplied with continuous pressurized clean hot and cold water for the duration of the Project sink shall drain to the exterior Forced draft oven thermostatically controlled capable of maintaining any desired temperature setting from room temperature to F to within F and capable of holding two SGC specimen molds and two Marshall specimen molds upright Electronic balance with weigh below capability pound kg minimum capacity sensitivereadable to .
pounds .
g Ignition oven that conforms to the apparatus requirements of AASHTO T Determining the Asphalt Content of HotMix Asphalt HMA by the Ignition Method with two full sets of sample baskets two catch pans and one set of safety equipment that conforms to the requirements of AASHTO T Full set of inch diameter full height sieves pans and covers necessary for testing all bituminous items required on the Project Motorized sieve shaker with either rocking and tapping action or circular and tapping action capable of holding at least ten sieves and one pan inch diameter minimum stainless steel bowl Mechanical aggregate shaker with .
cubic foot capacity and necessary screens shaker may be placed in a separate enclosure outside of the testing facility with the approval of the Engineer Sample splitter with inch chutes Sample splitter riffles with inch chute width or smaller Squarepointed shovels one longhandled and one shorthandled inch wide taping knife Metal pans approximately inches long inches wide and inches deep minimum dimensions Flat triangular trowel Rectangular trowel approximately inches wide Hand scoops Size quart capacity measuring approximately inches inches Brass wire bristle brush Standard floor brush Standard table brush inch soft bristle paint brushes Flexible spatulas with inch long blades Automatic timers with intervals from minutes Pail gallon capacity Pairs of gloves lined and heat resistant Digital or mechanical metal stem thermometers with a range of F to F C to C approximately inches long mechanical head shall be approximately inches wide Laboratory thermometers glass or digital capable of reading at least F C in F C increments Proportional Caliper meeting the requirements of ASTM D Vacuum containers meeting the apparatus requirements of AASHTO T Vacuum pump and vacuum measurement device with bleeder valve meeting the apparatus requirements of AASHTO T Water bath meeting the apparatus requirements of AASHTO T Method A with adequate means to maintain constant water level and temperature as deemed satisfactory by the Engineer In addition to the standard commercial equipment specified above a facility producing Superpave mixtures shall be equipped with the following Superpave Gyratory Compactor SGC as specified in AASHTO T Preparing and Determining the Density of HotMix Asphalt HMA Specimens by Means of the Superpave Gyratory Compactor with a minimum of two specimen molds specifically designed for use with the SGC provided calibration of the SGC shall be done at the initial setup whenever the unit is disrupted or moved at the start of each Construction Season and as directed by the Engineer In addition to the standard commercial equipment specified above a facility producing Marshall mixtures shall be equipped with the following apparatuses meeting the requirements of AASHTO R and AASHTO T Automatic Marshall Compaction Hammer Marshall compaction molds with base plates Marshall stability mold Marshall flow meter Motorized compression and testing machine Water bath capable of maintaining a temperature of F F For drummix and continuous mix plants the facility shall be equipped with the following additional test equipment and supplies with substitutes provided upon approval of the Engineer Microwave oven with a minimum interior volume of .
cubic foot with defrost as well as normal modes of operation Ovenproof glass dishes measuring approximately inches inches inches All of the foregoing testing equipment shall be in good condition calibrated andor verified per the Contractors QC Plan schedule andor the Agency provided schedule as applicable .
Testing equipment shall be replaced or repaired by the Contractor if during the duration of the Project it becomes unsuitable for testing purposes .
The abovementioned equipment is for a oneplant operation only .
In the event the Contractor chooses to use more than one plant the Contractor shall provide adequate Laboratory facilities as deemed necessary by the Engineer for making tests .
Safety Requirements .
Adequate and safe stairways to the mixer platform shall be provided and guarded ladders to other plant units shall be located where required for accessibility to plant operations .
All heated pipe lines adjacent to work areas gears pulleys chains sprockets and other dangerous moving parts shall be thoroughly guarded and protected .
Ample and unobstructed space shall be provided on the mixing platform .
A clear and unobstructed passage shall always be maintained in and around the truck loading space .
This space shall be kept free of drippings from the mixing platform .
A platform shall be located at the truck loading space to permit easy and safe inspection of the mixture as it is delivered into the trucks .
Adequate overhead protection shall be provided where necessary .
Surge or Storage Bins .
Surge or storage bins will be permitted for use in the production of bituminous items provided they are approved and inspected by the Engineer .
A surge or storage bin shall be capable of storing the mix without any degradation of its properties .
The surge or storage bins shall be covered during inclement weather to protect the stored mix from the elements .
Should circumstances preclude paving operations the Agency will not be obligated to purchase mix remaining in a surge or storage bin .
For drummix and continuous mix plants an approved recording weigh system shall be used on all surge bins .
When a surge bin is used in conjunction with a batch plant the determination of pay quantities for the applicable Contract item shall be in accordance with the following procedure a .
The plant will produce mix with the printer operating in accordance with the standard requirements for this device .
The mix will be deposited in the surge bin .
A sequentially numbered ticket will be prepared for every normal load produced .
b .
As each truck is loaded from the surge bin the driver will be given the ticket previously prepared when the mix was produced for that bin .
The truck driver will then deliver the ticket to the paving Inspector upon reaching the paving site .
c. The weight shown on the ticket will not be the actual weight of the mix contained in the truck since the truck was loaded from the surge bin .
The bin shall be completely emptied at the end of every day circumstances permitting and all tickets delivered to the Paving Inspector .
d. Any rejected or heldover material shall be weighed on the platform truck scales .
This quantity shall be deducted from the daily totals .
e. When paving ramps or other areas where a definite quantity is desired the material required will be weighed on the platform scales and appropriate adjustments made in the daily totals obtained from the printer .
These weights will be entered on the ticket or a separate ticket provided .
f. The Plant Inspector will sign the first slip of each day instead of initialing it .
If the Inspector changes during the day this procedure will be followed for each change .
At the end of each day the Plant Inspector will inspect the storage bin to determine that it is empty and note that on the last ticket .
g. The Paving Inspector will acknowledge receipt of the material at the paving site by initialing the lower righthand corner of the ticket .
h. All standard checks of the weighing apparatus at the plant will be made at the prescribed intervals .
i .
All mix produced for commercial customers andor other Projects must be discharged from bins other than those used for this Project or directly from the pugmill into the haul vehicle such mix shall not be loaded from the bin used for this Project .
j .
All surge bins shall be emptied each day unless written permission is obtained from the Engineer .
b Requirements for Batching Plants .
Weigh Box or Hopper .
The equipment shall include a means for accurately weighing each bin size of aggregate in a weigh box or hopper suspended on scales and of ample size to hold a full batch without handraking or running over .
The weigh box or hopper shall be supported on fulcrums and knife edges constructed so that they will not be easily thrown out of alignment or adjustment .
All edges ends and sides of weighing hoppers shall be free from contact with any supporting rods of columns or other equipment that will in any way affect proper functioning of the hopper .
Also there shall be sufficient clearance between the hopper and supporting devices to prevent accumulation of foreign materials .
The discharge gate of the weigh box shall be hung so that the aggregate will not be segregated when dumped into the mixer .
The gate shall close tightly when the hopper is empty so that no material will be allowed to leak into a batch in the mixer during the process of weighing the next batch .
Aggregate Scales .
Scales for any weigh box or hopper shall be springless dial or load cell with digital readout and shall be of standard make and design sensitive to .
of the maximum load that may be required .
Dials shall be free of vibration and shall be located to always be plainly visible and readable to the operator at all times .
Adequate means for checking the accuracy of the scales shall be provided by the Contractor either using ten pound test weights or by other methods approved by the Engineer .
All test weights shall be certified annually by the Consumer Protection Section of the Vermont Agency of Agriculture Food and Markets .
Bitumen Bucket .
The bucket for weighing bitumen shall be of sufficient capacity to hold and weigh the amount required for a batch in a single weighing .
The filling system and bucket shall be designed sized and shaped so that bitumen will not overflow splash or spill outside the confines of the bucket during filling and weighing .
The bucket shall be steam or oiljacketed or equipped with properly insulated electric heating units .
It shall be able to deliver the bitumen in a thin uniform sheet or in multiple sprays over the full length of the mixer within a period of consecutive seconds .
Bitumen Scales .
Bituminous material shall be weighed on scales that conform to the Specifications for the weighing of aggregate .
The value of the minimum graduation shall not exceed .
pounds .
Mixer Unit for Batch Method .
The plant shall include an approved twin pugmill type batch mixer jacketed or insulated and capable of producing a uniform mixture within the applicable jobmix tolerance .
The mixer shall be so constructed as to prevent leakage and designed to provide a means of adjusting clearance between the mixer blades and liner plates .
Recording .
The recording system of the batch plant shall print the weight of the bitumen the weight of the aggregate and the total combined weight of both in addition to printing the combined net weight of each load .
c Requirements for DrumMix and Continuous Mix Plants .
Aggregate Cold Bin Feeders .
The plant shall have a device at each cold bin to feed the aggregate accurately and uniformly .
The feeding orifice shall be adjustable .
Gravity type feeders will not be permitted .
Indicators graduated to not more than .
inch shall be provided on each orifice .
Each aggregate feeder shall be interlocked so that production is interrupted if one or more cold bins become empty or the flow is obstructed .
Mineral Filler System .
When mineral filler is to be added it shall be fed from a bin and feeder separate from the aggregate cold bins .
The system shall be able to feed the mineral filler at adjustable rates accurately and uniformly .
The feeder shall be interlocked so that production is interrupted if the bin becomes empty or the flow is obstructed .
The filler shall be fed so that no filler is lost as fugitive dust .
Aggregate Weighing Equipment .
All aggregates including mineral filler shall be weighed by a continuous weighing device either as it is proportioned by the individual feeders or after all materials have been deposited on a common belt .
Belt scales shall meet the requirements of the National Institute of Standards and Technology Handbook Specifications Tolerances and Other Technical Requirements for Weighing and Measuring Devices and shall be installed in accordance with the scale manufacturers recommendations by a technician licensed by the Vermont Agency of Agriculture Food and Markets .
Any other type of weighing device shall be approved by the Engineer prior to use .
Bitumen Control Unit .
The bitumen shall be proportioned by a meter .
A flow switch designed to stop production if the bitumen flow is interrupted shall be installed in the delivery line between the meter and the mixer .
A temperature compensating device shall be installed in conjunction with the meter to correct the quantity of asphalt to a temperature of F. Proportioning Controls .
All proportioning controls for aggregates mineral filler and bitumen shall be located at the panel which controls the mixer and temperature .
The panel shall have a master control capable of increasing or decreasing the production rate without having to reset the individual controls .
a .
Aggregate Feed Rate Control .
The plant shall have an adjustable feed rate control for each aggregate cold bin feeder and mineral filler feeder .
The control shall maintain an aggregate flow rate for each bin such that the variation of material per interval of time shall not exceed an amount equal to .
of the total weight of bituminous mixture per interval of time .
When separate addition of mineral filler is required it shall be added with an accuracy of .
on the basis stated above for aggregates .
The rate of aggregate flow shall be displayed on a meter and it shall be based on weight or percentage of dry aggregates .
b .
Aggregate Weight Indicator .
The plant shall have an aggregate weight indicator which will display in the control room the mass of combined aggregates and mineral filler it shall continuously accumulate the dry aggregate weight of material during the production period generally one day .
The indicator shall be resettable to zero and lockable .
c. Aggregate Moisture Compensator .
The plant shall have a moisture compensation device capable of electronically changing the wet weight of aggregate to dry aggregate weight .
The compensator may be set manually based on moisture tests performed on composite aggregate samples .
The maximum graduations on the compensator shall be .. d. Bitumen Control .
The plant shall have a bitumen control capable of presetting the actual bitumen content directly as a percentage based on total weight of mixture .
The maximum gradation on the bitumen control shall be ..
The asphalt delivery system shall be coupled with the aggregate delivery system to automatically maintain the required proportions as the aggregate flow varies .
e. Bitumen Quantity Indicator .
The plant shall have a bitumen quantity indicator in the control room indicating the accumulated quantity of bitumen during the production period generally one day .
The quantity indicated may be either weight or volume at F. The indicator shall be resettable to zero and lockable .
Recording of Proportions .
The plant shall be equipped with an automatic digital recording device approved by the Engineer that simultaneously records the accumulated weight of dry aggregate and bitumen separately during production time and on demand .
All recordings shall show the date including day month and year and time to the nearest minute for each print .
The original recordings shall become the property of the Agency .
Calibration of Feed Rates .
The feed rates of aggregates from the cold bins mineral filler when used and bitumen shall be established for each mix type initially by passing the individual aggregates and mineral filler over the continuous weighing device and the bitumen through the meter respectively .
The feed rates shall be checked periodically or at the direction of the Engineer .
Automatic Aggregate Sampling Device .
The plant shall have an automatic aggregate sampling device which will divert a representative combined aggregate sample including mineral filler into a hopper or container for gradation testing .
The sampling tray shall cut the full width and depth of the aggregate flow .
The sampling point shall be after the aggregate is proportioned and prior to its mixing with bitumen .
Mixer Unit for DrumMix Plants .
The plant shall have a drum mixer approved by the Engineer having an automatic burner control and capable of producing a uniform mixture within the jobmix tolerances .
The mixture shall be discharged into a hot bituminous surge or storage bin meeting the requirements of this Section .
Mixer Unit for Continuous Mix Plants .
The plant shall include an approved twin pugmill type continuous mixer and capable of producing a uniform mixture within the applicable job mix tolerance .
The paddles shall be adjustable for angular position on the shafts and reversible to retard the flow of mix . .
PREPARATION OF BITUMINOUS MATERIAL .
The bituminous material shall be uniformly heated to the specified temperature .
A continuous supply of the bituminous material shall always be provided to the mixer at a uniform temperature . .
PREPARATION OF AGGREGATES .
The aggregate for the mixture shall be dried and heated at the mixing plant before being placed in the mixer .
Flames used for drying and heating shall be properly adjusted to avoid damage to the aggregate and to avoid depositing soot or unburned fuel on the aggregate .
For batch plants immediately after heating the aggregates shall be screened and conveyed into separate bins ready for batching and mixing with bituminous material .
To meet gradation requirements mineral filler may be added .
The way the mineral filler is introduced into the mix shall be approved by the Engineer. . MIXING .
The mixture when discharged from the mixing unit shall be at the temperature specified on the approved mix design unless otherwise approved by the Engineer .
The dried aggregates shall be combined in the mixer at the appropriate proportions required to meet the job mix formula and thoroughly mixed prior to adding the bituminous material .
Dry mix times shall be increased as approved by the Engineer in such cases that RAP material is introduced into the mixer .
The bituminous material shall be measured and introduced into the mixer in the amount consistent with the approved mix designs current jobmix formula .
After the required amounts of constituent material have been introduced into the mixer the materials shall be mixed until a complete and uniform coating of the particles and a thorough distribution of the bituminous material throughout the aggregate is obtained .
If complete and uniform coating of the particles is not achieved the wet mixing time shall be adjusted as approved by the Engineer .
All plants shall have a means of eliminating oversized and foreign material from being incorporated into the mixer. . HAULING EQUIPMENT .
To prevent the mixture from adhering to the beds trucks used for hauling bituminous mixture shall have tight clean and smooth metal beds which have been thinly coated with a bond release agent .
Petroleumbased products will not be permitted .
The trucks used for hauling bituminous mixture shall be compatible with the equipment used for placing the bituminous mixture .
Trucks are not to be cleaned andor emptied on surfaces to be paved .
Each truck shall have a cover of canvas or other suitable material of sufficient size to extend over all sides of the haul vehicle to properly protect the mix from the weather .
When necessary to ensure placement of material at the specified temperature truck beds shall be insulated and covers shall be securely fastened . .
PLACING EQUIPMENT .
The bituminous concrete paver shall be a selfpropelled unit with an activated screed or strikeoff assembly capable of being heated if necessary and capable of spreading the mixture without segregation for the widths and thicknesses required .
The screed shall be adjustable to provide the desired crosssectional shape .
Pavers shall be in good mechanical condition equipped with all necessary attachments and designed to operate electronically for controlling the grade of the finished surface .
Additionally pavers shall be equipped such that upon extension of the screed by inches or more auger extensions shall be used as directed by the Engineer .
The adjustments and attachments of the paver shall be checked and approved by the Engineer before placement of bituminous material .
Bituminous concrete pavers shall be equipped with a sloped plate to produce a tapered or notched tapered edge at longitudinal joints .
The sloped plate shall produce a tapered or notched tapered edge having a minimum face slope of VH .
The plate shall be able to accommodate compacted mat thicknesses from inches to inches .
The bottom of the sloped plate shall be mounted inch to inch above the existing pavement .
As directed by the Engineer bituminous pavers shall be equipped with a joint heater that has the capacity to supply at least BTUmin of heat to the longitudinal edge of the previously placed mat and heat it to a surface temperature of F or higher if necessary to achieve bonding of the newly placed mat with the previously placed mat without undue breaking or fracturing of aggregate at the interface .
The surface temperature shall be measured immediately ahead of the screed .
The joint heater shall be equipped with automated controls which shut off the burners when the paving machine stops and reignites them with the forward movement of the paver .
The joint heater shall heat the entire area of the previously placed wedge to the required temperature .
Heating to the point of F or higher shall immediately precede placement of the bituminous material. . ROLLERS .
Rollers shall be in good mechanical condition capable of reversing without backlash and operated at speeds slow enough to avoid displacement of the bituminous mixture .
The weight of the rollers shall be sufficient to compact the mixture to the required density without crushing the aggregate .
Rollers shall be equipped with tanks and sprinkling bars for wetting the rolls or tires .
Pneumatictired rollers shall be equipped with appropriate skirts and shall always be preheated prior to use in order to avoid picking .
The Contractor shall remove all picked material from the surface .
Vibratory rollers shall have separate controls for energy and propulsion .
They shall be equipped with automatic cutoffs that stop the vibration prior to the roller stopping andor reversing its direction of travel . .
CONDITIONING OF EXISTING SURFACE .
All surfaces shall be cleaned and sprayed with an emulsion meeting the requirements of emulsified asphalt RS CRS RSh or CRSh before placing of any bituminous mixture unless otherwise ordered by the Engineer .
The emulsion shall be applied under pressure at a rate in accordance with Table .A .
TABLE .A SURFACE TYPE AND EMULSION APPLICATION RATES Surface Type Application Rate galSY New bituminous concrete . .
Existing bituminous concrete . .
Cold planed surface . .
Cold mix . . Portland cement concrete . .
The application shall be made just prior to the placement of the bituminous concrete mixture and shall progress sufficiently ahead of the paving so that the surface to be paved will be broken such that the surface consists of residual asphalt only .
Equipment used to apply the emulsion shall meet the requirements for distributors specified in Subsection ..
Prior to paving any mainline or drive surfaces the existing bituminous concrete pavement surface shall be prepared as shown on the plans and as directed by the Engineer .
Bituminous Concrete Pavement Surface Preparation shall consist of performing all necessary surface preparation including pothole repairs raveling repairs and other repairs directed by the Engineer prior to placing the final surface treatment .
Bituminous surface preparation material shall be a bituminous material or mixture as approved by the Engineer .
Contact surfaces such as curbing gutters and manholes shall be coated with a thin uniform coat of emulsified asphalt immediately before the bituminous concrete mixture is placed against them .
Grass growing adjacent to pavement or through cracks in the pavement which may hamper the placement of new bituminous concrete shall be removed by the Contractor as directed by the Engineer .
If there are deficiencies that require corrective action in the base course constructed under the Contract a bituminous concrete mix approved by the Engineer shall be used to bring the base course to the designed grade and contour .
Where bituminous concrete pavement is used to resurface existing pavements and the existing pavement contains irregularities depressions or waves such deficiencies shall be eliminated using extra bituminous material for spot leveling to bring the existing base to uniform section and grade before placing of the required courses of bituminous concrete . .
PLACING AND FINISHING .
The finished surface shall be of uniform texture and evenness and shall not show tearing shoving or pulling of the mixture .
At the time of placement the bituminous mixture shall be within F of the compaction temperature for the approved mix design .
The Contractor shall during all phases of the paving operation protect from damage all exposed surfaces which are not to be treated .
The bituminous mixture shall be placed and finished with the specified equipment shall be struck off in a uniform layer to the full width required and of such depth that each course when compacted shall have the required thickness and shall conform to the grade and elevation specified .
All paving operations shall be conducted such that to the extent possible all travel lanes are covered their full width in a single paver pass .
Longitudinal construction joints within any travel lane will not be permitted .
Screed extension to cover adjacent shoulders concurrent with any travel lane will be permitted considering the requirement for auger extensions .
Tandem paving operations shall have an independent rolling train for each paver sufficient to achieve compaction requirements .
On areas where irregularities or unavoidable obstacles make the use of mechanical spreading and finishing equipment impracticable the mixture shall be spread raked luted and compacted by hand methods .
All material shall be produced early enough in the day such that the completion of spreading and compaction of the mixture will occur during daylight hours unless night paving has been approved for the Project .
No traffic will be permitted on placed material until the material has been thoroughly compacted and has cooled to F unless otherwise authorized by the Engineer .
The use of water to cool the pavement will not be permitted .
All work adjacent to the pavement such as guardrail cleanup and turf establishment shall be completed prior to placing the wearing course .
When bituminous concrete pavement is to be placed on a bridge deck having a waterproofing membrane a rubbertired or rubbertracked paver shall be used to place the binder course of pavement .
Rollers shall operate in static mode when compacting bridge deck pavements .
On Projects where traffic will be maintained the Contractor may be required to schedule daily paving operations such that at the end of each work day all travel lanes of the roadway on which work is being performed will be paved to the same limits or as directed by the Engineer .
Suitable temporary aprons or fillets shall be constructed at side road intersections and driveways as directed by the Engineer within hours of adjacent mainline paving .
Permanent side road aprons shall be constructed within Working Days of adjacent mainline paving .
Reasonable access to and from the mainline mat shall be maintained at all times .
Mainline temporary transverse tapers shall have a minimum slope rate of inch per feet for speeds of mph and lower and a minimum slope rate of inch per feet for speeds greater than mph .
Permanent public andor private drives and permitted drives such as field drives for agriculture shall be constructed within Working Days of adjacent mainline paving .
This work shall consist of the placement of one or more courses of bituminous concrete material by hand nonmechanical methods on a prepared foundation in conformance with the Plans or as directed by the Engineer .
For all drive construction operations the existing surface andor bed subbase upon which the bituminous concrete material is to be placed shall be compacted to the line grade and shape shown on the Plans or as directed by the Engineer .
All vegetation and soft yielding or unsuitable material shall be excavated and replaced with properly compacted material meeting the requirements of Section for Subbase of Crushed Gravel Fine Graded .
Crushed RAP generated from the Project may be substituted for Subbase of Crushed Gravel Fine Graded .
The existing edge of pavement shall be sawcut or trimmed by mechanical means to provide a vertical edge for placing the handplaced bituminous concrete material .
Emulsified asphalt shall be applied uniformly and completely to all vertical and horizontal surfaces to be paved .
All surfaces shall be free of moisture dust and debris prior to applying emulsified asphalt .
If cross slope allows as determined by the Engineer existing paved drives shall be cold planed the entire drive width to the depth of the wearing course not to exceed inches .
Unless the drive is to be paved that day all cold planed vertical edges shall have temporary fillets placed the same day as cold planing takes place .
Handplaced bituminous concrete material shall be rolled with a minimum ton mechanical roller with steel drums or approved equal until compacted to the satisfaction of the Engineer .
a QC Plan Information .
The Field Section of the QC Plan shall contain the following minimum information as applicable and will be subject to approval by the Engineer Field Project Manager andor Superintendent names and their duties .
Field Process ControlQuality Control Technicians andor Contractor Foreman names and their duties .
Pavers and Laydown Equipment manufacturers and types .
Material Transfer Vehicles MTVs manufacturers and types in accordance with Section .
Steel drum rollers manufacturers and types with the number of rollers including total weight and weight per inch of drums and their respective location within the paving train .
Pneumatictired rollers manufactures and type with the number of rollers including the average or recommended ground pressure per tire and their respective location within the paving train .
Mixing loading and transportation the Contractor shall submit proposed plans of product delivery to the Project site and will be subject to approval by the Engineer such that a balanced paving operation is achievable .
Process Control Testing and Quality Control Testing daily QC testing results shall be provided to the Engineer as requested and printed and bound copies of all Project QC testing shall be provided on such dates that a biweekly estimate from the Agency is intended to be processed .
Intended paving and construction sequence a detailed full Project construction staging and sequence is required for the Project this detail shall be above and beyond but include all traffic control plans as otherwise required by the Contract this detail shall be inclusive and be in concert with any Project schedule submitted .
Paving limitations .
Weather limitations .
Any specific Project issues with bridges drives intersections structures guardrails or other items .
b Additional Information .
The Contractor shall provide the following additional information as components of the QC Plan to have the QC Plan considered for acceptance by VTrans .
All components provided shall be titled Best Practices .
Best Practices for minimizing segregation .
a. Loading Trucks b .
Dumping Trucks c. Laydown Operations d. Troubleshooting e Thermal Segregation Best Practices for screed setupoperators .
Best Practices for paver operators .
Best Practices for breakdown roller operators .
Best Practices for intermediatefinish roller operators .
Best Practices for MTV operators .
Best Practices for constructing and achieving longitudinal joint compaction .
Best Practices for achieving ride quality .
Other .
The Contractor shall also submit as part of the QC Plan all calculations which reveal hot mix plant daily capacity intended for the Project anticipated daily field laydown capacity delivery vehicle availability and capacity and delivery vehicle routes and timing .
The Contractor shall calculate the resultant paver speed based on the delivery system and submit it to VTrans within the QC Plan indicating a balanced paving operation .
Any calculations that may indicate repeated or frequent interruptions of paver laydown operations will not be approved .
Any repeated or frequent interruptions of paver laydown operations that occur after the QC Plan has been approved will result in production suspension .
The Contractor shall submit any QC Plan a minimum of Working Days prior to any Project production .
VTrans will review any QC Plan and provide any comments or approval within Working Days of receiving the same .
Outlines of that as specified above will be provided by the Engineer upon any request. . COMPACTION .
Prior to performing any construction operations the Contractor shall submit to the Engineer for their approval the proposed rolling pattern and compaction equipment to be used .
The Contractor shall take random investigative cores at locations as determined by the Engineer to verify the effectiveness of the proposed rolling pattern and equipment .
Pending results of the investigative cores necessary adjustments to the proposed rolling pattern andor equipment shall be made by the Contractor to achieve densities to the satisfaction of the Engineer .
In the absence of a Mat Density Pay Adjustment on any Project this provision will be the sole criterion governing compaction requirements .
The Contractor shall provide to the Engineer all compaction QC records in a printed and bound format at the conclusion of each days paving operations .
If rolling causes undue displacement cracking tearing or shoving no further material will be produced for or placed on the Project until a corrective action plan is proposed by the Contractor and accepted by the Engineer .
To prevent adhesion of the mixture to the rollers the rollers shall be kept properly moistened with water or water mixed with very small quantities of detergent or other approved material .
Excess liquid and petroleum products will not be permitted .
For places not accessible to the rollers the mixture shall be thoroughly compacted with hand tampers smoothing irons or mechanical tampers coated with a nonpetroleum based bond release agent .
The Contractor assumes full responsibility for and shall repair at the Contractors expense all damages which may occur to highway components and adjacent property if vibratory compaction equipment is used .
If the Agency elects to not take cores of any pavement course the Density Pay Factor PFD for that course will be considered equal to ..
Leveling courses will not be analyzed for density .
a Short Projects .
For Projects less than or equal to .
miles in length Bituminous Concrete Pavement will be analyzed for density according to the procedure specified below .
The density of the compacted pavement shall be at least .
but not more than .
of the corresponding daily average maximum specific gravity for each mix type each mix design of bituminous mix placed during each day .
The Density Pay Factor PFD will be determined in accordance with Table .A and applied in accordance with Subsection .b .
TABLE .A DENSITY PAY FACTORS FOR SHORT PROJECTS Average Density Density Pay Factor PFD .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . For material with an average density that is less than .
or more than .
the Construction Engineer will determine whether the material will be removed and replaced by the Contractor at no expense to the Agency or if a greater penalty shall be imposed .
It shall be the responsibility of the Contractor to conduct all process control .
Acceptance testing will be conducted by Agency personnel using cores extracted and provided by the Contractor .
Acceptance testing to verify the density of the compacted pavement will be done by averaging the densities of a minimum of four cores for each days production for each type of bituminous mix placed .
The cores taken for acceptance testing will be the final cores taken for determination of densities .
b Long Projects .
For Projects greater than .
miles in length bituminous concrete pavement will be analyzed for density according to the procedures specified in this Subsection .
QualityLevel Analysis .
Compacted bituminous concrete pavement specified to be sampled and tested using bituminous concrete pavement core samples for determining density will be analyzed by utilizing the statistical qualitylevel analysis Percent Within Limits PWL method .
Quality Acceptance .
a .
Sampling Bituminous Mixtures .
Bituminous concrete mixtures will be sampled once per sublot using a stratified random sampling procedure in accordance with ASTM D and tested and evaluated by the Agency for each mix type each mix design for each Project in accordance with the guidelines in Table .B .
TABLE .B ACCEPTANCE CRITERIA Property Point of Sampling Lot Size Test Method Density Compacted inplace Daily hour max .
AASHTO T Method A and AASHTO T b .
Acceptance Test Properties .
For the purpose of evaluating acceptance test properties a lot shall consist of the total quantity of bituminous concrete mixture compacted in place during any one days production to a maximum of hours .
Sampling shall be performed at the rate of one sample per lane .
mile with the exception that there shall not be fewer than six samples taken per any one days production .
The quantity represented by each sample shall constitute a sublot .
If daily field laydown operations are unexpectedly halted by circumstances such as inclement weather or equipment breakdowns the Engineer reserves the right to combine the truncated days production with a subsequent days production to constitute a single lot for density analysis .
c. Density Pay Factor PFD Determination .
Where the density PWL value as defined in Subsection .Cd equals or exceeds the Rejectable Quality Limit RQL for density of the PFD for each lot of bituminous concrete mixture based on test results will be determined by using the following applicable equations .
Superpave Bituminous Concrete Mixtures .
Where PWL 𝑃𝐴𝐷 .
𝑃𝑈𝐿 .
or where PWL 𝑃𝐴𝐷 .
𝑃𝑈𝐿 . . Marshall Bituminous Concrete Mixtures .
Where PWL 𝑃𝐴𝐷 .
𝑃𝑈𝐿 .
or where PWL 𝑃𝐴𝐷 .
𝑃𝑈𝐿 .
The PFD for each lot of bituminous concrete mixture used for low production activities not associated with any traveled way paving operation will be .. Low production activities are defined as those not associated with traveled way paving operations and having a maximum daily production of tons of bituminous concrete mixture .
d. Compacted Pavement Density .
The density of the base course pavement after compaction shall not be less than .
nor more than .
of the corresponding maximum specific gravity for each mix type each mix design placed per lot .
For this Subsection the base course will be defined as the first single lift of hot mix asphalt pavement placed directly on the aggregate subbase or Full Depth Reclamation material .
The density of all intermediate and surface courses of compacted pavement shall not be less than .
nor more than .
of the corresponding maximum specific gravity for each mix type each mix design placed per lot .
e. Process Control .
It shall be the responsibility of the Contractor to conduct all process control .
Acceptance testing will be conducted by Agency personnel using cores provided by the Contractor in accordance with the coring protocol below .
Coring Protocol .
Original core sampling locations will be restricted to travel lanes only and will not include those areas within inches of a longitudinal joint nor within feet of a transverse joint .
That area encompassing a longitudinal tapered joint will not be selected as a sampling location .
Independent shoulder and mat area core sampling locations may be selected by the Engineer to afford verification of Subsection .b .
Original core sampling locations will be selected by the Engineer or designee in accordance with ASTM D within Working Days of the bituminous mixture being placed .
The Contractor will be advised in writing of the selected sampling locations .
The Contractor may challenge whether any specific original sample location is representative of any specific lot by notifying the Engineer .
This notification shall be made immediately upon the sublot locations being selected and conveyed to the Contractor and being prior to extracting the cores and shall be further documented in any Contractor job records citing just reasoning for recommending a reselection of original sample locations .
Upon receipt by the Engineer of a written challenge from the Contractor the Engineer will evaluate it within one Working Day and notify the Contractor in writing of either acceptance or rejection of the challenge .
Rejection of a challenge will result in the Engineer using the original core sampling locations for the determination of density data in any compaction pay factor calculations .
Acceptance of a challenge will result in the Engineer selecting alternate core sampling locations for those challenged samples .
Alternate core sampling locations will be selected by the Engineer by generating new random numbers to determine both new longitudinal and transverse coordinates within the sublot in question .
The alternate core sampling locations will not be subject to further challenge and will be used for the determination of density data in any compaction pay factor calculations .
The Contractor will be notified in writing of the final core sampling locations .
Within one Working Day of the final selection of the core sampling locations the Contractor shall extract cores in the presence of the Engineer or designee and shall deliver the samples to the Engineer in a suitable container provided by the Contractor on the same day the samples are taken .
The Engineer will identify and record the core samples .
Any cores not delivered in a suitable container will be rejected and new cores taken at the Contractors expense .
The Contractor shall fill the core holes at their expense with hot bituminous concrete pavement at a temperature of at least F on the same day that the cores are taken .
Failure to comply with these provisions may result in payment being withheld for the representative lot of bituminous material .
Core samples inches in diameter shall be taken to satisfy the provisions of this Subsection .
Agency personnel will process the core samples within Working Days and will relay the test results to both the Engineer and the Contractor .
Testing will be performed in accordance with AASHTO T Method A for bulk specific gravity B and AASHTO T for maximum specific gravity M from tests performed at the plant lab for that day .
As necessary the Contractor shall mark the cores for sawcutting in the presence of the Engineer or designee for verification of cut locations .
The Degree of Compaction DC will be determined as follows 𝐴𝐴 𝐴 𝐿 where DC Degree of Compaction B Bulk specific gravity of bituminous sample M Maximum specific gravity from plant lab tests To satisfy the requirements of Subsection .b physical core samples will be retained for a period of Working Days from the time that DC test results are relayed to the Engineer and Contractor .
In addition any subsequently retested or recored samples as defined in Subsection .b will be retained to the point of fully satisfying the requirements of Subsection .b .
Core Result Verification .
Upon the test results required in Subsection .b being relayed to both parties the Engineer and Contractor any individual core sample result considered to be an outlier as determined in accordance with ASTM E will enter a core result verification process as defined herein .
This process will consider only those core samples processed by the Agency as acceptance tested samples and does not preclude the provisions of Subsection .
b .
The core result verification process consists of four levels as follows a .
Level .
The Agency will perform a statistical analysis on all lots of core sample compaction values to investigate any presence of statistical outliers as determined in accordance with Table of ASTM E at a significance level .
In cases where a statistical outlier is not detected all core sample results as reported under Subsection .b will be used in any compaction pay factor calculations .
When an outlier is determined to exist the core sample representing that outlying result will be retested to ensure procedural integrity including support information accuracy testing methodology and mathematical accuracy .
The core sample retested results will replace the original outlier core sample results for any future calculations within this Level .
Should it be verified at this point that an outlier does in fact exist or the core sample retested results vary from those originally obtained the options to either party will be either to compute any compaction pay factors using all core sample test results derived through Level or to proceed to Level .
b .
Level .
Level outlier core sample results will be replaced by recored sample results to be obtained under this Level .
The recoring location shall be at the same transverse offset as the original location and shall be offset longitudinally forward inches from the original location .
The recored sample will be tested as specified in Subsection .b and may reenter Level analysis of this Subsection up to and including the point of ensuring procedural integrity .
The recored sample will not reenter Level analysis .
Upon receiving recored sample test results of Level the options to either party will be either to compute any compaction pay factors using those recored sample test results or to state reasons for belief that said recored sample test results are in error .
Receipt of reasons shall be cause for this verification process to proceed to Level .
c. Level .
A final attempt at field resolution of core sample test results will be addressed under this Level by introduction of a thirdparty testing facility .
Selection of such a facility will be discussed and mutually agreed upon by both parties prior to beginning construction activities and will not be included in Project QC or acceptance testing processes .
Any findings of a thirdparty facility will become final and will not be subject to further review .
Payment to a third party for services rendered will be borne by the party having provided the Level reasons leading to Level .
The recored samples from Level shall be provided to the thirdparty testing facility .
The facility will process the recored samples and provide results to both the Agency and the Contractor .
Upon receipt of the thirdparty recored sample test results the options to either party will be either to compute any compaction pay factors using these results or to proceed to Level .
d. Level .
At this level the Agency and the Contractor will defer to the requirements specified in Subsection ..
Both parties shall submit to the Chief Engineer a written report describing the disparity all subsequent actions taken to date all documentation related to these actions and a proposed course of action for settlement .
The Chief Engineer will review the submittals and all relevant Project records and act in accordance with Subsection ..
If the Contractor does not concur with any final decision by the Chief Engineer the Contractor may seek other remedies as specified under Subsection .
and the Contract .
Rejected Material .
When the density PWL is less than the Rejectable Quality Limit RQL for density of and the lot has satisfied the requirements of Subsection .b the lot shall be termed rejected material .
For any lot of rejected material the Engineer will require complete removal of the representative lot and replacement with mix meeting Contract requirements at no additional cost to the Agency provided that any one of the following conditions is also met a .
Lot Standard Deviation s is greater than .
or b .
Lot Average Density 𝑥 is greater than .
or c. Lot Average Density 𝑥 is less than ..
In addition and at the discretion of the Contractor any lot of rejected material that does not meet any of the above criteria may be removed and replaced at no additional cost to the Agency .
If none of the aforementioned criteria are met and removal and replacement is not implemented by the Contractor any lot of rejected material will have any Density Pay Factors PFD calculated as follows 𝑃𝐴𝐷 .
𝑥 . 𝑥 . . where 𝑥 is the lot average density .
In such cases that this Subsection applies any PFD as computed above will be the solitary pay factor to the representative lot as per the provisions of Subsection .
and Subsection .. All other applicable pay factors of the representative lot will be set equal to .. .
JOINTS .
Joints between old and new pavements or between each successive days work shall have a thorough and continuous bond between the old and new mixtures .
Whenever the spreading process is interrupted long enough for the mixture to attain its initial stability the paver shall be removed from the mat and a transverse butt joint constructed .
Transverse butt joints shall be formed by cutting the pavement in a vertical plane at a location approved by the Engineer where the pavement has a true surface as determined using a straightedge at least feet long .
Otherwise the transverse butt joint may be formed by trimming using mechanical means such that the full design depth of bituminous material is present at the trimmed joint .
The transverse joint shall be thoroughly coated with emulsified asphalt just prior to depositing the new paving mixture .
When constructing transverse tapered joints care shall be taken in raking out and discarding the coarser aggregate at the low end of the taper and in rolling the taper .
The taper area shall be thoroughly coated with emulsified asphalt just prior to the resumption of paving operations .
As the paver places new mixture on the taper area placement shall proceed such that an evenly graduated deposit of mixture will complement the previously made taper .
Shovels may be used to add additional mixture if necessary .
The joint shall be smoothed with a rake and properly rolled with coarse material discarded .
Longitudinal joints that have become cold shall be coated with emulsified asphalt before the adjacent mat is placed .
If directed by the Engineer such joints shall be cut back to a clean vertical edge prior to coating with the emulsion .
Unless otherwise directed by the Engineer longitudinal joints shall be offset at least inches from any joint in the lower courses of pavement .
Transverse joints shall not be constructed nearer than inches from the transverse joints constructed in lower courses .
Wherever possible a inch space should be maintained between all final pavement markings and parallel joints in bituminous concrete pavement .
The Contractor shall conduct paving operations such that the paving joint between the travel lane and adjacent shoulder will be outside of all longitudinal pavement markings .
Projects that have a centerline length of more than miles shall also be subject to the following provisions a General .
For the purposes of longitudinal joint compaction acceptance a lot shall consist of the total Project length of joint constructed per pavement course and the total Project quantity of bituminous concrete mixture compacted in place per pavement course including shoulders .
Side roads or drives will not be considered part of the joint lot for this provision .
Sampling on constructed joints shall consist of inch minimum diameter cores taken at the rate of two cores per mile of joint per lot .
Sample locations will not include those areas within feet of a transverse joint .
Each individual core sample shall represent a Project sublot .
Once selected per that method in Subsection .b sample locations will become final and not subject to revision nor will any core sample be subject to the provisions specified in Subsection .
b. b Sampling .
Bituminous concrete mixtures will be sampled once per sublot on a stratified random sampling procedure in the longitudinal direction in accordance with ASTM D . For a longitudinal butt joint the transverse location of the sample shall be centered on the visible surface joint line .
For a tapered joint the transverse location of the sample shall be offset from the visible surface joint line approximately of the taper width as directed by the Engineer .
Joint core samples shall be taken between any adjacent travel lanes and between any travel lane and shoulder provided the shoulder material was placed as a separate construction operation .
All samples will be tested and evaluated by the Agency for each mix type each mix design excluding levelingshim courses for each Project in accordance with Table .A .
TABLE .A ACCEPTANCE CRITERIA Property Point of Sampling Lot Size Test Method Density Compactedinplace Project AASHTO T Method A and AASHTO T For determining the degree of compaction the maximum specific gravity Gmm used in the calculation shall be the average of the two Gmm values of the materials placed to construct the joint .
The calculated compaction of any individual joint core sample shall not be less than .
of the corresponding maximum specific gravity of the average of the two Gmm values for each mix type each mix design placed per lot .
c Longitudinal Joint Pay Factor PFJ Determination .
In such case that an individual core sample sublot is above the minimum compaction as specified in Subsection .b it shall be defined as above minimum .
Upon completion of any individual lot the percentage of sublots equal to or above the acceptable minimum compaction shall be defined as the lot Percent Above Minimum PAM and shall be used as the basis for determining pay factors as follows 𝐴𝑜𝑟 𝑃𝐴𝐿 𝑃𝐴𝐽 .
𝐴𝑜𝑟 𝑃𝐴𝐿 𝑃𝐴𝐽 .
𝐴𝑜𝑟 𝑃𝐴𝐿 𝑃𝐴𝐽 . .
SURFACE TOLERANCE .
The surface will be tested by the Engineer using a straightedge at least ft in length at selected locations parallel with the centerline .
Any variations exceeding inch between any two contact points shall be satisfactorily eliminated .
A straightedge at least feet in length may be used on a vertical curve .
The straightedges shall be provided by the Contractor in accordance with Subsection .. For Projects that have a centerline length of onehalf mile or greater the surface roughness of the wearing course will be additionally measured by the Engineer or the Engineers designee with an Agencyprovided Road Surface Profiler RSP to determine a surface tolerance pay factor PFR .
The Engineer will contact the Agencys Pavement Design Unit Project Manager to arrange for surface testing .
The surface will be tested by Agency personnel by traveling at highway speeds once in each direction on two lanetwoway nonlimited access State highways and other Routes as applicable .
For those twoway limited or nonlimited access highways containing truck or passing lanes only the rightmost lane will be tested in any given direction .
The reported International Roughness Index IRI value will be the average as calculated based upon travel in both directions .
Twolane divided Interstate highways and other applicable limited access highways will have both passing and travel lanes tested at highway speeds with the reported IRI value being the average as calculated based upon travel in both lanes .
For those Interstate or other applicable limited access highways having both barrels of the highway constituting the Project the reported IRI value will be that average value as calculated based on travel in both lanes of both barrels .
Prior to the highway being surface tested all Contract items shall be complete such that the Project could be deemed substantially complete unless otherwise directed by the Engineer including but not limited to all guardrail bridge joints and permanent pavement markings installed including all side road markings .
There shall not be lane closures or equipment present that would impede highway travel .
Additionally and prior to the highway being surface tested the highway surface shall be dry and free of snow ice and loose debris and the ambient air temperature shall be a minimum of F. The roughness value used in the applicable formula below will be the average of the IRI values measured by the RSP in each lane .
The roughness associated with any anomalous features beyond the control of the Contractor such as mechanical bridge joints or Utility structures will be eliminated from the calculations of the final Project average .
The corresponding Surface Tolerance Pay Factor PFR will be determined as follows and applied to the corresponding lot as defined below a Limited Access Highways 𝑃𝐴𝑅 .
𝐼𝑃𝐼 . . b All Other State Routes 𝑃𝐴𝑅 .
𝐼𝑃𝐼 . . For the evaluation of surface tolerance acceptance a lot shall consist of the total Project quantity of wearing surface of bituminous concrete pavement constructed and measured in place .
Said measurement shall include all shoulders side roads drives and any other miscellaneous mix except for all limitedaccess highway on and offramps. . TRAFFIC CONTROL .
Whenever traffic must be maintained during paving operations uniformed traffic officers andor flaggers shall be stationed at each end of the section being paved and at such other locations as may be required by the Engineer .
The uniformed traffic officers or flaggers shall conform to the requirements specified in Section .
Traffic shall be maintained in accordance with Subsection .A and Subsection .B. . ASPHALT PRICE ADJUSTMENT .
a General Requirements and Conditions .
The purpose of the Asphalt Price Adjustment APA clause is to provide either additional compensation to the Contractor or a payment to the Agency depending upon an increase or decrease in the average price of asphalt cement and emulsified asphalt during the construction of a Project .
No price adjustment will be applied beyond the Contract Completion Date as adjusted by Change Order or any applicable interim completion dates .
b Price Adjustment Procedures .
Prior to advertising for bids an Index Price IP for asphalt cement will be established by the Agency and will be the base from which the APA is computed .
The Contract Index Price will be as stated elsewhere in the Contract for a ton of asphalt cement .
The monthly Posted Prices PP will be those prices obtained from the Agencys website for the month that the construction activity was performed .
The APA will be debited or credited for asphalt cement when the Posted Price of asphalt cement increases or decreases over its respective Index Price .
The APA will be based upon the Quantity of Asphalt Cement QAC and Quantity of Emulsified Asphalt QEA incorporated in the work determined as follows QAC for Batch Plants .
The QAC is determined using the cumulative virgin binder content for each applicable item as reported on the batch ticket .
QAC for DrumMix and Continuous Mix Plants .
The QAC is determined based upon the tons of mix placed multiplied by the virgin binder content reported on the demand tickets as verified by Agency personnel .
In the event of multiple binder contents the accepted quantity of mix at each binder content shall be determined and the total QAC used shall be calculated accordingly .
The accumulated asphalt cement total on the plant automation may be checked and verified by Agency personnel for each mix .
QEA and ACEA for Emulsified Asphalt .
The QEA is determined per the requirements of Subsection ..
The amount of Asphalt Price Adjustment will be based upon the actual asphalt content of the emulsified asphalt used which is calculated by multiplying the QEA used by the asphalt content fraction for that emulsion type .
The Asphalt Content of Emulsified Asphalt ACEA factor is determined from the type of emulsified asphalt used as specified in Table .A .
TABLE .A ASPHALT CONTENT OF EMULSIFIED ASPHALTS Emulsified Asphalt Type ACEA Factor CSSh .
MS . RS .
RSh .
CRSh .
CRSp .
CSSh Fog .
If an emulsified asphaltic liquid is used in the Contract work under any Contract item subject to the APA provisions and that liquid is not included in Table .A the ACEA factor for that liquid will be that as determined by averaging Contractor certified test results for the Project .
c Calculation of APA .
The APA to be paid shall be computed as follows 𝐴𝑃𝐴 𝑃𝐴𝐴 𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴 .
𝑃𝐴𝐴 𝑃𝑃 𝐼𝑃 where APA Asphalt Price Adjustment lump units QAC Quantity of Asphalt Cement tons ACEA Asphalt Content of Emulsified Asphalt factor from Table .A QEA Quantity of Emulsified Asphalt hundredweight PP Posted Price of asphalt on the date of work dollarston IP Index Price of asphalt dollarston .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT .
The quantity of Bituminous Concrete Pavement to be measured for payment will be the number of tons of mixture each type complete inplace in the accepted work .
The quantity of Bituminous Concrete Pavement Surface Preparation to be measured for payment will be the number of tons of material complete inplace in the accepted work as determined from the weigh tickets .
The quantity of HandPlaced Bituminous Concrete Material Drives to be measured for payment will be the number of square yards complete inplace in the accepted work .
The quantities of all applicable Pay Adjustments calculated for the Project will be determined as specified below .
a Air Voids Pay Adjustment .
When applicable and when the Air Voids Pay Factor PFAV as calculated per Subsection .Ce or Subsection .Cf for a lot of Bituminous Concrete Pavement is nonzero the measured quantity of Bituminous Concrete Pavement placed will be multiplied by such pay factor to determine an Air Voids Pay Adjustment PAAV to the Accepted Tonnage Placed Q for that lot based on the Contract Bid Price B as follows 𝑃𝐴𝐴𝑈 𝑃𝐴𝐴𝑈 𝑃 𝐴 where PAAV Air voids pay adjustment lump units PFAV Air voids pay factor Q Accepted tonnage placed tons B Contract bid price dollarston When boxed samples are taken to determine mix properties for any Project or portion thereof the PFAV shall be assumed to be equal to .
Additionally when the RQL for air voids of is not attained for a lot all other applicable pay factors for that lot shall not be greater than .
but may be less than or equal to .
except in the following situation When the Density Pay Factor is calculated per Subsection .b the Air Voids Pay Factor shall be equal to .
and the Density Pay Factor shall be the sole pay factor applied to the representative lot .
b Mat Density Pay Adjustment .
When applicable and when the Density Pay Factor PFD as calculated per Subsection .a Subsection .b or Subsection .b for a lot of Bituminous Concrete Pavement is nonzero the measured quantity of Bituminous Concrete Pavement placed that day will be multiplied by such pay factor to determine a Mat Density Pay Adjustment PAD to the Accepted Tonnage Placed Q for that lot based on the Contract Bid Price B as follows 𝑃𝐴𝐷 𝑃𝐴𝐷 𝑃 𝐴 where PAD Mat density pay adjustment lump units PFD Density pay factor Q Accepted tonnage placed tons B Contract bid price dollarston Additionally when the RQL for density of is not attained for a lot and the Density Pay Factor is calculated per Subsection .b all other applicable pay factors for that lot shall be considered equal to .. c Longitudinal Joint Pay Factor .
When applicable and when the Longitudinal Joint Pay Factor PFJ as calculated per Subsection .c for a lot of Bituminous Concrete Pavement is nonzero the measured quantity of Bituminous Concrete Pavement placed will be multiplied by such pay factor to determine a Longitudinal Joint Pay Adjustment PAJ to the Accepted Tonnage Placed Q for that lot based on the Contract Bid Price B as follows 𝑃𝐴𝐽 𝑃𝐴𝐽 𝑃 𝐴 where PAJ Longitudinal joint pay adjustment lump units PFJ Longitudinal joint pay factor Q Accepted tonnage placed tons B Contract bid price dollarston d Surface Tolerance Pay Adjustment .
When applicable and when the Surface Tolerance Pay Factor PFR as calculated per Subsection .
for a lot of Bituminous Concrete Pavement is nonzero the measured quantity of wearing surface of Bituminous Concrete Pavement placed will be multiplied by such pay factor to determine a Surface Tolerance Pay Adjustment PAR to the Accepted Tonnage Placed Q for that lot based on the Contract Bid Price B as follows 𝑃𝐴𝑅 𝑃𝐴𝑅 𝑃 𝐴 where PAR Surface tolerance pay adjustment lump units PFR Surface tolerance pay factor Q Accepted tonnage placed tons B Contract bid price dollarston The Contract bid prices for the applicable Pay Items will be paid separately under the Contract .
The asphalt price adjustment APA as calculated per Subsection .
will be calculated and paid in the same biweekly estimate as the applicable Contract work . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT .
The measured quantity of Bituminous Concrete Pavement will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per ton .
Payment shall be full compensation for furnishing mixing hauling and placing the material specified and for furnishing all labor tools equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
The measured quantity of HandPlaced Bituminous Concrete Material Drives will be paid at the Contract Unit Price per square yard .
Payment shall be full compensation for furnishing mixing hauling placing compacting and finishing the material specified and for furnishing all labor tools equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
For drive construction cold planing emulsified asphalt subbase material cleaning existing paved surfaces excavation and filling joints cracks and holes will not be paid for directly but will be considered incidental to HandPlaced Bituminous Concrete Material Drives .
Payment for Pay Adjustments shall be debited or credited against the Contract prices lump units for the applicable Pay Adjustment items .
The costs of furnishing testing facilities and supplies at the plant will be considered included in the Contract Unit Price of Bituminous Concrete Pavement .
The costs of obtaining furnishing transporting and providing the straightedges required by Subsection .
will be paid for under the appropriate Section Pay Item included in the Contract .
The cost of taking cores for acceptance testing and filling the core holes will be incidental to the Contract item being cored .
All other costs associated with obtaining samples for acceptance testing will be incidental to the cost of the Section Pay Item .
The cost of traffic control for taking cores for acceptance testing and filling the core holes will be paid under the appropriate Section Contract item .
When not specified as items in the Contract the costs of sweeping and cleaning existing paved surfaces and tacking of Utility structures curbing gutters and other contact surfaces will not be paid for directly but will be incidental to the appropriate Bituminous Concrete Pavement Pay Item .
Bituminous concrete mixtures approved by the Engineer for use in correcting deficiencies in the base course constructed as part of the Contract will not be paid for as Bituminous Concrete Pavement but will be incidental to the Contract item for the specified type of base course .
The accepted quantity of Bituminous Concrete Pavement Surface Preparation as approved by the Engineer will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per ton .
Payment shall be full compensation for furnishing mixing hauling and placing the materials and for furnishing all labor tools equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
Payments for Price Adjustment Asphalt Cement shall be debited or credited against the Contract price lump unit for Price Adjustment Asphalt Cement .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Marshall Bituminous Concrete Pavement Ton .
Medium Duty Marshall Bituminous Concrete Pavement Ton .
Air Voids Pay Adjustment N.A.B.I .
Lump Unit .
Mat Density Pay Adjustment N.A.B.I .
Lump Unit .
Surface Tolerance Pay Adjustment N.A.B.I .
Lump Unit .
Longitudinal Joint Compaction Pay Adjustment N.A.B.I .
Lump Unit .
Superpave Bituminous Concrete Pavement Ton .
Superpave Bituminous Concrete Pavement Type IVB Ton .
HandPlaced Bituminous Concrete Material Drives Square Yard .
Bituminous Concrete Pavement Surface Preparation Ton .
Price Adjustment Asphalt Cement N.A.B.I .
Lump Unit SECTION BONDED WEARING COURSE .
DESCRIPTION .
This work shall consist of applying a surface treatment consisting of a polymer modified emulsified asphalt coat followed immediately with a bonded wearing course and in conformance with the lines grades thicknesses and typical crosssections shown on the Plans or established by the Engineer. . MATERIALS .
Materials shall meet the requirements of the following Subsections Performance Graded Asphalt Binder .
PolymerModified Emulsified Asphalt .c Aggregate for Bonded Wearing Course .b Joint Sealer Hot Poured .
a PerformanceGraded Asphalt Binder .
Performancegraded asphalt binder shall be PG .
b PolymerModified Emulsified Asphalt .
The emulsified asphalt shall be a polymermodified type CRSP emulsion with the modifications specified in Table .A .
If the residue from the residue by evaporation test fails to meet the requirements of Table .A the test shall be repeated using the distillation method specified in AASHTO T with modifications to include distillation temperature and time in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
TABLE .A REQUIREMENTS FOR POLYMERMODIFIED EMULSIFIED ASPHALT Residue from Residue by Evaporation Test Test Method Min .
Max .
Residue AASHTO T . Penetration F g s dmm AASHTO T . . Elastic recovery AASHTO T . Solubility in organic solvent AASHTO T . .
COMPOSITION OF MIXTURE .
Formulate a Bonded Wearing Course Job Mix Formula JMF that satisfies the design limits specified in Table .A .
The JMF for each mixture shall establish a single percentage of aggregate passing each sieve and a single percentage of bituminous material to be added to the aggregate mixture .
The gradation of the aggregate shall not vary more than the production tolerance from the mix design gradation JMF while also remaining within the Specification gradation band .
The mixture shall not contain recycled asphalt materials .
TABLE .A BONDED WEARING COURSE MIXTURE REQUIREMENTS Sieve Designation Type A Type B Type C Design Limits Passing Production Tolerance Design Limits Passing Production Tolerance Design Limits Passing Production Tolerance inch .
mm inch .
mm inch .
mm No. . mm No. . mm No. . mm No. . mm No. . mm No. . mm No. . mm PG Binder . . . . . . PG Binder percentage shall be based on a minimum film thickness of .
microns when calculated using the effective asphalt content in conjunction with the surface area for the aggregates in the JMF according to the following formula and the factors in Table .B .
𝑈𝐷𝐴 𝐴𝑅 𝑃 𝐴𝐴𝐴 where WEA Weight of effective asphalt binder pounds per pound of aggregate AS Surface area of aggregate square yards per pound of aggregate S Minimum film thickness of asphalt microns GBA Specific gravity of asphalt Surface area of aggregate is calculated by multiplying the percent passing for the design by the factors in Table .B for each sieve size and summing the resultant values TABLE .B AGGREGATE SURFACE AREA FACTORS Sieve Designation Surface Area Factors SYlb Type A Type B Type C inch .
mm .
inch .
mm .
inch .
mm .
No. . mm .
. . No. . mm .
. . No. . mm .
. . No. . mm .
. . No. . mm .
. . No. . mm .
. . No. . mm .
. . Draindown from the loose mixture shall not exceed .
when tested in accordance with the requirements specified in AASHTO T . The draindown shall be tested at the design asphalt content plus ..
The temperature shall be the mixing temperature plus F. The temperature shall not exceed F. If granite or quartzite aggregates are used in the mixture an antistrip additive shall be added as specified in Subsection .. No work shall be started until the Contractor has submitted and the Materials Engineer has approved a mix design including cold feed gradations mixing times the percentage of each ingredient including bitumen the jobmix formula from such a combination and the optimum mixing and compaction temperatures as required .
The Materials Engineer may approve changes in the designs jobmix formula or discontinue use of the design if placement or finishing characteristics are determined by the Engineer to be unsatisfactory .
At the time the above mix design is submitted the Contractor shall indicate and make available for sampling and testing the PG asphalt binder and stockpiles of all aggregates proposed for use .
A minimum of Working Days shall be allowed for testing and evaluation of the submitted mix design .
Once a mix design is approved the JMF is valid until a change is made in aggregate source or PG asphalt binder grade .
If a change is made in aggregate source or PG asphaltbinder grade a new mix design shall be submitted and a minimum Working Days shall be allowed prior to resuming production .
If a change is proposed to be made in the PG asphaltbinder supplier it shall be from an approved supplier and be in accordance with the most current VTrans mix design submittal policy .
If there is a change in source for the polymermodified emulsion the emulsion shall be from an approved source and the Engineer shall be notified at least hours prior to resuming production. . QUALITY ACCEPTANCE .
a Bonded Wearing Course will be tested at the rate of once per tons of material produced to ensure the requirements specified in Table .A are being met .
Polymermodified emulsified asphalt will be tested at the rate of once per day of production and in accordance with the requirements specified in AASHTO M and Table .A .
b Bonded Wearing Course will be tested for gradation and asphalt content based on printed ticket weights .
The application rate of the polymermodified emulsified asphalt will also be calculated to ensure target values are within tolerance .
Acceptance sampling and testing will be conducted by Agency personnel in accordance with the Agencys Quality Assurance Program .
c If any analyzed sample is outside of the testing tolerances andor other design criteria as defined herein immediate adjustments shall be made by the Contractor .
After the adjustment the resulting mix will be sampled and tested for compliance with these Specifications .
With the permission of the Engineer the plant may continue production pending results of these tests but if the Engineer deems that it is in the best interest of the Project the Engineer may at any time order plant production stopped .
In this event additional adjustments shall be made and tested on a trial basis until the deficiency is corrected . .
WEATHER AND SEASONAL LIMITATIONS .
Bonded Wearing Course shall not be placed when the ambient air temperature and temperature at the paving site in the shade and away from artificial heat is below F. Bonded Wearing Course shall not be placed on a wet or frozen surface or when weather or other conditions would prevent the proper handling finishing or compacting of the material unless otherwise approved by the Engineer .
Bonded Wearing Course shall not be applied before May th or after October th .
When it is in the public interest the Construction Engineer may adjust the weather and seasonal limitations. . BITUMINOUS MIXING PLANT AND TESTING .
The requirements of Subsection .
shall apply except as modified by this Subsection .
For Bonded Wearing Course the following test equipment shall not be utilized for testing Superpave Gyratory Compactor Automatic Marshall Compaction Hammer Marshall compaction molds with base plates Marshall stability mold Marshall flow meter Motorized compression and testing machine Water bath capable of maintaining a temperature of F F . FIELD QUALITY CONTROL PLAN .
The Contractor shall prepare and submit a written Field Quality Control Plan QC Plan to include all surface treatments Contracted for the Project .
The Contractor shall submit the QC Plan to the Engineer a minimum of Working Days prior to any Project production .
As a minimum the QC Plan shall contain the following information a General Requirements .
The QC Plan as specified within this Subsection shall be separate from any other Quality Control QC Plan as required by VTrans within the Contract Documents .
Bituminous concrete material shall not be produced for any Project that has not secured QC Plan approval as defined under this Subsection .
The QC Plan shall contain the following minimum information as applicable and will be subject to approval by the Engineer QC Plan Administrator Contractor PersonnelProject Manager names and their duties .
Field Process ControlQuality Control Technicians Contractor Foremen names and their duties .
Pavers and Laydown Equipment manufacturers and types .
Emulsion application procedure and rate .
Steel drum rollers manufacturers and types with the number of rollers including total weight and weight per inch of drum and their respective location within the paving train .
Pneumatictired rollers manufacturers and types with the number of rollers including the average or recommended ground pressure per tire and their respective location within the paving train .
Mixing loading and transportation the Contractor shall submit proposed plans of product delivery to the Project site and will be subject to approval by the Engineer such that a balanced paving operation is achievable .
Process Control Testing and Quality Control Testing Daily QC testing results shall be submitted to the Engineer as requested and bound printed copies of all Project QC testing shall be submitted on such dates that a biweekly estimate from the Agency is intended to be processed .
Paving limitations .
Weather limitations .
Projectspecific issues with bridges drives intersections structures guardrails or other items .
b Additional Information .
The Contractor shall provide the following additional information as components of the QC Plan to be considered for acceptance by VTrans .
All components provided shall be titled Best Practices .
Best Practices for minimizing segregation a. Loading Trucks b .
Dumping Trucks c. Laydown Operations d. Troubleshooting e. Thermal Segregation Best Practices for screed setupoperators Best Practices for paver operators Best Practices for breakdown roller operators Best Practices for intermediatefinish roller operators Best Practices for constructing and achieving joint construction Best Practices for achieving ride quality Daily application rate of polymermodified emulsified asphalt to meet the requirements of Subsection .c .
CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS .
a Equipment .
Paving .
Use a selfpriming paver as approved by the Engineer .
The selfpriming paver shall be capable of spraying the polymermodified emulsified asphalt applying the hot mix asphalt overlay and smoothing the surface of the mat in one pass at a rate of at least feet per minute .
The selfpriming paver shall be equipped with a receiving hopper feed conveyor emulsion storage tank metered highpressure emulsion spray bar and a variable width heated ironing type screed .
The screed shall have the ability to be crowned at the center both positively and negatively and have vertically adjustable extensions to accommodate the desired pavement profile .
Compaction .
Use steelwheeled doubledrum rollers weighing at least tons equipped with functioning water systems and scrapers to prevent material from adhering to the roller drums .
Hauling .
Haul vehicles shall meet the approval of the Engineer prior to transporting the hot mix asphalt wearing course .
b Surface Preparation .
Prior to paving the existing bituminous concrete pavement surface shall be prepared as shown on the plans and as directed by the Engineer and in accordance with the provisions of Subsection .
and Subsection .c Surface preparation shall consist of pothole repairs raveling repairs crack sealing and other repairs directed by the Engineer prior to placing the final surface treatment .
Surface preparation material shall be a bituminous material or mixture as approved by the Engineer or as otherwise specified .
Perform all surface preparation prior to applying the wearing course .
Thoroughly clean the entire area to be overlaid .
The surface of the area to be overlaid shall be free of dirt oil debris other foreign materials and standing water .
A damp surface is acceptable if favorable weather conditions are expected during paving operations .
All Utility structures within the area to be paved shall be covered with material approved by the Engineer and referenced for location and adjustment if necessary after paving .
c Application .
The polymermodified emulsified asphalt shall be applied at a temperature in accordance with Table .A and uniformly applied across the entire width to be overlaid .
The daily application rate shall be . . gallons per square yard for Type C . . gallons per square yard for Type B and . . gallons per square yard for Type A .
The spray rate shall be continuously monitored and daily application rates shall be checked for each days production of Bonded Wearing Course BWC .
The daily application rate shall vary by no more than .
gallons per square yard .
If the actual daily application rate is less than the specified rate for that Type the Contractor shall take corrective action as directed by the Engineer .
Daily application rates RDA shall be calculated using the following formula 𝑃𝐷𝐴 𝐿𝐷 𝐿𝑅 𝐴 where RDA Daily application rate of polymermodified emulsified asphalt gallonssquare yard ME Ending meter reading gallons MS Starting meter reading gallons A Daily area measured for payment under BWC square yards Field adjustments to the specified application rate of polymermodified emulsified asphalt shall be determined based upon the existing surface condition of the pavement .
Adjustments to the polymer modified emulsified asphalt specified application rate shall be approved by the Engineer .
Equipment shall not come in contact with the polymermodified emulsified asphalt before the BWC is applied .
Immediately after applying the polymermodified emulsified asphalt apply the BWC across the full width of the emulsion within the temperature range of F F. A load ticket shall accompany each vehicle supplying BWC .
Make one legible copy of the load ticket available to the Agencys Paving Inspector prior to placement of the mixture .
Each load ticket shall identify the type of mix used as outlined in Table .A and show all of the following information .
Ticket number Mix design number Plant Identification Contract number Mix type A B or C Performancegraded binder type PG Binder Quantity of material in delivery vehicle tons Date and time A load ticket shall also be supplied for the polymermodified emulsified asphalt such that the weight of actual Project usage can be determined .
d Finishing .
Finishing shall begin immediately after application of the BWC using a minimum of two static passes .
Vibratory equipment shall not be used unless otherwise approved by the Engineer .
The rollers will not be allowed to stop on the freshly placed BWC .
Use an adequate number of rollers to complete finishing before the pavement temperature falls below F. Once finished traffic will not be permitted on placed material until the material has cooled to F unless otherwise authorized by the Engineer . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT .
The quantity of Bonded Wearing Course to be measured for payment will be the number of square yards of pavement surface treated in the complete and accepted work . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT .
The accepted quantity of Bonded Wearing Course will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per square yard .
Payment shall be full compensation for furnishing all labor materials and equipment necessary to complete the work .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Bonded Wearing Course Square Yard .
PolymerModified Emulsified Asphalt CWT SECTION THIS SECTION RESERVED SECTION THIS SECTION RESERVED SECTION MATERIAL TRANSFER VEHICLE MTV .
DESCRIPTION .
This work shall consist of furnishing and utilizing an approved Material Transfer Vehicle MTV in bituminous concrete paving operations. . CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS .
An approved MTV shall be used to transfer the bituminous material from the hauling equipment to the paver .
The MTV shall operate independently from the paver and shall be a commercially manufactured unit specifically designed for the transfer of mix from the hauling equipment to the paver without depositing the mix on the roadway surface .
The MTV andor separate hopper shall be designed such that the deposited mix is remixed prior to placement on the roadway .
The minimum storage capacity of the MTV not including any separate hopper shall be tons .
The MTV shall be capable of swinging or offsetting the material transfer delivery system to side discharge into the paver .
If the MTV and associated actions do not effectively eliminate mat segregation as determined by the Engineer the Engineer may require a hopper insert with remixing capabilities or other measures .
When the MTV traverses a bridge that is not a buried structure it shall be as near to empty as possible and shall not exceed five miles per hour while on any structure .
If the Contractor proposes moving the MTV over a bridge with more than a minimal amount of bituminous material in it a proposal shall be submitted to the Structures Engineer for their review and approval prior to any mix being placed .
Any submittal shall detail all wheel and axle loadings that will be placed on the bridge deck . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT .
The quantities of Material Transfer Vehicle and Material Transfer Vehicle Cold Mix to be measured for payment will be the number of tons of bituminous pavement transferred by the MTV to the paver in the completed and accepted work as determined by the weigh slips . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT .
The accepted quantities of Material Transfer Vehicle and Material Transfer Vehicle Cold Mix will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per ton .
Payment will be full compensation for the equipment as specified and for furnishing all labor tools equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Material Transfer Vehicle Ton .
Material Transfer Vehicle Cold Mix Ton SECTION COLD MIXED RECYCLED BITUMINOUS PAVEMENT .
DESCRIPTION .
This work shall consist of cold planing and crushing andor screening the existing bituminous pavement adding additional asphalt emulsion and mixing and repaving with the material to the depths lines and grades shown on the Plans Recycling of the existing pavement shall be performed in a manner that does not disturb the underlying materials. . MATERIALS .
The emulsified asphalt for Cold Mixed Recycled Bituminous Pavement shall meet the requirements of Section andor be as recommended by the Contractor as a result of Subsection .
and as approved by the Engineer .
The grade and initial application rate based on emulsion ratedensity curves AASHTO T Modified blows developed from test section material shall be recommended by the Contractor and accepted by the Engineer .
The value for the emulsion rate shall be based on the optimum for achieving maximum density .
The exact application rate may be varied by the Contractor as required by existing pavement conditions and approved by the Engineer .
The Cold Mixed Recycled Bituminous Pavement shall meet the gradation requirements in Table .A for extracted aggregate taken from the pulverized material .
TABLE .A EXTRACTED AGGREGATE GRADATION REQUIREMENTS Sieve Designation Percentage by Mass Weight Passing Square Mesh Sieves inch .
mm inch .
mm No. . mm No. . mm .
EQUIPMENT .
The Contractor shall furnish a selfpropelled machine capable of planing the existing bituminous pavement to the depth shown on the Plans in one pass .
The machine shall be equipped with standard automatic depth controls and must maintain a constant cutting depth and width .
The machine shall be capable of producing the proper size material required or additional screening andor crushing will be required .
Oversized particles shall be reduced to the proper size by crushing .
Mixing equipment shall be provided which is capable of mixing the sized bituminous material and liquid binder into a homogeneous mixture .
The mixing equipment shall be equipped with weighing and metering devices which assure that the correct amount of sized material and proper amount of emulsion are introduced into the Cold Mixed Recycled Bituminous mixture .
The method of depositing the mixed material shall be such that segregation does not occur .
Placing of the Cold Mixed Recycled Bituminous Pavement shall be accomplished with a selfpropelled bituminous paver .
The Cold Mixed Recycled Bituminous material shall be spread without segregation to the lines and grades shown on the Plans or as directed by the Engineer .
If a pickup machine is used to feed a windrow of the bituminous material into the paver hopper the pickup machine shall be capable of picking up the entire windrow down to the underlying materials .
The number mass and type of rollers shall be sufficient to obtain the required uniform density through the full depth while the mixture is in a workable condition .
A rubbertire roller shall perform the initial rolling after the emulsion initially breaks as indicated by the materials color changing from brown to black . .
WEATHER AND SEASONAL LIMITATIONS .
Recycling operations shall not be performed when either the ambient air temperature or the surface temperature of the pavement to be recycled is below F. Recycling operations shall also not be performed when the weather is foggy or rainy or when weather conditions or predicted weather conditions are such that proper mixing spreading and compacting of the recycled material can not be accomplished .
When it is in the public interest for servicing traffic the Construction Engineer may adjust the ambient air andor pavement temperature requirements or extend the dates of the recycling season. . MOISTURE .
The Contractor may add under positive control a small amount of water to the planed material to facilitate uniform mixing with the emulsion .
The water may be added prior to the mixing phase of the operation .
The water shall be added carefully so as not to cause any adverse effects. . COMPACTION .
Compaction shall be performed while the emulsion is in a workable state .
The Cold Mixed Recycled Bituminous Pavement material shall be finished within a grade tolerance of inch provided that this deviation is not maintained for a distance longer than feet and provided that the required crown or superelevation is maintained .
The Cold Mixed Recycled Bituminous Pavement shall be compacted to a minimum of of the target density approved by the Engineer in accordance with the requirements of Subsection .. . CURING AND STABILITY .
The Cold Mixed Recycled Bituminous Pavement may be opened to traffic as approved by the Engineer .
Hot mixed bituminous concrete pavements shall not be placed until the Cold Mixed Recycled Bituminous Pavement material has been allowed to cure and the free moisture content is reduced to a maximum of ..
The required density shall be achieved and maintained until a hot mixed bituminous concrete pavement has been placed .
Any additional compactive effort or repair of imperfections in the Cold Mixed Recycled Bituminous material shall be performed as directed by the Engineer at no additional compensation to the Contractor. . CONTROL SECTION .
The Contractor shall be responsible for performing all Process Control and Quality Control sampling and testing .
Process Control sampling and testing shall involve taking a set of four representative samples from the test section .
The samples may be taken either before or after the cold recycling process .
The four samples shall be combined to represent a uniform sample for determining maximum density .
The material used including that used for the Marshall series to determine the optimum emulsion rate shall be in a processed pulverized state replicating the state which the material will be in immediately prior to the point when the emulsified asphalt is introduced during the recycling process .
The Contractor shall perform the Marshall Design series tests to determine the maximum density .
A maximum density shall be obtained by performing a series of tests using the blow Marshall Design method AASHTO T Modified .
The series of Marshall tests shall be prepared using a minimum of five different percentages of emulsion .
The maximum density obtained from these tests shall be used as the recommended target density to be approved by the Engineer The Contractor shall perform all tests necessary to verify that the target density is achieved and maintained prior to placement of a hot bituminous overlay .
The necessity for additional testing will be determined by the Engineer .
The Contractor shall provide the Engineer with the original copies of all Marshall Design series Process Control and Quality Control test results .
The Contractor shall construct a control section to assure the Engineer that the Contractors equipment and procedure are suitable for the work specified and are capable in achieving the density specified .
If the control section does not meet the requirements of this Specification or the density achieved does not appear suitable the Contractor shall modify their procedure and either construct another control section or reconstruct the original until acceptable results are obtained .
The suitability of results will be determined by the Engineer .
The length of the control section shall be to feet .
No further recycling shall be performed on the Project until all aspects of the test section are approved by the Engineer . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT .
The quantity of Cold Mixed Recycled Bituminous Pavement to be measured for payment will be the number of square yards of existing pavement which has been recycled in an acceptable manner as determined by actual surface measurements of the lengths and widths of the recycled area as shown on the Plans or as directed by the Engineer .
No additional compensation will be made for overlapping areas .
The quantity of Emulsified Asphalt Cold Mix to be measured for payment will be the number of hundredweight CWT used in the complete and accepted work . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT .
The accepted quantity of Cold Mixed Recycled Bituminous Pavement will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per square yard .
Payment will be full compensation for performing the work specified and for furnishing all labor materials tools equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
The accepted quantity of Emulsified Asphalt Cold Mix will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per hundredweight CWT for the specified material applied .
Payment will be full compensation for furnishing transporting and placing the material and for furnishing all materials labor tools equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Cold Mixed Recycled Bituminous Pavement Square Yard .
Emulsified Asphalt Cold Mix CWT SECTION BITUMINOUS CRACK SEALING .
DESCRIPTION .
This work shall consist of furnishing and placing cracksealing material in the cracks of existing bituminous concrete pavement. . MATERIALS .
Materials shall meet the requirements of the following Subsections Joint Sealer Hot Poured .a The Contractor shall provide the Engineer with a copy of the material manufacturers recommendations pertaining to heating application and reheating prior to the beginning of operations or the changing of materials. . EQUIPMENT .
Equipment shall meet the approval of the Engineer and shall always be maintained in working condition .
a Air Compressor .
Air compressors shall be portable and capable of furnishing at least .
cubic yards of air per minute with a minimum pressure of psi at the nozzle .
The compressor shall be equipped with traps that will maintain the compressed air free of any oil or water .
b Hand Tools .
Hand tools shall consist of brooms shovels metal bars with chiselshaped ends squeegees and any other tools which may be required to accomplish the work .
c Melting Kettle .
The melting kettle shall be a double boiler indirectfired portable type .
The space between the inner and outer shells shall be filled with a suitable heat transfer oil or substitute having a flash point of not less than F. The kettle shall be equipped with a satisfactory means of agitating the joint sealer .
This may be accomplished by continuous stirring with mechanically operated paddles andor by a continuous circulating gear pump attached to the heating unit .
The melting kettle shall be equipped with a thermostatic control calibrated between F and F. The kettle shall be mounted on rubber tires and be equipped with a metal shield beneath the firebox to protect the pavement .
d Application Wand .
The application wand shall apply a controlled flow of material via an insulated or heated hose .
The nozzle shall distribute the material as called for on the Plans or this Specification .
A pressure regulator shall be provided to regulate pressure at the nozzle .
A bypass line into the holding tank is required for use when the nozzle is shut off .
e Router .
Equipment for preparing cracks shall be a rotaryimpact type cutter or a diamondblade crack saw which will provide a reservoir of specified dimensions .
f HotAir Lance .
Equipment for blowing clean and drying cracks and joints shall be a propane gas and compressed air burner ATAFA unit or approved equivalent operating at a temperature of F and at a velocity of feet per second . .
TEMPERATURE LIMITATIONS .
The ambient air temperature shall be in the range of F to F and the pavement temperature shall be in the range of F to F. When it is in the public interest the Construction Engineer may adjust the specified ambient air andor pavement temperature requirements . .
PREPARATION .
a General .
Care must be taken in the preparation of all cracks to receive sealant material .
All cracks must be clean dry and heated to ensure optimal bonding of the sealant material to the existing pavement .
b Bituminous Crack Sealing .
All routed cracks shall be filled with sealant in the same work day as directed by the Engineer .
Cracks of inch to inch in width shall be shaped into a square crosssection of approximately inch in width by inch in depth using a router or crack saw .
All cracks to be sealed shall be routed or sawcut .
All material removed from the cracks shall be immediately removed from the pavement .
Cracks greater than inch in width shall only be prepared and sealed at the direction of the Engineer .
Following crack routing or sawcutting the entire pavement area shall be cleaned using a power broom or blower device .
Special care must be exercised in urban areas to ensure that the pavement area is cleaned after the crack sealing operation and to minimize the creation of dust in the cleaning process .
Immediately prior to the application of the sealer material all cracks shall be cleared of loose pavement vegetation sand dust and any other debris using the hotair lance .
The full length of the cracks shall be heated with the hotair lance to improve bonding of the sealant and pavement .
Care shall be taken not to burn or char the pavement .
Any charred pavement shall be cut out and removed and the crack prepared and resealed .
Areas of high density cracking indicating a structural failure should not be prepared for sealing as directed by the Engineer .
c Bituminous Crack Sealing Blow and Go Method .
Bituminous Crack Sealing Blow and Go Method shall be performed in accordance with Subsection .b with the exception that no routing or sawcutting will be required prior to cleaning and sealing the crack . .
PLACING OF SEALER .
The joint sealer material shall be heated and applied at the temperature specified by the manufacturer and approved by the Engineer .
Any material that has been heated above the manufacturers Specification shall not be used .
Material that is reheated or held at temperature for an extended period of time may be used as allowed by the manufacturers Specification and approved by the Engineer .
The Contractor shall provide the Engineer with a suitable device for verifying the sealant temperature in the kettle and at the application site .
The sealant application temperature shall not be lowered below the manufacturers recommended temperature to address pooling problems at the end of the rout .
This problem shall be addressed by using sealant material with appropriate flow characteristics to prevent pooling .
All routed cracks shall be fully filled with joint sealer material .
A strikeoff device may be used to facilitate placement of the material provided it has a maximum width of inches .
The joint sealer material should be struck off such that only a thin film band inch or less is left on the pavement .
Optimally the pavement aggregate should be visible through the thin film band .
Any over application or spills are to be removed to the satisfaction of the Engineer .
Any sealed areas with damaged or contaminated sealer or visible voids are to be removed prepared and resealed .
Any filled areas that have sunk below the surface more than inch shall be repaired by applying additional material .
The sealant material shall be applied while the cracks or joints are still hot from the hotair lance preparation .
Any loose material on the surface or in the crack which may contaminate the joint sealer or impede bonding of the sealant to the pavement is to be removed by hand tools prior to crack sealing .
No crack sealing material shall be applied in a crack that is wet or where frost snow or ice is present .
No vehicles or equipment should be allowed on the newly placed sealant material until it has cooled as specified by the manufacturer .
If the pavement must be reopened to traffic prior to air cooling the cooling process may be accelerated with water or other coolant as specified by the manufacturer and approved by the Engineer .
As a last resort sealant may be protected against tire pickup by dusting with a fine sand mineral dust or similar material as approved by the Engineer .
Any procedure used to accelerate cooling time must be approved by the Engineer and follow the manufacturers application Specifications .
Costs for all material and labor for dusting or cooling shall not be paid for directly but shall be considered incidental to Bituminous Crack Sealing . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT .
The quantities of Bituminous Crack Sealing and Bituminous Crack Sealing Blow and Go Method to be measured for payment will be the number of pounds of joint sealer complete and inplace in the accepted work . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT .
The accepted quantities of Bituminous Crack Sealing and Bituminous Crack Sealing Blow and Go Method will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per pound .
Payment shall be full compensation for handling and placing the sealant material including the cleaning and preparation of cracks the removal and disposal of all bituminous grindings and for furnishing all labor materials tools equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Bituminous Crack Sealing Pound .
Bituminous Crack Sealing Blow and Go Method Pound SECTION THIS SECTION RESERVED This Page Intentionally Left Blank DIVISION STRUCTURES SECTION PERFORMANCE BASED STRUCTURAL CONCRETE .
DESCRIPTION .
This work shall consist of designing furnishing and placing high performance Portland cement concrete for structures and incidental construction .
The Portland cement concrete may consist of a homogeneous mixture of cement fine aggregate coarse aggregate water admixtures and pozzolans proportioned and mixed according to these Specifications. . MATERIALS .
Materials shall meet the requirements of the following Subsections Portland Cement .
PortlandPozzolan Cement .
Portland BlastFurnace Slag Cement .
Ternary Blended Cement .
Fine Aggregate for Concrete .
Coarse Aggregate for Concrete .
Lightweight Coarse Aggregate for Structural Concrete .
Preformed Joint Filler Cork and AsphaltTreated Felt .
Polyvinyl Chloride PVC Waterstop .
Concrete Bonding Systems .
StayinPlace Corrugated Metal Forms for Superstructure Slabs .
Epoxy Bonding Compound .
Concrete Curing Materials .
AirEntraining Admixtures .b Retarding Admixtures .c WaterReducing Admixtures .e WaterReducing and Retarding Admixtures .f WaterReducing High Range Admixtures .g WaterReducing High Range and Retarding Admixtures .h Accelerating Admixtures .i WaterReducing and Accelerating Admixtures .j Specific Performance Admixtures .k Mineral Admixtures .
Silica Fume .b Ground Granulated BlastFurnace Slag GGBFS .c Polystyrene Insulation Board .
Blanket Insulation Material .
Pipe Insulation .
Water .
The coarse aggregate for superstructure shall be conditioned so that the total moisture percentage shall be the absorption percentage plus at a minimum .
free moisture for the aggregate .
Precast concrete stayinplace forms prestressed deck panels shall conform to Section .
All hardened concrete surfaces to have plastic concrete placed against it will be saturated with water and excess water shall be removed just prior to plastic concrete contacting it . .
CLASSIFICATION AND PROPORTIONING .
The following classes of concrete shown in Table .A are included in these Specifications and shall be used as shown on the Plans .
TABLE .A HIGH PERFORMANCE CONCRETE HPC CLASSES AND PROPERTIES HPC Class Air Content percent SlumpSpread Range in .
Max .
Slump in .
Free Shrinkage AASHTO T Max .
WCM Ratio Day Compressive Strength psi Day Surface Resistivity Permeability PCD .
. . . . Low PCS .
. . . . Low SCC . . TBD Low The listed day compressive strength is the minimum strength required to meet the design intent .
The maximum watercementitious material WCM ratio shall be .
with a maximum water content of lbsyd .
The acceptable WCM range of .
added to the target WCM shall not exceed the specified maximum water content or ratio .
The permeability may be tested prior to days but results must still be categorized as Low or Very Low according to the requirements of AASHTO T Table .
The mix shall have a target slumpspread that will allow enough workability to be placed and finished per Contract requirements .
The slumpspread shall be maintained within the specified range based on the target slumpspread from the approved mix design .
The mix shall not exhibit segregation at the slumpspread at which it is being used .
If the mix does exhibit segregation or exceeds the maximum slumpspread or is outside of the target slumpspread range the load shall be rejected and subsequent loads shall be tested until the mix meets the allowable limits .
The Contractor shall determine the minimum and maximum spread range based on trial tests prior to submitting the mix for approval .
The Engineer may perform a JRing test at the time of testing if blocking is a concern .
When HPC Class PCD is used for bridge deck placement the Contractor may pick a new slumpspread target within the accepted mix tolerance range .
The slumpspread range for HPC Class PCD when used for bridge deck placement shall be .
inches from the new chosen target or the original target .
At no time shall the new slumpspread target or range exceed the minimum or maximum values for the original slumpspread range of the accepted mix design .
PCD Performance Concrete Deck PCS Performance Concrete Substructure SCC Self Consolidating Concrete If a nominal maximum aggregate size is not specified the Contractor shall determine the nominal maximum aggregate size using guidance from ACI .
to do so .
In no case will the maximum aggregate size exceed of the narrowest dimension between sides of the forms the depth of slabs nor of the minimum clear spacing between individual reinforcing bars bundles of bars or pretensioning strands unless approved by the Engineer .
The Contractor may use industry methods to develop gradations not specified in Section in order to create better optimized gradations to satisfy the required concrete performance characteristics .
If the Contractor is using a combined gradation they shall provide the method or methods of how they will monitor gradation the limits of the gradation ranges and the frequency of monitoring .
Lightweight fine aggregate may be used up to by volume replacement for normal weight sand .
The gradation of the lightweight fine aggregate shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M . The lightweight fine aggregate shall be conditioned for enough time to fully saturate the material .
The stockpile shall be constructed so that it contains uniform moisture content throughout the pile .
The stockpile will be allowed to drain to hours immediately prior to use unless an alternate procedure is approved by the Structural Concrete Engineer .
The Contractor shall state the method duration and procedure used to confirm that the material is at or above its saturated surface dry SSD value by weight throughout the pile .
The mix may contain a shrinkage compensating admixture conforming to the requirements of AASHTO M M or ASTM C C M. The use of chlorides or admixtures containing chlorides is prohibited .
All admixtures will be considered incidental to the work and included in the Contract Unit Price of the concrete .
The concrete materials may be proportioned using the absolute volumes method in accordance with the specified requirements .
The volumetric proportioning method such as that outlined in ACI .
Standard Practice for Selecting Proportions for Normal Heavyweight and Mass Concrete or other approved volumetric proportioning methods shall be employed in the mix design .
A minimum of Calendar Days prior to placement of the trial pour or prior to the preplacement meeting if the trial pour is waived by the Engineer the Contractor shall submit for approval the mix design for the class of concrete specified .
The mix designs shall be submitted to the Structural Concrete Engineer at the Agencys Materials Section Central Laboratory .
No class of concrete shall be placed on a Project including the trial pour until the mix design is approved .
a The mix design must contain the following information Class of Concrete .
Type of mix conventional or SelfConsolidating Concrete SCC .
Specify if saturated surface dry or dry weights .
Aggregates Types sources specific gravities and absorption values .
Specified day design compressive strength psi .
Cementitious content and the amount of each pounds per cubic yard .
Specified air content and range percent .
Specified surface resistivity value .
Slump target and range for conventional concrete inches .
Spread minimum and maximum for SCC .
Watercementitious materials WCM ratio target value .
Volumetric quantities of each material in the mix design .
Design unit weight of the mix .
Chemical Admixtures Types brand names and dosages .
Concrete test mix or mixes shall be used to obtain the test results where applicable .
b The following test results shall accompany the mix design The concrete test mix slump for conventional concrete shall be measured based on the requirements of AASHTO T MT and shall be within inch to .
inches of the target slump value as stated on the mix design .
The spread range for SCC will be established for the initial submittal of mix for approval .
The JRing Test will be conducted per the requirements of ASTM C C M. The upper and lower ranges of the spread shall not have a difference of greater than inches between the JRing and spread test and a Visual Stability Index VSI not greater than .
The spread test ASTM C C M will be done for the production mix only unless the Engineer requests that JRing testing is to be done .
The air content shall be measured based on the requirements of AASHTO T and shall be within .
to of the specified air content value .
For conventional mixes the WCM ratio of the concrete test mix shall be .
above the stated target value on the mix design .
At no time shall the maximum WCM ratio or maximum water content be exceeded .
For SCC mixes the WCM ratio of the concrete test mix shall be tested at the maximum WCM ratio the Contractor would use for the SCC mix .
The concretes cylinder compressive strength shall be measured based on the requirements of AASTO T for and day standard cured cylinders .
The concretes free shrinkage rate shall be tested per the requirements of AASHTO T Length Change of Hardened Hydraulic Cement Mortar and Concrete .
The crosssection of the prism shall be inches .
Procedure .. of AASHTO T shall be followed for storage and measurements and all specified test age results shall be submitted .
Specimen Testing may be terminated after days of drying .
Testing shall be performed by an independent AMRL qualified Laboratory accredited in the specific test method .
The mix shall be tested for scaling resistance based on the requirements of ASTM C C M Standard Test Method for Scaling Resistance of Concrete Surfaces Exposed to Deicing Chemicals .
The visual rating shall not exceed .
The AlkaliSilica Reactivity ASR of each type of aggregate shall be measured separately based on the requirements of AASHTO T Accelerated Detection of Potentially Deleterious Expansion of Mortar Bars Due to AlkaliSilica Reaction .
If one or more of the aggregates exceeds .
expansion then the aggregate shall be tested again according to the requirements of ASTM C . The Contractor may elect to go directly to ASTM C testing if they suspect that the aggregate may exceed the .
expansion if tested by AASHTO T . Testing shall be performed by an independent AMRL qualified Laboratory accredited in the specific test method .
The Surface Resistivity of the test mix shall be measured at and days based on the requirements of AASHTO T Surface Resistivity Indication of Concretes Ability to Resist Chloride Ion Penetration .
All wet testing will have been done by personnel with current ACI Concrete Field Testing Technician Grade I certifications .
All other tests shall be performed by a Laboratory that is certified in the particular test method or as allowed by the Engineer .
After the mix design furnished by the Contractor has been reviewed and approved by the Structural Concrete Engineer no new materials shall be incorporated .
In no case shall concrete from more than one mix design be permitted to be used during the same pour without prior written approval of the Engineer .
Mix design approvals will be valid for a month period .
The approved mix design will be allowed a two consecutive year reapproval if no material proportioning or material sources have changed from the previous years approved mix design and the mix design is submitted with updated aggregate properties and volumes adjusted accordingly .
The aggregate properties shall be tested within Calendar Days of the mix design submission .
The properties to be tested are but are not limited to specific gravity unit weight and absorption .
The mix design shall be accompanied by the previously completed and accepted test mix data and any applicable updated test information .
The concrete shall have air content by volume as specified .
The entrained air shall be obtained using an approved admixture. . BATCHING .
Measuring and batching of materials shall be done at an approved batch plant .
Batch plants shall have an inspection completed prior to the first concrete placement on an Agency Project if it has been longer than calendar months from the last inspection .
Request for inspection and required documentation must be received by the Material Section a minimum of Calendar Days prior to the date of the requested inspection .
All deficiencies shall be corrected and verified a minimum of Calendar Days prior to the first concrete placement for any Agency Project .
The batch plant shall meet the requirements of AASHTO M except as modified in these Specifications and shall always be maintained in good repair .
The batch plant shall be subject to periodic inspections by Authorized Representatives of the Agency .
The batch plant shall have approved methods of storing measuring and dispensing approved mineral admixtures .
All new or relocated concrete batch plants offered for Agency approval shall be equipped for semiautomatic batching and proportioning of all cementitious material aggregates water and for the automatic insertion of admixtures .
The plants shall be equipped to automatically and accurately record in English units the quantity of all aggregates cementitious material and the water incorporated into each batch and shall identify and record the addition of the required admixtures .
Proper facilities shall be provided for the Engineer to inspect ingredients and processes used in the batching and delivery of the concrete .
The Contractor shall without charge afford the Engineer all reasonable facilities for securing samples to determine whether the concrete is being furnished in accordance with these Specifications .
In the batch room area the producer shall provide the Inspector with a inch inch horizontal working surface at a sufficient working height with a seat and an adequate view of the batching controls display and power supply .
The Contractor shall give the Engineer hour notice of intent to place concrete so that arrangements can be made for Laboratory inspection and control .
Failure to give notice which causes postponement of placing operations shall not be reason for determining extension of Contract time per the requirements of Subsection .. a Semiautomatic Batch Plants .
When actuated by a starting mechanism the semiautomatic batch controller shall start the weighing operation of the materials and stop the flow automatically when the designated weight has been reached .
It shall be interlocked to ensure that the discharge mechanism can not be opened until the weight is within the tolerance specified in Subsection .d .
Water and admixtures may be batched in a weigh batcher or by volume in a volumetric device .
When actuated volumetric controls shall start the measuring operation and stop the flow automatically when the designated volume has been reached .
b Testing Laboratory .
The Contractor shall provide a weatherproof building or room at the plant site for the use of Agency personnel as a testing Laboratory .
The Contractor shall attain and maintain a qualified Laboratory status in accordance with the current edition of the Agencys Qualified Laboratory Program .
Failure to comply with this program may result in suspension or revocation of acceptance testing at the facility .
The testing Laboratory shall have a minimum gross internal area of square feet with a layout providing a minimum internal width of feet in which to house and use the equipment specified .
Should the Contractor elect to provide additional equipment relevant to testing of Portland cement concrete and materials the gross inside floor area of the Laboratory shall be increased in proportion to the area required to house and operate the additional equipment .
If the additional equipment is to be operated on a bench the length of bench sections shall also be proportionally increased .
Adequate ventilation lighting heating and any necessary electrical or gas connections shall be provided .
Proper sanitary toilet facilities with a lavatory shall be available for use by Agency personnel at the plant site .
Dedicated private telephone and internet services shall be provided to the Laboratory .
The internet connection shall have a minimum download capacity of Mbps megabits per second without utilizing compression algorithms and the bandwidth speed shall be verified using an online speed test .
The Laboratory shall be equipped with the following items and equipment Standard office desk with lockable drawers or a separate lockable twodrawer file cabinet and chair VTrans Qualified Laboratory Binder with producer equipment calibration data Set of bench sections at least feet wide providing a minimum of square feet of working area with undercounter shelving Standard laboratory stool Fully automatic electronic calculator with eight digit capacity Standard laboratory sink and faucet provided with an adequate supply of water meeting the requirements of Subsection ..
The sink shall drain to the outside of the Laboratory Bench brush Floor brush Motorized inch sieve shaker with an adjustable timer .
The shakers operation shall be conducted by means of lateral and vertical motion of the sieve accompanied by jarring action with the following inch diameter sieves inch .
mm No. . mm No. . mm No. . mm No. . mm No. . mm No. . mm plus pan and cover .
Mechanical aggregate shaker with an adjustable timer a cubic foot capacity together with the following screens inch .
mm inch .
mm inch .
mm inch .
mm inch .
mm inch .
mm inch .
mm No. . mm No. . mm No. . mm and pan .
The aggregate shaker may be placed in a separate enclosed area or be shielded for dust and sound control .
When the aggregate shaker is placed in a separate enclosed area there shall be a minimum of feet of clear space measured from the front frame of the aggregate shaker outward as well as a bench section measuring approximately inches high inches deep and inches long located adjacent to the aggregate shaker .
The area shall be well lit and ventilated .
Square pointed shovel Five gallon plastic buckets with handles Electronic balance with a minimum capacity of pounds and accurate to .
pounds .
If separate fine and coarse aggregate scales are to be used the fine aggregate scale shall meet the requirements of AASHTO M Table Class G with a minimum capacity of .
pounds and readable to .
pounds .
The coarse aggregate scale shall meet the requirements of AASHTO M Table Class G with a minimum capacity of pounds and readable to .
pounds .
Set of standard masses weights to use for verifying the accuracy of the electronic balance Doubleburner hot plates with variable temperature controls Metal pans with a nominal size of inches inches inches Metal pans with a nominal size of inches inches inches Sample splitter with a inch chute inch blunted trowel foot foot minimum heavy canvas for quartering samples Brass wirebristle brush Pair of heatresistant gloves F shortcontact inch soft bristle paint brushes Acceptable substitutes for these items and equipment may be made with the approval of the Structural Concrete Engineer .
Batching operations shall not begin until the testing Laboratory has been approved as being in compliance with these Specifications and all equipment and equipment calibration requirements of the current VTrans Quality Assurance Program and Qualified Laboratory Program documents .
Removal of any equipment except with written request and written approval of the Structural Concrete Engineer will revoke any prior approvals andor qualifications and require the termination of batching operations .
The building or room designated as a testing Laboratory shall be maintained in a clean condition by the producer and kept free of all articles not necessary for the testing of materials .
Cleaning supplies shall be furnished by the Contractor .
c Bins and Scales .
The batch plant shall include bins weighing hoppers and scales with adequate separate compartments for fine aggregate and for each required separate size of coarse aggregate .
If cement is used in bulk a bin hopper and scale for cement shall be included .
Each compartment shall be designed to discharge efficiently and freely into the weighing hopper or hoppers .
Means of control shall be provided so that when required the material may be added slowly in minute quantities and shut off with precision .
Hoppers shall be constructed to eliminate accumulations of tare materials and to discharge fully without jarring the scales .
Partitions between compartments shall be configured to prevent spilling under any working condition .
All batch plant structures shall be properly leveled and maintained in that condition within the tolerance required by the design of the weighing mechanism .
The scales for determining the mass weight of aggregate water and cementitious material shall be comprised of a suitable system of levers or load cells .
The levers or load cells will determine the mass weight consistently within .
under operating conditions with loads indicated either by means of a beam with balance indicator a fullreading dial or a digital readout or display .
Adequate means for checking the accuracy of the scales shall be provided by the Contractor either using pound weights or by other methods approved by the Structural Concrete Engineer .
Weights shall be certified annually by the Division of Weights and Measures of the Vermont Agency of Agriculture Food and Markets .
All exposed fulcrums clevises and similar working parts of scales shall be kept clean .
When beamtype scales are used provision shall be made for indicating to the operator that the required load in the weighing hopper is being approached .
Poises shall be designed to be locked in any position to prevent unauthorized change of position .
All measuring and weighing indicating devices shall be in full view of the operator while charging the hopper and the operator shall have convenient access to all controls .
The scales shall be serviced and their accuracy verified annually by a hopperscale service person licensed by the Division of Weights and Measures .
For Vermont plants an Inspector representing the Division of Weights and Measures shall witness all testing conducted by the service person and will attach a seal to each hopper scale provided it meets the current Specifications tolerances and regulations adopted by the Division of Weights and Measures .
Standard test weights used to determine the accuracy of hopper scales shall be certified yearly by the Division of Weights and Measures in accordance with their established standards .
The readymixed concrete producer shall hire a licensed hopper scale service person for annual checking and service of scales .
In addition Vermont producers shall schedule an inspection with the Division of Weights and Measures between February th and April th of each year .
After April th Vermont plants without current seals affixed to the hopper scales will not be permitted to supply concrete to Agency Projects unless otherwise directed by the Engineer or until the seals are affixed .
Outofstate concrete producers shall observe all annual hopper scale weighing and seal requirements of their respective states .
d Production Tolerances for Batching .
For weighed ingredients the accuracy of batching is determined by a comparison between the desired weight and the actual scale reading .
For volumetric measurement of water and admixtures accuracy is determined by checking the quantity either by weight on a scale or by volume in a calibrated container .
Admixturedispensing systems shall at a minimum be annually calibrated by an admixture distributor representative .
The admixture distributor representative shall check at least two volumes with a check done at approximately of the minimum and at of the maximum manufacturers recommended dosage range or other targets as approved by the Structural Concrete Engineer .
Batching shall be conducted to accurately measure the desired quantities of materials within the tolerances specified in Table .A .
TABLE .A CONCRETE PRODUCTION TOLERANCES FOR BATCHING Material Tolerance Cement Water Aggregates Chemical admixtures Mineral admixtures e Storage and Proportioning of Materials .
Portland Cement .
Either sacked or bulk cement may be used .
No fraction of a sack of cement shall be used in a batch of concrete unless the cement is weighed .
All bulk cement shall be weighed on an approved weighing device .
The bulk cement weighing hopper shall be properly sealed and vented to preclude dusting during operation .
Facilities shall be provided for the sampling of cement at the batch plant either from the storage silo or from the weighing hopper .
The sampling device shall provide a sample that represents the true nature of the material being used .
This device shall be a permanent installation located to allow for safe and easy access .
Water .
Water may be measured either by volume or by weight .
When measurement is by meter the water meter shall be so located that the measurements will not be affected by variable pressures and temperatures in the water supply line .
Measuring tanks shall be equipped with an outside tap and valve to provide for checking the setting unless other means are provided for readily and accurately determining the amount of water in the tanks .
All water metering methods shall be verified and calibrated on an annual basis or at any time there is a question of accuracy .
All water added to the concrete at any point shall be through an approved metering method .
Aggregates .
Aggregate stockpiles shall be formed on hard welldrained areas that prevent contamination from underlying material and accumulation of excessive moisture .
Aggregates from different sources or of different gradations shall not be stockpiled together .
Only rubbertired equipment shall be permitted to operate on aggregate stockpiles .
Stockpiles shall be constructed as follows a .
If the stockpile is to be made using mechanical equipment front end loader clam bucket rock ladder radial stacker or other approved equipment the stockpile shall be made in such a manner that segregation is kept to a minimum .
b .
If the stockpile is to be made by dumping from trucks in multiple layers each layer shall be approximately feet in depth .
Each layer shall be completely in place before commencing the next layer .
Care shall be taken that successive layers do not cone down over the previous layer .
c. No equipment shall be used to haul aggregate over the stockpiled material except to deposit the material for the layer being placed .
It shall be the responsibility of the Contractor to ensure that the aggregate is kept free from deleterious material or degradation .
Stockpiles shall be maintained in such a manner that twice the anticipated aggregate requirement for any Agency Project placements will be on hand and available for sampling and testing at least hours before mixing operations for the placements are scheduled to begin .
The Engineer may modify this requirement when special aggregates are required .
Aggregates shall be handled from stockpiles or other sources to the batch plant in such a manner as to secure a uniform grading of the material .
Aggregates that have become segregated or mixed with earth or foreign material shall not be used .
All aggregates except lightweight coarse aggregate produced or handled by hydraulic methods and washed aggregates shall be stockpiled or binned for draining at least hours before being batched .
In case the aggregates have a high or nonuniform moisture content a storage or stockpile period longer than hours may be required by the Engineer .
Stockpiles being watered per the Specifications or allowed through producer QC procedures shall be watered for a sufficient time to ensure consistent moisture throughout the stockpile .
Aggregate stockpiles being watered shall be loaded in the bin within hour of being batched .
The Contractor shall conduct moisture content tests within .
hours of the anticipated concrete batching time .
If there is a visual difference in aggregate moisture appearance aggregate moisture content will be tested again and new moisture test results shall be obtained and used as soon as possible .
Material that has been stored in a storage bin for more than hours shall be retested for moisture content .
A minimum of one cubic yard of aggregate will be removed from the bottom of the storage bin .
A minimum of one cubic yard of aggregate will then be removed and a moisture content sample taken .
Plants that employ moisture probes shall have them calibrated and verified a minimum of hours prior to batching or as directed by the Structural Concrete Engineer .
The procedure for checking the meter will be to run aggregate over the probe and then collecting a portion of the aggregate on which to perform a moisture content test .
If the difference between the meter and the tested moisture content is greater than .
then the meter must be calibrated .
d. Lightweight coarse aggregate stockpiles shall be presoaked for a minimum period of time to ensure that the aggregate is completely saturated surface dry or greater immediately prior to use as indicated by moisture testing .
Soaking shall be accomplished by continuous sprinkling or other suitable means that will provide a uniform moisture content throughout the stockpile .
The stockpile shall be allowed to drain for to hours immediately prior to use .
Admixtures .
The Contractor shall follow an approved procedure for adding the necessary amounts of admixtures to each batch .
Admixtures shall be dispensed in such a manner that will ensure uniform distribution of the material throughout the batch within the required mixing period .
Except as specified herein all admixtures shall be added to the batch at the plant unless otherwise authorized by the Structural Concrete Engineer .
Chemical admixture containers metering equipment and scales shall be calibrated annually by a qualified admixture distributor representative .
Admixture calibration and verification shall be done at of the high at approximately the middle and at of the low recommended ranges for the admixture being dispensed by the system .
The calibration and verification shall be done in the presence of an Agency representative when requested by the Agency .
All dispensers shall include visual inspection aids such as graduated transparent cylinders .
A separate dispenser shall be provided for each liquid admixture .
If the dispensing system does not provide visual inspection aids then periodic verification tests shall be done at a frequency satisfactory to the Structural Concrete Engineer .
Calibration and verification records shall be kept at the production facility for a minimum of one year .
The producer shall do the calibration and verification of the metering systems when requested .
Storage and dispensing systems for liquid admixtures shall be equipped to allow thorough circulation andor agitation of all liquid in the system .
This shall be required prior to the first batching of concrete for Agency Projects in any calendar year and periodically thereafter at intervals not to exceed Calendar Days for the duration of the period the plant is supplying concrete for Agency Projects .
If the plant has received a delivery of at least of the volume of the storage container this will be considered as a method of circulation or agitation .
If the circulation method is used the admixture shall be circulated until a complete exchange of admixture is achieved .
If an agitation method is used the method shall be subject to approval by the Structural Concrete Engineer .
If an admixture does not need agitation then the admixture manufacturer shall submit in writing stating this annually .
Storage and dispensing systems for liquid admixtures shall be maintained within the manufacturers stated temperature and environmental conditions .
It shall be the responsibility of the Contractor to use the quantity of Agencyapproved admixtures needed to obtain concrete meeting the requirements of the Contract .
All admixtures will be approved by the Structural Concrete Engineer prior to incorporation into the mix .
a. AirEntraining Admixture .
Airentraining admixture shall be used as required to obtain the specified air content .
b. WaterReducing Retarding and WaterReducing and Retarding Admixtures Accelerators and Specialty Admixtures .
Dosages shall be in the recommended range as stated by the Manufacturer unless otherwise approved by the Manufacturer .
Fly Ash or GGBFS .
Fly Ash or Ground Granulated BlastFurnace Slag GGBFS shall be stored at the batch plant in separate storage or holding bins or other approved holding containers and shall be protected from rain and moisture. . MIXING AND DELIVERY .
a General .
Concrete may be mixed at the site of construction at a central point or wholly or in part in transit mixers .
The production of concrete shall meet the requirements of AASHTO M with the following additional requirements All concrete shall reach its final position in the forms no more than .
hours after the cement has been added to the water .
When the ambient air temperature is F or above the elapsed time may be reduced as necessary as directed by the Engineer or in accordance with the requirements of Subsection .a .
If in the opinion of the Engineer the concrete visual characteristics appear to be noticeably different from the last acceptance test or previous concrete for that pour the Engineer may direct the Contractor to perform QC tests to confirm the concrete conforms with the Specifications .
Authorization by Field Inspection personnel must be obtained prior to the addition of water or admixtures at the Project site .
If water is added in excess of the specified maximum WCM ratio amount at time of placement the concrete shall not be used .
Each load of concrete delivered at the job site shall be accompanied by a State of Vermont Batch Slip signed by the authorized Agency representative if present at the plant .
The Contractor shall provide direct communication service from the site of the work to the batch plant that shall always be available to the Engineer during concrete operations .
The cost of this service will be considered incidental to the work .
When use of a WaterReducing High Range Admixture or WaterReducing High Range and Retarding Admixture is specified for deck concrete the Contractor shall submit for the Engineers approval information about the admixture manufacturer the admixture addition rate and when the admixture is to be added to the mixture i.e .
at the plant on Project or a combination thereof .
To obtain the required concrete characteristics a representative from the concrete producer is required on the Project to determine the final admixture dosage and water addition for each load of concrete .
The dosage shall be applied by means of a dispenser or by other means of accurately measuring volume as approved by the Engineer .
The Contractor shall provide QC concrete testing personnel with current ACI Concrete Field Testing Technician Grade I Certification to confirm the concrete is within Specifications for the required work .
All concrete shall be discharged into the forms before revolutions of the drum or blades not including initial mixing revolutions .
The total allowed number of revolutions may be increased as directed by the Engineer .
Mortar shall be mixed in an approved mixer at the site of placement or in transit mixers when approved by the Engineer .
The Engineer will withdraw approval for use of transit mixers if necessary to ensure a quality product or if the rate of delivery can not be coordinated with finishing requirements .
b Stationary Mixers .
When a stationary mixer is used for the complete mixing of the concrete the mixing time for mixers that have a capacity of cubic yards or less shall be not less than seconds .
For mixers that have a capacity of more than cubic yards the mixing time shall be determined by the concrete producer .
The time is valid provided that mixer efficiency tests prove the concrete is satisfactory for uniformity and strength .
The plant shall be equipped with a timing device that will not permit the batch to be discharged before the predetermined mixing time has elapsed .
Vehicles used in hauling shall comply with the requirements of Subsection .c .
c Transit Mixers .
Transit mixers and agitators shall be subject to periodic inspections by an Authorized Representative of the Agency .
Such equipment shall bear a currently dated inspection sticker supplied by the Agency indicating that the transit mixer or agitator conforms to the Agencys requirements .
Transit mixers shall be equipped with a watermeasuring tank with a visible sight gauge for use when the water for the batch is supplied from the transit mixer tank .
The gauge shall be clean and legibly graduated .
Measuring tanks shall be provided with outside drain valves or other means to check their calibration .
These should be easily opened for checking at any time .
No transit mixer or agitator shall be charged with the ingredients of the concrete unless an authorized Agency representative is present and authorizes it .
This requirement may be waived by the Engineer if a batch weight slip accompanies the delivery vehicle to the site .
Electricallyactuated revolution counters shall be required on all transit mixers except on mixers charged at central mix plants and utilized as agitator trucks only .
If bagged mineral admixtures are being used the transit mixer maximum load size shall be limited to of the manufacturers rated mixing capacity .
Also legal vehicle load restrictions shall not be exceeded .
The mixer shall be capable of combining the ingredients of the concrete into a thoroughly mixed and uniform mass and of discharging the concrete with a satisfactory degree of uniformity .
If bagged mineral admixtures are being used agitators when loaded shall also not exceed of the manufacturers rated mixing capacity or legal load restrictions and shall be capable of maintaining the mixed concrete in a thoroughly mixed and uniform mass and of discharging the concrete with a satisfactory degree of uniformity .
The Engineer may require the Contractor to perform uniformity tests on a transit mixer or agitator .
Two samples shall be taken .
The first sample shall be taken after of the load volume has been discharged and the second prior to of the load volume being discharged .
Slump and air content tests shall be performed on each sample .
The maximum difference in air content between the two samples shall be .
For concretes with a specified slump of inches or less the maximum difference between the two samples shall be inch .
For concretes with a specified slump greater than inches the maximum difference shall be inches .
If both conditions are not met then the Contractor will be required to either modify the mixing procedure andor batching sequence or that transit mixer or agitator will not be allowed to deliver concrete to the Project .
The Contractor will be required to perform uniformity tests to confirm the changes have satisfactory results .
All mechanical details of the mixer or agitator such as water measuring and discharge apparatus condition of the blades speed of rotation of the drum general mechanical condition of the unit and clearance of the drum shall be checked before a further attempt to use the unit will be permitted .
Mixers and agitators shall be kept free from accumulation of hardened concrete or mortar .
The mixing blades shall be rebuilt or replaced when any part or section is worn inch or more below the original height of the manufacturers design .
A copy of the manufacturers design showing the dimensions and arrangements of blades shall be available to the Engineer at the plant at all times .
The mixing of concrete containing silica fume is very important and shall be mixed in accordance with the appropriate situation When silica fume is added to the batch by bags or in bulk from a silo each batch of concrete shall be mixed for not less than revolutions of the drum or blades at the rate of rotation designated by the manufacturer of the equipment as the mixing speed .
The mixing and agitating speeds shall be found on the metal plate on the mixer .
When silica fume is blended with cement or a combination of cement and mineral admixture at the cement plant prior to being delivered to the concrete plant each batch of concrete shall be mixed for not less than nor more than revolutions of the drum or blades at the rate of rotation designated by the manufacturer of the equipment as the mixing speed .
The mixing and agitating speeds shall be found on the metal plate on the mixer .
If inconsistent test results are obtained or the batch of concrete appears not to be completely mixed the mixing revolutions shall be extended as necessary .
When a transit mixer or agitator is used for transporting concrete mixing during transport shall be continuous and at two to six rotations per minute or as designated by the manufacturer of the equipment as agitating speed .
Failure to do so is cause for rejection of the concrete .
Transit mixers and agitators assigned to a Project shall not be used for other purposes until the desired work is completed at the site and shall arrive at the Project within the cycle that anticipated placement conditions dictate .
The interval between loads shall be controlled in order that concrete in place shall not become partially hardened prior to placing succeeding batches .
The plant capacity and transportation facilities shall be sufficient to ensure continuous delivery at the rate required .
Before discharging transit mix from a transit mixer that has been operating at agitating speed the drum or blades shall be rotated approximately one minute at mixing speed .
The same procedure shall apply to agitators if admixtures water or other ingredients are added to the mix in the field .
If additional mixing water is required to maintain the specified slump and is added with the permission of the Engineer a minimum of revolutions of the transit mixer drum at mixing speed shall be required before discharge of any concrete .
At no time shall the total water introduced into any mix exceed the maximum WCM ratio specified in Table .A .
Upon discharge of the concrete from the drum a sufficient amount of water shall be charged into the drum to properly cleanse the drum .
This water shall not be used as a part of the next succeeding batch but shall be discharged from the drum prior to the charging of the drum with the concrete ingredients .
The drum shall be completely emptied before receiving materials for the succeeding batch .
Re tempering of concrete or mortar that has partially hardened by remixing with or without additional materials shall not be permitted. . FIELD TESTS .
The Contractor shall provide assistance equipment materials and curing for field sampling and testing as required by the Engineer .
All costs shall be included in the Contract Unit Prices under Section .
The Engineer shall perform all acceptance sampling and testing in accordance with the Agencys Quality Assurance Program .
For bridge deck pours and other pours as required by the Engineer the Contractor shall perform all onsite Quality Control QC sampling and testing .
The person performing the QC sampling and testing shall have as a minimum current ACI Concrete Field Testing Technician Grade I Certification .
a Trial Pour .
When concrete will be used for a deck or overlay or when deemed necessary by the Engineer the Contractor shall construct a slab to be used for the trial pour .
The purpose of the trial pour is to ensure that the mix can be placed and finished in accordance with these Specifications .
The slab shall be a minimum of feet feet inches thick .
If the concrete is intended to be placed by pump the trial pour concrete shall be placed by pump .
The pump will be setup in the configuration that best represents the most difficult pumping condition .
The wet concrete properties will be checked at the point of placement .
The Contractor will demonstrate that they can provide an acceptable finish to the concrete for the element to be completed .
The Contractor will need to bull float a minimum of of the surface area of the slab and hand finish the curb areas in the same manner as anticipated during the production pour .
The Contractor may elect to construct the slab so that the same screed equipment and same finishing method can be used as anticipated for the production pour .
In this case the Contractor will not be required to bull float a minimum percentage of surface area unless that will be included in their process for finishing the concrete deck surface during the deck pour .
The test slab will become the property of the Contractor and removed from the Project after completion of the trial pour .
Concrete production activities shall be closely monitored to ensure that no deviations are made from the approved mix design .
If test results indicate a failure to obtain the characteristics as specified in Table .A the Engineer may reject the material .
The Contractor will be responsible for proposing solutions which could include changes to the mix design and will require testing be done with no extra payment .
The modified mix design shall not be used until successful test results are obtained during a trial pour that is representative of the anticipated pour conditions .
For evaluation new mix design submittals shall be considered as initial mix design submittals when the cementitious content target changes by more than andor the aggregate targets are changed by more than .
The volumetric proportioning will need to be adjusted on the mix design to achieve the target volume of cubic feet .
Any proposed adjustments will be based on the target values of the originally approved mix design .
Admixtures which do not affect concrete shrinkage or permeability may be adjusted from the approved mix design as necessary to provide a mix to meet the Project requirements .
The sources of these admixtures which do not affect concrete shrinkage or permeability can be changed with permission of the Engineer and Structural Concrete Engineer and may not require a new initial mix design submittal .
A trial batch may be required as evidence that any change will result in wet test results and possibly selected hardened concrete properties to confirm they are in compliance with job requirements .
b Sampling .
Sampling for tests shall be taken in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO R or other procedures approved by the Agency .
Sampling will be done at point of placement or as close to it as practical .
Changes .
Any time that there is a change in admixture dosage outside of the allowable tolerances whether modified at the batch plant or at the site additional QC sampling and testing shall be performed on the modified load prior to incorporating the concrete into the work .
Beginning of Load Sampling .
Beginning of Load Sampling is sampling for QC testing purposes that is taken before of the load has been discharged .
Beginning of Load Sampling shall be performed as required by the Engineer or as needed to ensure that the Concrete meets the Contract requirements at the point of placement .
The QC personnel shall monitor the placement operation and adjust the mix accordingly to ensure that the material being incorporated into the work meets Contract requirements .
c Slump Tests .
Slump tests shall be made in accordance with AASHTO T MT .
d Spread Tests .
Spread tests for SCC shall be made in accordance with the requirements of ASTM C C M Procedure B .
The concrete inside the cone shall not be tamped .
e Visual Stability Index VSI Tests .
VSI tests for SCC shall be made in accordance with the requirements of ASTM C C M Appendix X. and shall be performed on each completed spread test .
f Air Content Tests .
Air content tests shall be made in accordance with the pressure method specified in AASHTO T for acceptance or rejection .
For Class SCC the specimens shall be fabricated in accordance with ASTM C C M. g Compressive Strength Tests .
General .
The number of compressive strength tests performed should be in accordance with the guidance given in the current edition of the VTrans Materials Sampling Manual .
The Engineer may order additional tests as deemed necessary .
Compressive test cylinders shall be made in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO T and tested for compressive strength in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO T . For Class SCC the specimens shall be fabricated per ASTM C C M. Categories of Testing .
a .
Acceptance Testing .
Acceptance testing utilizes specimens to determine the compliance with requirements for the Project .
All test cylinders used for quality acceptance testing shall be stored in an approved curing box until they are shipped to the Agencys Materials Section Central Laboratory .
b .
Job Control Testing .
Job control testing utilizes specimens to determine whether adequate curing procedures are being followed and for early form removal or early loading of structure .
All job control specimens shall be stored on the structure and shall receive the same curing and protection from the elements as the concrete that they represent up until hours before anticipated testing of specimens .
c. Specimen Curing Requirements .
Specimen curing requirements shall be as stated in the Specifications or as directed by the Engineer .
If not specifically stated the curing shall be as specified in Table .A .
TABLE .A CONCRETE SPECIMEN CURING REQUIREMENTS Testing Category Number of Specimens Curing Location Acceptance Curing box Job control applicable curing period On structure h Concrete Temperature .
Concrete temperature tests shall be made in accordance with the requirements of ASTM C C M. .
WEATHER AND TEMPERATURE LIMITATIONS PROTECTION OF CONCRETE .
The temperature of the concrete just prior to placement in the forms shall not be less than F nor more than F. Aggregates and water shall be heated or cooled as necessary to produce concrete within these temperature limits .
Placement and curing procedures shall be approved by the Engineer prior to actual placement .
a Hot Weather Concrete .
Placement of concrete during hot weather may be limited by the Engineer based on an assessment of temperature humidity wind velocity and sun radiation conditions .
No concrete shall be placed when the ambient air temperature is or is expected to be above ºF .
b Cold Weather Concrete .
General .
Cold weather concrete will be any concrete placed or cured when the ambient air temperature is expected to be below freezing at any point or below F for a continuous hour period .
No concrete shall be placed when the ambient air temperature is lower than F except by written permission of the Engineer .
A cold weather concrete plan shall be submitted to the Engineer for their review and acceptance before any cold weather concrete is placed .
When placing cold weather concrete the Contractor shall have adequate equipment for heating and protecting the materials and freshlyplaced concrete meeting the approval of the Engineer .
This equipment shall be on the job and ready to deploy prior to the commencement of concrete placing operations .
No concrete shall be placed in any superstructure or thin section under cold weather conditions .
Heating of Materials .
The heating equipment deployed for cold weather concrete placement shall be capable of heating the materials uniformly .
Aggregates shall not be heated to a temperature exceeding F. If water is heated to a temperature exceeding F the water shall be mixed with the aggregate before the cementitious material is added .
The materials shall be heated in such a manner for such a period of time and in such quantity as to produce concrete having a uniform temperature within the specified temperature range at the time of placement .
Materials containing frost or frozen lumps shall not be used .
Stockpiled aggregates may be heated using dry heat or steam .
Aggregates shall not be heated directly by gas or oil flame or on sheet metal over fire .
When aggregates are heated in bins steamcoil or watercoil heating or other methods that will not be detrimental to the aggregates may be used .
Antifreeze Compounds .
Salts chemicals or other foreign materials shall not be used in the mix to lower the freezing point of the concrete .
Preparation of Forms .
Before placing concrete any ice snow or frost shall be completely removed from the forms .
Concrete shall not be placed on any surface or in any forms that are frozen have surface temperatures below ºF or that contain frozen materials .
The frozen surface or forms shall be completely thawed the day before the placement of the concrete and shall be kept continuously thawed until the concrete is poured .
The temperature difference between forms or substrate and the plastic concrete shall not exceed ºF .
Housing .
The Contractor shall furnish sufficient canvas with a supporting framework or other suitable type of housing to fully enclose and protect the structure when placing and curing cold weather concrete .
The sidewalls and roofing of the protective housing shall be completely built before the placing of any concrete .
The sidewalls for decks shall extend below and fully enclose the entire superstructure .
The protective housing shall be constructed independently of the forms and bracing and with adequate space to allow for form removal and the initial finishing of the concrete as required during the heating period .
Joists shall be located to suitably support the housing roof with no sagging .
The protective enclosure shall be heated to the proper temperature before placing any concrete .
When the temperature readings taken on or in the concrete indicate the temperature of the concrete may fall below F the Contractor shall without exposing the concrete immediately build the necessary enclosures around the area involved and supply heat to ensure curing conditions as specified in Subsection ..
The enclosure shall be removed when directed by the Engineer .
Heating the Enclosure .
The enclosure shall be heated in such a manner that the temperature of the concrete and the enclosed air shall be kept above F and not more than F above the concrete temperature for the designated curing period .
During this time the concrete shall be kept continuously wet to provide proper curing .
After the curing period the temperature shall be gradually lowered to that of the surrounding atmosphere taking at least hours for the transition but at no time exceeding a F change per hour .
When dry heat is used a means of maintaining atmospheric moisture shall be supplied .
The Contractor shall also maintain adequate fire protection and shall provide personnel to keep the heating units in continuous operation .
When concrete placement operations are in locations where water levels may fluctuate the supports for heating equipment shall be built so that the heating equipment can be raised and steam lines shall be placed above the probable high water level .
When using directfired or indirectfired heaters the enclosure shall be wellventilated to avoid accumulation of carbon dioxide and carbon monoxide .
When using a hydronic heating system with heattransfer fluid that circulates through a series of hoses the heattransfer hoses shall be laid on top of the vapor barrier usually plastic sheeting then covered with approved insulating materials or by other approved methods for retaining heat .
Temperature Records .
The Contractor shall provide an automatic temperature recorder to continuously record concrete curing temperatures and ambient air temperatures for the entire curing period .
Recording thermometers shall be capable of measuring and recording temperatures within the range of F to F with maximum graduations of F. Temperature sensors shall be carefully placed within the curing enclosure or in the concrete to ensure that temperatures are measured at typical locations .
The recorders accuracy shall be certified once every months with the certificate displayed with each recorder .
The Engineer may make random checks of each recorder .
On each recorder chart the Engineer shall indicate the location of the representative concrete the placement date and start and finish times of the temperature record .
At the completion of the curing period the recorder charts shall be submitted to the Engineer .
A thermometer shall be provided that is capable of displaying the current temperature with a maximum gradation of F. The Inspector will use the thermometer to take periodic temperature measurements of the concrete and enclosure temperatures at varying locations .
When the Contractor places concrete at more than one location within the specified curing period or if the Engineer determines that monitoring of a single pour is necessary in multiple locations additional monitoring and recording equipment shall be furnished to provide temperature records at each location. . FORMS .
The Contractor shall be responsible for and shall make good any injury arising from inadequate forms .
The Engineer shall inspect and accept all forms prior to concrete placement .
Unless the Plans specifically allow for the use of stayinplace forms such forms shall not be used in the construction of any superstructure or bridge deck .
Stayinplace forms will only be allowed in the construction of substructure elements in locations where the Engineer agrees that removable formwork is impossible to employ .
a Falsework .
In general falsework that can not be founded upon a solid footing shall be supported by falsework piling .
The Engineer may require the Contractor to employ screw jacks or hardwood wedges to correct any deflections or settlement however slight occurring in the falsework .
b Construction .
Forms shall be mortartight and sufficiently rigid to prevent distortion due to the pressure of the concrete and other loads incidental to the construction operations including vibration .
Forms shall be constructed and maintained to prevent the opening of joints due to shrinkage of the lumber .
Sealers and caulking as approved by the Engineer shall be used where forms abut structural steel members such as top flanges of beams and girders etc .
To ensure their easy removal forms shall be filleted and chamfered at all sharp corners unless otherwise shown on the Plans or directed by the Engineer and shall be given a bevel or draft in the case of all projections such as girders and copings .
Falsework and forms for slabs beams and girders shall be constructed to provide the camber shown on the Plans or ordered by the Engineer .
Falsework and forms for Class SCC construction shall be designed with consideration given to concrete placement rates mix temperature additives and placement procedures that effect hydrostatic pressure of the concrete .
Forms shall be watertight and sufficiently rigid to prevent distortion due to the pressure of the concrete and other loads incident to the construction operations including vibration which should not be needed .
c Form Lumber .
All face form lumber for exposed surfaces shall be concrete form exterior grade plywood not less than five ply and with a minimum thickness of inch .
In computing stud spacing plywood shall be considered inch lumber provided that the grain of three of the plies runs perpendicular to the studs .
Form lumber for unexposed surfaces may be dressed tongueandgroove dressed shiplap or square edge surfaced four sides of uniform width and thickness with a minimum thickness after finishing of inch .
All form lumber shall be sound and free from loose or rotten knots knotholes checks splits or wanes showing on the surface that will be in contact with the concrete .
Used face form lumber having defects or patches which may produce work inferior to that resulting from new material shall not be used .
Other form materials may be used with the permission of the Engineer .
d Form Ties .
Metal ties or anchorages within the forms shall be constructed to permit their removal to a depth of at least inch from the face without injury to the concrete .
Wire ties shall be used only in locations where they will not extend through surfaces exposed in the finished work and then only when authorized .
The cavities shall be filled with cement mortar in accordance with the requirements of Subsection .. e Surface Treatment .
All forms shall be treated with commercial form oil prior to placing reinforcement and wood forms shall be saturated with water immediately before placing the concrete .
Any material that will adhere to or discolor the concrete shall not be used .
f Metal Forms .
The Specifications for wood forms regarding design mortartightness filleted and chamfered corners beveled projections bracing alignment removal reuse and oiling also apply to metal forms .
The metal used for forms shall be of such thickness that the forms will remain true to shape throughout the concrete placement operations .
All bolt and rivet heads shall be countersunk .
Clamps pins or other connecting devices shall be designed to hold the forms rigidly together and to allow removal without injury to the concrete .
Metal forms that do not present a smooth surface or do not line up properly shall not be used .
Care shall be exercised to keep metal forms free from rust grease or other foreign matter .
g Removal of Forms .
Deck Superstructure .
The forms or their supports for any portion of a structure shall not be removed before the end of the day cure period for the deck .
Forms under beams or floor slabs may be removed upon approval of the Engineer after the concrete attains of the minimum compressive strength as specified in Table .A but not prior to the end of the day cure period .
Substructure .
The forms or their supports for any portion of a substructure shall not be removed without the approval of the Engineer .
Forms under arches pier caps or other special design conditions may be removed upon approval of the Engineer after the concrete attains of the minimum compressive strength as specified in Table .A .
The removal of forms and supports may begin when the concrete is found to have the required strength .
In no case shall the number of curing days be less than specified in Table .A .
Methods of form removal likely to cause overstressing of the concrete shall not be used .
Forms and their supports shall not be removed without approval .
Supports shall be removed in such a manner as to permit the concrete to uniformly and gradually take up the stresses due to its own dead load .
h StayinPlace Corrugated Metal Forms SIPCMF for Superstructure Deck Slabs .
General .
Use of SIPCMF for superstructure deck slab construction shall be subject to the following requirements a. Fascia overhangs shall be formed with removable forms that leave the resulting concrete with a flatsurfaced finish .
b. Bays that are constructed in stages such that a longitudinal joint is required shall be made with removable forms .
Design Requirements .
The following requirements shall govern the design of SIPCMF a .
The design span shall be the clear span of the form plus inches measured parallel to the form flute also referred to as the form valley .
b .
The design load shall be the sum of the weight of forms bar reinforcement plastic concrete and pounds per square foot for construction loads .
c. The unit working stress shall not exceed of the specified minimum yield strength of the material .
d. The dead load deflection shall not exceed times the form span length or inch whichever is less .
e. Physical design properties shall be computed with the requirements of the latest edition of the American Iron and Steel Institute Specifications for the Design of ColdFormed Steel Structural Members .
Construction Requirements .
The following construction requirements shall apply to the use of SIPCMF a .
Construction Drawings .
The Contractor shall submit Construction Drawings for SIPCMF in accordance with the requirements of Subsection ..
These Drawings shall contain the following information as a minimum .
The name of the SIPCMF supplier. . A layout showing the compression and tension region of each beamgirder . .
The method of SIPCMF attachment for the compression and tension regions . .
The geometric properties of each type of panel being used . .
The number location and type of panels being used within each girder bay. . Panel laps considering the direction of concrete pours . .
The Specifications for the material used to fill the flutes. . Any other material data erection information or miscellaneous notes that may be required .
b .
Handling and Installation .
Care and protection shall be given the metal form sheets supports and accessory items during handling shipping and storage .
During loading hoisting and unloading operations extra precaution and care shall be taken to prevent damage to ends corners and edges of form sheets supports and accessory items .
If the form units and accessories are to be stored prior to installation they shall not be placed in contact with the ground and shall be adequately covered or protected to keep them dry .
Form supports shall be placed in direct contact with the flange of beamgirderstringer or floor beam .
All attachments shall be made by permissible welds bolts clips or other approved means .
The welding of form supports to steel not considered weldable or to portions of flanges subject to tensile stresses shall not be permitted .
Welds and welding shall be in accordance with the requirements of Subsection .
with the exception that a inch fillet weld will be permitted .
Form sheets shall not be permitted to rest directly on the flanges .
They shall be securely fastened to form supports by selftapping screws and shall have a minimum bearing length of inch at each end .
Transverse construction joints shall be located at the bottom of a valley .
A inch diameter weep hole shall be drilled at the lower end of each flute or valley .
Screed and pouring runway supports shall not be located directly on the form sheets form supports or reinforcing steel .
No loose sheets or miscellaneous hardware shall be left on the structural slab at the end of the working day .
The corrugated metal sheets shall be fabricated for the placement sequence used with the joints between sections of sheets overlapped or securely fastened to eliminate differential deflections .
Any exposed form metal where galvanizing has been damaged shall be cleaned and repaired to the satisfaction of the Engineer .
Inspection Procedures .
The following threestep inspection procedure will be used to check the soundness of the concrete deck against the SIPCMF .
a .
Step .
Not less than two days after completion of a concrete structural slab pour but prior to the next slab pour one panel of the SIPCMF shall be removed from the most recently completed pour of each span at a location selected by the Engineer to provide visual evidence that the concrete mix or the construction procedures are obtaining the desired results .
If the concrete mix or the construction procedures are varied significantly within a pour such as a change in the extent of vibration or change in the workability of the mix another section of forming shall be removed to verify that the new procedures are yielding desirable results .
b .
Step .
After the concrete has attained of the specified design strength the Engineer will spotcheck the underside areas of the steel forms by sounding with a suitable weight hammer .
If honeycomb or voided areas are detected the SIPCMF at that location shall be removed for a visual inspection .
c. Step .
A minimum of of the total SIPCMF area shall be removed for visual inspection of the concrete surface .
The amount of sounding and form removal may be moderated at the Engineers discretion after a substantial amount of the slab has been constructed and inspected if the Contractors methods of construction and results of the inspections as outlined above indicate that sound concrete is being obtained throughout the slab .
If after removing a section of form the concrete is found to be defective additional panels shall be removed as directed by the Engineer .
All defective concrete shall be repaired to match the adjacent concrete in section and color to the satisfaction of the Engineer .
The Contractor shall provide all facilities required for the safe suitable and convenient means of access to the forms for the Engineers inspection procedures .
The form sections shall be removed by a metal saw or aircarbonarc gouging with minimum damage to the concrete .
Cuts shall only be sufficiently deep to sever the form .
Any other method of removal shall be submitted to the Structures Engineer for approval .
Cuts parallel to the corrugations in the forms shall be located on the sloping surface midway between a crest and valley .
Cuts parallel to the supporting beamsgirders shall be made through the supporting angles taking care not to damage the structural steel beamsgirders .
The Contractor will not be required to replace the forms which have been removed . .
PLACING CONCRETE .
a Workforce .
The Contractor shall always have sufficient skilled personnel during the concreting operations to properly place consolidate and finish the concrete .
If in the opinion of the Engineer the Contractor does not have sufficient skilled personnel to handle the concrete properly the Engineer may postpone the start of the concreting operations until the Contractor has remedied this situation .
b PrePlacement Meeting .
For deck pours or as required by the Engineer a preplacement meeting shall be scheduled by the Contractor to take place at least Calendar Days before concrete placement and prior to the Trial Pour if required .
Attendees at the preplacement meeting shall include but not be limited to the Contractors Project Superintendent the Engineer the Agencys Structural Concrete Engineer and the concrete producer .
The Contractor shall provide a placement plan that addresses but is not limited to the following topics Time of concrete placement and amount Batch plant testing Delivery of concrete Method of concrete placement on the deck Consolidation and finishing of concrete QC testing of the plastic concrete Protection of the concrete from evaporation Curing of the concrete How to avoid long delays for balance loads Screed work bridge and rail setup Dry run schedule Contingency plans for long delays break downs weather events and other potential problems Crew size and responsibilities Available equipment Project layout including locations for all pumps cranes testing cleanouts staging etc .
c Placement Limitations .
All concrete shall be placed in daylight unless otherwise authorized in writing by the Engineer .
Authorization to place concrete at any other time shall not be given unless an adequate lighting system is provided prior to beginning the concrete placement operations .
Concrete shall not be placed under adverse environmental conditions that the Engineer determines will interfere with acceptable placement andor finishing operations .
Concrete shall not be placed until the depth and character of the foundation the apparent adequacy of the forms and falsework and the placing of the reinforcing steel have been approved by the Engineer .
The interior of the forms shall be clean of all debris before concrete is placed .
The Contractor shall submit to the Engineer a schedule of batching delivery and placement prior to the beginning of the concreting operations .
The Contractor shall comply with the requirements of Subsection .. Equipment and tools necessary for handling materials and performing all parts of the work shall meet the approval of the Engineer as to design capacity and mechanical condition and must be on the site before the work is started .
Any equipment in the judgment of the Engineer that proves inadequate to obtain results prescribed shall be improved or new equipment substituted or added .
The Engineer may suspend the pour or reject the pour if the Contractor deviates from the accepted pour plan which will also include unacceptable delivery rates .
The Contractor will not be allowed compensation due to the pour being suspended or rejected do to the Contractor deviating from the accepted pour plan or uncontrolled delivery rates .
For simple spans concrete should be deposited by beginning at the lower end of the span and working toward the upper end .
For continuous spans where required by design considerations the concrete placing sequence shall be as shown on the Plans .
Concrete shall not be deposited in the forms more than feet from its final position .
The dropping of unconfined concrete more than feet will not be permitted .
Concrete shall not be deposited in running water .
The rate of placing the concrete shall be so regulated that no excessive stresses are placed on the forms .
Concrete in all decks shall be placed in one continuous operation unless otherwise specified .
Concrete shall be placed in continuous horizontal layers the thickness of which shall not exceed inches unless otherwise directed by the Engineer .
Each succeeding layer shall be placed before the underlying layer has taken initial set and shall be consolidated in a manner that will eliminate any line of separation between the layers .
When it is necessary due to any emergency to place less than a complete horizontal layer at one operation such layer shall terminate in a vertical bulkhead .
After the concrete has taken its initial set care shall be exercised to avoid jarring the forms or straining the ends of projecting reinforcing bars .
d Placement of Overlays .
For a period of at least hours before the placement of overlay material the prepared surface shall be flooded with water .
After removal of all free water the overlay material shall be deposited on the damp surface and manipulated to coat the horizontal and vertical surfaces to be covered .
The rate of progress shall be controlled to prevent the drying of previously deposited materials .
e Use of Chutes .
Chutes troughs and pipes used in placing concrete shall be arranged to avoid segregation of the materials and the displacement of the reinforcement and shall be approved by the Engineer .
Aluminum chutes troughs or pipes will not be permitted .
All chutes troughs and pipes shall be kept clean and free of hardened concrete by thoroughly flushing with water after each run .
Open troughs or chutes shall be either of metal or metallined and shall extend as nearly as possible to the point of deposit .
When the discharge must be intermittent a hopper or other device for regulating the discharge shall be provided .
Dropping of unconfined concrete more than feet or depositing a large quantity at any point and running or working it along the forms will not be permitted .
f Use of Vibrators .
Unless otherwise specified the concrete shall be consolidated with mechanical vibrators of an approved type and design operating within the concrete .
When required vibrating may be supplemented by handspading with suitable tools to ensure proper and adequate consolidation .
Vibrators shall be manipulated to work the concrete thoroughly around the reinforcement and imbedded fixtures and into corners and angles of the forms to produce surfaces free of imperfections .
Vibrators shall not be used to cause concrete to flow or run into position in lieu of placing .
The vibration at any point shall be of sufficient duration to accomplish consolidation but shall not be prolonged to the point where segregation occurs .
Vibrators shall have nonmetallic or rubbercoated heads .
Vibrating machines shall at no time be left running unattended in the concrete .
When it is necessary due to an emergency to discontinue the placing of a monolithic section the use of vibrators shall cease .
Vibrators shall not again be used until a sufficient depth of fresh concrete is placed to prevent any possibility of the effect of vibration on the concrete already in place and in no case shall this depth be less than feet .
The number of vibrators used shall be ample to consolidate the incoming concrete immediately after it is deposited in the form .
The Contractor shall have at least one spare vibrator in serviceable condition at the site of the structure in which more than cubic yards of concrete are to be placed .
The vibrators shall be capable of transmitting vibration to the concrete at frequencies of not less than impulses per minute under load .
The vibration shall be of sufficient intensity and duration to cause plasticity settlement and complete consolidation of the concrete without causing segregation .
The vibrator shall visibly affect a mass of concrete of inch slump over a radius of at least inches .
g Blasting Operations .
All blasting operations within feet of any concrete work shall be completed prior to the placement of the concrete .
Regardless of the above limitation on blasting operations the Contractor shall be responsible for any damage resulting from blasting operations. . DEPOSITING CONCRETE UNDER WATER .
a General .
Concrete shall not be deposited under water except as specified by the Contract Documents or upon approval of the Engineer and shall be subject to the following Specifications .
b Placement .
When placing concrete underwater the Contractor shall use a tremie or an alternate method of conveyance approved by the Engineer which minimizes the mixing of fresh concrete and water .
A tremie shall have a hopper at the top that empties into a watertight tube at least inches in diameter .
The discharge end of the tube on the tremie shall include a device to seal out water while the tube is first filled with concrete .
An inflatable ball will not be permitted .
The device shall keep its shape and float without danger of deflation .
The placement shall be continuous to the elevations shown on the Plans and the resulting concrete shall be monolithic and homogeneous .
Concrete shall not be deposited in water that has a temperature of F or below .
When the water temperature is between F and F the mixing water the aggregates or both shall be heated as specified in Subsection .b .
A tremie shall be constructed of heavygauge steel pipe and consist of watertight joints between the tremie sections with a diameter of not less than inches .
The tremie hopper shall have a capacity of at least cubic yard .
When a batch is dumped into the hopper the flow of the concrete shall be induced by slightly raising the discharge tube always keeping it in the concrete .
Tubes shall be kept continuously submerged in concrete during discharge .
The depth that the tube is submerged in concrete and the height of the concrete in the tube shall be sufficient to prevent water from entering the tube .
The Contractor shall continuously monitor the difference in elevation between the top of the concrete and the end of the discharge tube .
Horizontal movement of discharge tubes through the concrete will not be allowed .
For minor quantities at the sole discretion of the Engineer a direct pumping method may be approved .
If a direct pumping method is to be implemented the pipe discharging the concrete shall consist of heavygauge steel sections .
The Contractor shall demonstrate the ability to pump the concrete without the pump line surging or otherwise moving in the water as concrete is being pumped .
Cylinders cured as field cure shall be cured at the same temperature as the water covering the concrete. . PUMPING .
Where concrete is conveyed and placed by mechanicallyapplied pressure the equipment shall be suitable in kind and adequate in capacity for the work .
The pump shall be capable of pumping concrete within the specified slump limits .
The use of aluminum pipe as a conveyance for the concrete will not be permitted .
The operation of the pump shall be such that a continuous stream of concrete without air pockets is produced .
When pumping is completed the concrete remaining in the pipeline if it is to be used shall be ejected in such a manner that there will be no contamination of the concrete or separation of the ingredients .
The equipment shall be arranged so that no resulting vibrations may damage freshly placed concrete. . CONSTRUCTION JOINTS .
a Construction Joint Locations .
Joints shall be formed at the location shown on the Plans .
Any variation or new location of joints shall require written permission of the Engineer .
Feather edges at construction joints will not be permitted .
Joints shall be formed with inset formwork so that each layer of concrete will have a thickness of not less than inches .
b Joining Fresh Concrete to Previously Set Concrete .
When joining fresh concrete to concrete that has hardened the surface of the set concrete shall be roughened in such a manner that will not leave loosened particles or damaged concrete at the surface and shall be thoroughly cleaned of all laitance loose and foreign material .
Immediately prior to the placing of the new concrete the surface shall be saturated with water .
When shown on the Plans or ordered by the Engineer the surface shall be thoroughly coated with a very thin coating of mortar neat cement grout or approved bonding agent and all forms drawn tight against the face of the concrete .
This coating shall not be allowed to dry out before being covered with fresh concrete .
c Filled Construction Joints .
Filled construction joints shall contain a preformed cork joint filler or other preformed joint filler that may be shown in the Contract Documents .
Joint filler shall be cut to fit exactly and shall completely fill the space that is shown on the Plans .
Where a pour grade or caulking grade filler is indicated to be used in the joints that portion of the joint to be filled shall be formed with a separate material other than the preformed joint filler that can easily be removed prior to placement of the above indicated filler .
d Water Stops .
Approved water stops shall be placed at locations shown on the Plans .
They shall form continuous watertight joints .
e Bond Breakers .
Bond breakers shall be asphalttreated felt or pipe insulation as shown on the Plans . .
EXPANSION JOINTS .
All expansion joints shall be constructed according to details shown on the Plans .
a Filled Compression and Expansion Joints .
Filled compression and expansion joints shall be made with a preformed selfexpanding cork joint filler or other preformed joint filler that may be shown in the Contract Documents .
Joint filler shall be cut to fit exactly and shall completely fill the space that is shown on the Plans .
Where a pour grade or caulking grade filler is indicated to be used in the joint that portion of the joint to be filled shall be formed with a separate material other than the expansion joint filler that can easily be removed prior to placement of the above indicated filler .
b Special Types of Expansion Joints .
Special types of expansion joints may be used when shown on the Plans or ordered by the Engineer . .
CONCRETE FINISHING .
a Finishing Bridge Decks and Overlays .
General .
The Contractor shall follow the procedures and details for placing the deck in accordance with the preplacement meeting .
The procedure shall provide for adequate labor equipment and material supply to complete placement of concrete on the entire deck or specified portion thereof .
If during the placement unforeseen circumstances delay the progression of the pour to a point where the concrete begins to lose plasticity the Contractor shall be prepared to place a bulkhead as directed by the Engineer .
If at any time the screed machine does not advance in a minute period due to delayed concrete delivery mechanical breakdown or other problem the Contractor shall immediately cover concrete that is under the screed machine past the leading edge of the concrete with wet burlap .
Just before concrete placement is to begin the burlap shall be removed the screed machine will be moved back fresh concrete will be added to the area that was directly under the screed to the leading edge and the area will be vibrated again .
The screed machine may then be advanced forward to continue the placement .
Approval of their methods and equipment does not relieve the Contractor of full responsibility for obtaining the required surface finish .
Prior to texturing the finished concrete surface shall be examined by the Contractor .
Surface irregularities greater than inch in feet in either the longitudinal or the transverse direction shall be corrected in a manner acceptable to the Engineer .
When a bituminous concrete surface is to be placed on a bridge deck the deviation shall not be greater than inch .
When a sheet membrane is being applied sharp ridges shall not be allowed .
Thin mortar or laitance which may have accumulated ahead of the finishing machine screed shall be removed from the work site .
These materials shall not be used to fill depressions .
If the bridge deck concrete does not meet the above smoothness requirements the Contractor shall remove high spots up to inch high by means of grinding .
Any other corrections shall be made only with the written approval of the Engineer .
The use of bush hammers will not be allowed .
No concrete shall be removed that will result in a concrete slab thickness less than that shown on the Plans .
Any deck that can not be corrected by a method satisfactory to the Engineer shall be removed and replaced at the Contractors expense .
Sidewalks shall receive their final finish with a fine bristled broom .
Bridge Decks with No Asphalt Wearing Surface .
After finishing the surface shall be given a suitable texture with an artificial turf drag made of molded polyethylene or other material or method that will provide an acceptable finish .
The selection of turf drag or other method should be capable of producing a surface texture with a horizontal peaktopeak distance ranging from .
inch to less than or equal to .
inch and having a peaktopeak amplitude of .
inch to .
inch .
A turf drag material or other acceptable method that will minimize tearing and rolling of coarse aggregate from the surface shall be used .
The Contractor shall apply the finish texture in a transverse direction using hand methods .
Other directions may be allowed with the approval of the Engineer .
All texturing shall be performed from a work bridge immediately following the finishing operations and prior to curing operations .
A second work bridge will be required for curing purposes unless a method using a single work bridge has been approved by the Engineer .
One pass of the turf drag over the finished area is desired .
The drag shall leave a seamless strip between passes .
The finish texture resulting from the drag shall stop within inches of the curb face rail anchor bolts or edge of deck .
Any buildup of concrete at the beginning or end of the pass shall be hand troweled to provide an even transition .
The drag should produce a transverse skidresistant microtexture acceptable to the Engineer but should not tear the surface .
If the drag is not producing an acceptable microtexture the Contractor shall adjust the means and methods until an acceptable microtexture is achieved .
The Contractor shall check the drag material before the deck pour and from timetotime during finishing for tears worn surface or hardened concrete .
The Contractor shall clean or replace the drag as often as necessary to maintain a welldefined microtexture .
The turf drag or other acceptable methods should not be applied when the surface is so wet or plastic that the ridges formed flow back into the valleys when the drag has passed nor should dragging be delayed until the concrete is so hard that sharp ridges can not be formed by the drag .
Fogging or similar methods shall be deployed to ensure that the surface does not dry prematurely .
If the minute maximum as specified in Subsection .c for applying the wet cure can not be met then fogging of the area shall be performed in a manner that keeps the relative humidity above the evaporation rate of the concrete surface but not so excessive that water begins to collect on the surface prior to texturing or other surface manipulating procedures .
Finishing Machine Rail Supports .
Finishing machine rail supports shall be of substantial construction and accurately set so that the finished deck surface will conform to the profile and transverse sections shown in the Plans .
Finishing machine rail supports shall be placed and adjusted to properly provide for the deflection of forms falsework and structural supporting members which will occur during the placement of the concrete .
The finishing machine rail supports shall be spaced at a maximum of feet on center and of sufficient design as to secure the rail to prevent it from falling off the support .
The screed rails shall be configured to allow the screed machine and work bridges to be fully functional over the entire deck area .
Sufficient screed rails shall be provided so that all rails necessary for any one continuous pour may be preset and graded before the start of concreting operations .
The removal of screed rails and exposed chairs shall be accomplished without walking in the fresh concrete and while the concrete is still plastic .
The Contractor shall furnish a work bridge or bridges of an approved type capable of spanning the entire width of the deck without deflection to the concrete slab surface .
Finishing .
After the concrete has been placed it shall be struck off by a finishing machine and the operation shall be repeated as necessary to produce a uniformly consolidated dense smooth surface .
The final passage of the finishing machine shall result in a uniform surface at the required grade and slope over its entire area .
Finishing machines shall be kept in true adjustment .
Machines shall not be used until the proper adjustments have been made and the adjustments have been checked and approved by the Engineer .
Sufficient time shall be provided prior to beginning concreting operations for the finishing machine to be operated over the full length of the bridge deck segment to be placed .
This test run shall be made with the screed adjusted to its finishing position .
While operating the finishing machine in this test the screed rails shall be checked for deflection and proper adjustment the cover on slab reinforcement shall be measured and the controlling dimensions of slab reinforcement and forms shall be checked .
After the concrete is placed it shall be struck off by one of the following methods a .
A selfpropelled concrete finishing machine may be deployed supported on suitable rails and equipped with adjustable strikeoff and finishing roller screeds capable of producing the required finish surface for the full width of the bridge from facetoface of curbs .
b .
An approved mechanical vibrating screed may be deployed capable of exerting a force of at least pounds per linear foot and generating at least vibrations per minute when checked by a vibration reedtype tester .
The vibrating screed shall provide a uniform finish throughout its entire length and shall be properly adjusted so as not to drive the aggregate more than inch below the surface .
In areas that are inaccessible to finishing machines an approved manual vibratoryequipped power screed with an approved gradecontrol method may be used with approval from the Engineer .
Smoothness shall be checked as specified in Subsection .a to ensure a smooth ride and seamless transition to the finishing machines finished area .
If manual vibratoryequipped power screeds are used then initial vibration of the concrete for consolidation in those areas shall be of the minimal duration possible to avoid overvibration and loss of air entraining of the surface concrete in these areas .
Hand finishing shall be allowed only in areas inaccessible to finishing machines or manually driven vibratoryequipped power screeds .
Hand screeds or bull floats shall be magnesium and at least inches in width .
Care shall be taken not to overwork the concrete surface during any finishing operation .
Smoothness shall be checked as specified in Subsection .a to ensure a smooth ride and seamless transition to the finishing machines finished area. . CURING CONCRETE .
a General .
Water for use in curing concrete shall conform to the requirements of Subsection ..
The effective cure time shall be only the time that the concrete has been maintained in a wet condition with the concrete surface temperature above F. If the concrete is not maintained in a wet condition andor the concrete surface temperature drops below F it shall not be counted as effective cure time .
The cure period will be extended hours for every hour the concrete is below F beginning when the concrete temperature is raised to or exceeds the minimum curing temperature .
Regardless of the curing medium specified the entire surface of the newly placed concrete shall be kept damp .
This shall be achieved by applying water with a nozzle that atomizes the flow so that a mist and not a spray is formed .
The moisture shall not be applied under pressure directly upon the concrete and shall not be allowed to accumulate in a quantity sufficient to cause a flow or washing of the surface .
The atomized flow shall be applied continuously until the surfaces can be covered by the specified curing mediums .
For bridge barriers curbs and sidewalks the curing method shall be applied within minutes of the completion of the finishing process .
Concrete components shall be cured for the times specified in Table .A .
TABLE .A CURING TIMES FOR CONCRETE COMPONENTS Type of Construction Curing Methods Subsection Effective Cure Time Days Substructure .b Superstructure .b Retaining walls .b Headwalls .b Sidewalks curbs and gutters .b There shall be no activity on the superstructure during the cure period .
b Curing Methods .
All exposed surfaces of newly placed concrete shall be cured by one of the following specified methods Water Curing .
Curing with water shall be by continuously sprinkling or flooding of all exposed surfaces for the entire required curing period .
Burlap Curing .
The entire exposed surface of the concrete shall be covered with two layers of approved burlap that has been presoaked with water .
The burlap shall then be covered with a lapped layer of white polyethylene sheeting .
Once the concrete superstructure has hardened sufficiently a stream of water applied with a soaker hose or similar device shall be run continuously under the polyethylene sheeting until the cure period is complete .
Sand Cover .
The entire exposed surface of the concrete shall be covered with at least inches of approved sand that shall be kept wet for the entire curing period .
White Polyethylene Sheeting .
The entire exposed surface of the concrete shall be covered with a blanket of white polyethylene sheeting maintained and fastened to provide a nearly airtight condition in contact with the surface where possible .
If in the opinion of the Engineer this cover is not adequately provided or maintained to ensure the proper conditions for the concrete cure then the white polyethylene sheeting cure shall be terminated and another method substituted .
White BurlapPolyethylene Sheeting .
The entire exposed surface of the concrete shall be covered with a blanket of white burlappolyethylene sheeting .
The burlap shall be thoroughly dampened prior to placing and shall be placed next to the concrete .
All joints shall be lapped a minimum of inches .
The burlap shall be kept damp throughout the curing period .
MembraneForming Curing Compounds .
Whitepigmented or fugitivedye membrane forming curing compounds may be used for curing concrete in minor drainage structures .
All other uses of curing compounds shall be approved in writing by the Engineer .
Only membraneforming curing compounds approved by the Agencys Materials Section may be used .
When membrane curing is used the exposed concrete shall be thoroughly sealed immediately after the free water has left the surface .
The concrete inside the forms shall be sealed immediately after the forms are removed and necessary finishing has been done .
The solution shall be applied in one or two separate applications .
If the solution is applied in two increments the second application shall follow the first application within minutes .
Satisfactory equipment shall be provided together with means to properly control and ensure the direct application of the curing solution to the concrete surface to result in a uniform coverage of the surface area at the rate of gallon of solution for each square feet .
If rain falls on the newlycoated concrete before the film has dried sufficiently to resist damage or if the film is damaged in any other manner a new coat of the solution shall be applied to the affected portions equal in curing value to that specified above .
Should the surface be subject to continuous injury or the use of curing compound results in a streaked or blotchy appearance the method shall be stopped and water curing applied .
White Polyethylene Sheeting with Sand Cover .
This method may be used only when approved by the Engineer and shall conform to the requirements of Subsection .b .
The airtight condition shall be obtained by the addition of a uniform sand cover with a minimum depth of inches .
PreDampened Cotton Mats .
The entire exposed surface of the concrete shall be covered with a blanket of cotton mats that has been predampened with water .
The mats shall be maintained in a damp condition until the curing period is complete .
c Bridge Decks .
For bridge decks the curing method shall promptly follow the screed machine within a maximum lag time of minutes and without interruption .
If this lag time can not be met then fogging of the area shall be performed in a manner that keeps the relative humidity above the evaporation rate of the concrete surface but not so excessive that water begins to collect on the surface prior to texturing or other surface manipulating procedures .
If in the opinion of the Engineer the Contractors curing procedure is not producing an adequate cure the Engineer may direct a change in the cure method at no additional cost to the Agency. . LOADING OF CONCRETE .
After the concrete has been placed and the finishing operations concluded it shall not be walked on or disturbed in any manner including removal of forms for a minimum period of hours .
If retarder is used as an admixture this minimum period may be extended as directed by the Engineer .
a Substructure .
No backfill material shall be placed against a newly completed structure unless the concrete cure is maintained in accordance with Table .A and until the field cured test cylinders have attained of the compressive strength specified in Table .A .
However the Contractor may erect forms for subsequent concrete placement on footings after hours have elapsed from the time that the footing placement was completed provided the concrete has sufficient strength to allow it to be worked on without damage and proper cure is maintained .
Static loads such as forms reinforcing steel or other materials necessary for construction may be placed on any concrete after it has been in place hours or a compressive strength of pounds per square inch has been obtained provided proper curing is maintained .
Superimposed loads from subsequent concrete pours will not be allowed on any substructure unit or section in place until the field cured test cylinders have attained of the compressive strength specified by Table .A and provided curing of the supporting section is maintained in accordance with Table .A .
b Superstructure .
Static loads such as forms granite curbing castinplace concrete curb and other materials necessary for deck construction shall not be placed on deck concrete until the effective cure time specified in Table .A is complete and the fieldcured test cylinders for this concrete have attained of the compressive strength specified in Table .A .
The Contractor shall keep bridge floors free of all motor vehicles transit mixers and heavy construction equipment until the curing period is satisfactorily completed the fieldcured test cylinders for the bridge floor concrete have attained the compressive strength specified in Table .A and the fieldcured test cylinders for the curb concrete or bridge rail concrete as applicable have attained of the compressive strength specified in Table .A .
c Vertical Joints .
Concrete shall not be placed against a vertical construction joint until the previously placed concrete has been in place a minimum of hours . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT .
The quantity of High Performance Concrete of the class specified to be measured for payment will be the number of cubic yards of the class of concrete specified in the complete and accepted work as determined by the prismoidal method using dimensions shown on the Plans or as directed by the Engineer .
The quantity of concrete shall also include the volume of superstructure precast concrete stayinplace forms but exclude the volume of steel or other stayinplace forms and form filling materials .
No deductions will be made for the volume of concrete displaced by steel reinforcement structural steel expansion joint material scuppers weep holes conduits tops of piles scoring chamfers or corners inset panels of inches or less in depth or any pipe less than inches in diameter . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT .
The accepted quantity of High Performance Concrete of the class specified will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per cubic yard .
Payment will be full compensation for performing the work specified including designing the mix performance of trial pours and satisfactory finishing and curing .
Payment will also be full compensation for furnishing all forms materials including joint filler and bond breaker labor tools admixtures and equipment including automatic temperature recording units trial batches and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
The cost of heating materials and protecting the concrete against cold weather and any additional cost for cement will not be paid for separately but will be considered incidental to the Contract Unit Prices for the applicable Section Pay Items .
The cost of furnishing testing facilities and supplies at the batch plant and the setting of inserts bench marks and bridge plaques furnished by the Agency will not be paid for separately but will be considered incidental to the Contract Unit Prices for High Performance Concrete .
Costs for all materials labor and incidentals for steel or other stayinplace forms and form filling materials will not be paid for separately but will be considered incidental to the Contract Unit Prices for High Performance Concrete .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
High Performance Concrete Class PCD Cubic Yard .
High Performance Concrete Class PCS Cubic Yard .
High Performance Concrete Class SCC Cubic Yard SECTION SHORING SUPERSTRUCTURES .
DESCRIPTION .
This work shall consist of furnishing the necessary shoring or vertically jacking of any structure or bearing to a position immediately above its present location holding it in position during any construction process lowering it to its supports removing all shoring or falsework and cleaning up the site. . CONSTRUCTION DRAWINGS .
Construction Drawings shall be submitted in accordance with the requirements of Section .
The Contractor shall submit the drawings and associated calculations procedures and details a minimum of days prior to the anticipated start of work. . CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS .
Associated details procedures and calculations for shoring and jacking shall conform to the latest version of the AASHTO LRFD Bridge Design Specifications and AASHTO LRFD Bridge Construction Specifications .
The Contractor shall be responsible for the strength capacity and performance of the construction methods employed .
When components andor materials that are not otherwise specified for removal are removed from the structure during shoring operations and the components andor materials are to be reinstalled in the construction the components andor materials shall be carefully removed and salvaged by the Contractor .
Components andor materials to be retained and reinstalled shall be stored at the location specified in the Contract or as directed by the Engineer .
The Contractor shall take every precaution necessary to prevent damage to remaining components andor materials and those to be retained for reinstallation .
Damage to remaining structure components andor materials and to those to be reinstalled shall be repaired or replaced by the Contractor both to the satisfaction of the Engineer and at no additional cost to the Agency . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT .
The quantity of Shoring Superstructure to be measured for payment will be on a lump sum basis for each location in the complete and accepted work specified in the Contract or ordered by the Engineer .
Unless otherwise specified in the Contract all work for removing salvaging stockpiling and reinstalling existing structure components andor materials during the Contractors shoring operations will not be measured for payment but will be considered incidental to Shoring Superstructure .
The quantity of Shoring Superstructure Bearings to be measured for payment will be on a unit basis for each bearing shored in the complete and accepted work as specified by the Contract or ordered by the Engineer . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT .
The accepted quantity of Shoring Superstructure will be paid for each location specified at the Contract lump sum price .
Payment will be full compensation for preparing and submitting construction drawings details procedures and calculations as specified performing the work specified including assuming all liability for the structure being shored and for furnishing all labor tools equipment materials and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
The accepted quantity of Shoring Superstructure Bearings will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price for each .
Payment will be full compensation for preparing and submitting construction drawings details procedures and calculations as specified performing the work specified including assuming all liability for the structure being shored and for furnishing all labor tools equipment materials and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
When the structure or bearing has been jacked and blocked onto its temporary position a payment of of the Contract Unit Price will be allowed .
The remaining will be paid when all shoring or falsework has been removed and the site cleaned up .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Shoring Superstructure Lump Sum .
Shoring Superstructure Bearings Each SECTION THIS SECTION RESERVED SECTION FURNISHING EQUIPMENT FOR DRIVING PILING .
DESCRIPTION .
This work shall consist of furnishing the equipment required to drive piles. . EQUIPMENT .
a General .
The Contractor shall obtain from the Engineer a copy of the Pile and Driving Equipment Data Form .
The Contractor shall complete this form in its entirety and shall submit copies to the Geotechnical Consultant employed by the Contractor when load tests are required and to the Engineer so that a wave equation analysis may be performed .
At least Calendar Days prior to the beginning of any pile driving the Contractor shall furnish for the Engineers acceptance Specifications and applicable information to verify the capacity and capability of the proposed pile driving hammer .
No test piles or production piles shall be driven prior to this acceptance .
During the pile driving operations no changes to the accepted equipment will be permitted without the Engineers permission .
b Hammers .
The type of hammer or driver shall be adequate in size to develop sufficient energy to drive the type and length of pile specified to the maximum ultimate pile capacity or nominal axial pile resistance shown on the Plans .
Each hammer shall be equipped with an anvil or clamp suitable for transmitting the driving force to the pile .
The valve mechanism and the other parts of the air or diesel hammer shall be maintained in first class condition to ensure that the length of stroke for a singleacting hammer and the design number of blows per minute for a doubleacting hammer will be obtained .
The drive head shall be axiallyaligned with the hammer and pile and shall be guided by leads and not be freeswinging .
It shall fit around the pile head in such a manner as to prevent transfer of torsional forces during driving while maintaining proper alignment of the hammer and pile .
The pile driving equipment shall not induce a compressive stress greater than of the yield stress of the pile material .
In addition the pile driving equipment shall be capable of driving the pile to the required ultimate capacity at a blow count of between and blows per inch as indicated by the Wave Equation Analysis Program WEAP .
c Leads and Bracing .
The Contractor shall locate and brace each pile so that upon driving its final position and alignment will be as specified and as shown on the Plans .
The selection of leads or form of bracing must be adequate to align and restrain the piling during placement .
If the leads or bracing are not adequate to place the piling to within the specified tolerance the Contractor shall modify the leads or system of bracing until it obtains results acceptable to the Engineer .
d Hammer Cushion .
All impact pile driving equipment except gravity hammers shall be equipped with a suitable thickness of hammer cushion material to prevent damage to the hammer or pile and to ensure uniform driving behavior .
Hammer cushions shall be made of durable manufactured materials such as Micarta provided in accordance with the hammer manufacturers guidelines .
Wood wire rope or asbestos hammer cushions will not be permitted .
A striker plate as recommended by the hammer manufacturer shall be placed on the hammer cushion to ensure uniform compression of the cushion material .
The hammer cushion shall be inspected in the presence of the Engineer prior to beginning pile driving at each substructure unit or after each hours of pile driving whichever is less .
Hammer cushions shall be replaced when either damaged or worn to of their original thickness .
e Saximeter .
The Contractor shall provide a Saximeter or equivalent device to assist the Inspector in collecting data to monitor the blow count for all hammer types the stroke for openend diesel hammers only or the kinetic energy if the hammer is equipped with proximity switches for measuring impact velocity .
The Saximeter shall be completely charged and in sound working order prior to Agency use and shall be available for the duration of the pile driving operation .
Pile driving operations shall not be conducted without the use of a Saximeter .
The Saximeter shall perform the following functions Detect hammer blows automatically using sound recognition circuits or manually with a keypad .
Automatically count blows and determine the blows per minute BPM for all impact hammers .
Calculate the stroke for openend diesel hammers .
Store blow count penetration average stroke or BPM data in memory .
Permit viewing of results on builtin screen .
Permit data transfer to PCs or printers .
For hammers equipped with proximity switches the Saximeter shall be deployed to acquire hammer impact velocity data by communicating with a transmitter mounted on the hammer and use this information to calculate the hammers kinetic energy .
The Saximeter shall operate on rechargeable batteries with batteries and charger supplied by the Contractor .
f Other Equipment .
Other equipment required and not specified in this Section shall be suitable for the use intended and shall be approved by the Engineer. . GENERAL .
The type and size of the equipment for driving piling shall be accepted by the Engineer prior to being moved onto the Project .
Unsatisfactory equipment shall be removed from the site and replaced with satisfactory equipment when directed by the Engineer . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT .
The quantity of Furnishing Equipment for Driving Piling to be measured for payment will be on a lump sum basis for furnishing the equipment to drive all piles required on the Project . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT .
The accepted quantity of Furnishing Equipment for Driving Piling will be paid for at the Contract lump sum price .
Payment will be full compensation for furnishing and mobilizing the required equipment to the Project and demobilizing equipment from the Project including the erecting dismantling and all incidentals necessary to complete the work .
When the equipment for driving piles has been set up and driving operations have started a payment of of the Contract Unit Price will be paid .
The remaining will be paid when piledriving operations are complete and the equipment has been removed from the site .
The cost of all labor and materials including operation and maintenance of the equipment for driving piles when used in connection with the driving of piles except for the costs specified in this Subsection will be considered as being included in the Contract Unit Prices for the types of piles being driven .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Furnishing Equipment for Driving Piling Lump Sum SECTION PILING .
DESCRIPTION .
This work shall consist of furnishing and driving piles of the size and type specified making field splices and performing pile load tests. . MATERIALS .
Materials shall meet the requirements of the following Subsections Steel Piling .
Steel Sheet Piling .
Receipt of approved mill test reports and verification that they correspond to the heat or lot numbers marked on the piles is required before the piles are driven . .
FURNISHING PILING .
a General .
Piling shall be of the type and size shown on the Plans .
The lengths shown for a structure are for estimating purposes only unless otherwise specified .
b Steel Piling .
Steel piling up to and including feet in length shall be furnished in one unwelded piece .
Steel piling over feet in length shall be furnished with not more than the number of splices specified in Table .A .
c Permanent Steel Sheet Piling .
The length type and classification of permanent steel sheet piling shall be as shown on the Plans. . DRIVING PILING .
a General .
Piling other than sheet piling shall not be driven until the excavation has been made to the elevation shown for the bottom of the footing .
In embankment areas the fill shall be completed to the bottom of the footing elevation prior to driving any piles .
Any material forced up between the piles shall be removed at the Contractors expense to the correct elevation before concrete for the foundation is placed .
Driving shall be done in a manner that will not damage or overstress the piles .
All piling shall be driven to the required maximum ultimate axial pile capacity or nominal axial pile resistance and to the penetration depth as shown on the Plans .
Under no condition shall the required maximum ultimate axial pile capacity or nominal axial pile resistance be less than that shown on the Plans except upon written approval of the Engineer .
When the Contractor proposes to use a vibratory or sonic method for driving piling the Engineer reserves the right to require the Contractor to demonstrate that such methods are capable of driving the piles to the penetration and resistance shown on the Plans .
Acceptance of this method shall be based on load tests on one or more piles driven by sonic or vibratory methods or verification of required maximum ultimate axial pile capacity or nominal axial pile resistance of one or more piles with an air or diesel hammer .
Verification of required maximum ultimate axial pile capacity or nominal axial pile resistance of sonic or vibratory driven piles shall be at the Contractors expense .
Piling shall not be driven within feet of any concrete footings or structures that have not cured for at least hours or attained a compressive strength of psi .
The placing of concrete and the driving of piles shall be scheduled so that fresh concrete and setting concrete will not be damaged by the pile driving .
Piles pushed up by driving adjacent piles or by any other cause shall be redriven to the required maximum ultimate axial pile capacity or nominal axial pile resistance and to the required penetration depth as shown on the Plans .
Any pile damaged during installation driven out of its proper location or driven below the elevation shown on the Plans or by the Engineer shall be corrected at the Contractors expense by one of the following methods approved by the Engineer Withdrawing and replacing the damaged pile with a new and if necessary longer pile .
Driving a second pile adjacent to the damaged pile .
Splicing the damaged pile or extending the footing to properly enclose the pile .
This will not be allowed for a substructure unit containing only a single row of piles .
b Tolerances .
The piling after driving shall not vary more than inch per foot from vertical or the specified batter .
The Engineer may require that driving be stopped in order to check the pile for plumb .
Pulling or pushing laterally on piles to correct outofplumb errors or splicing a section that meets the tolerances for plumb in this section on an outofplumb section will not be permitted .
The tops of foundation piling after driving shall not vary from the position shown on the Plans by more than inches and shall have a minimum of inches of concrete encasement .
The rotation about the vertical axis of the pile shall not vary by more than from that shown on the Plans .
The Contractor shall demonstrate how the tolerances will be met to the satisfaction of the Engineer prior to driving .
If the verticality location andor rotation tolerances specified herein are exceeded the extent of corrective measures will be evaluated by the Engineer .
If in the judgment of the Engineer corrective measures are necessary suitable measures shall be designed and constructed by the Contractor .
The Contractor shall bear all costs including delays associated with the corrective action .
c Pile Load Tests .
Pile load tests when required shall be performed prior to driving any production piles .
When not driven as a permanent production pile the test pile shall be driven near the substructure footing at a location acceptable to the Engineer .
When pile load tests are required the Contractor shall provide the services of a Geotechnical Consulting firm for dynamic testing of the test piles .
A dynamic load test pile may be used and paid for as a permanent production pile if it meets all of the following requirements After testing is completed the test pile meets all of the requirements for a permanent production pile i.e .
it is driven to the required maximum ultimate axial pile capacity or nominal axial pile resistance and to the required penetration depth as shown on the Plans .
The test pile is driven at the correct location and with the correct batter and has not failed under test loading is not damaged and does not exceed maximum number of splices etc .
The use of the test pile as a permanent production pile is approved by the Engineer .
d Determination of the Maximum Ultimate Axial Pile Capacity or Nominal Axial Pile Resistance .
These values shall be determined by dynamic loading tests wave equation analysis or a combination thereof as follows Dynamic Load Test .
Dynamic monitoring of the test piles shall be conducted by the Contractors Geotechnical Consultant and results will be used by the Engineer to verify that the required maximum ultimate axial pile capacity or nominal axial pile resistance has been met .
In addition to equipment and services to dynamically monitor the pile driving the Contractors Geotechnical Consultant shall perform wave equation analyses WEAP as necessary to determine the suitability of the pile driving equipment proposed by the Contractor and to determine the preliminary driving criteria for testing .
The Geotechnical Consultant shall submit copies of the wave equation analysis a minimum of Calendar Days prior to the beginning of any pile driving .
Also the Geotechnical Consultant shall perform a laboratory case pile wave analysis CAPWAP for each test pile to verify the field results .
The Geotechnical Consultant shall provide a preliminary and final written report including all data collected and the results of both the WEAP and CAPWAP for each test pile in accordance with the requirements of ASTM D . The preliminary report shall be presented to the Engineer when required and the final report shall be submitted following completion of all load tests .
The effective capacity of battered piles shall be reduced by multiplying by the factors specified in Table .A .
TABLE .A EFFECTIVE CAPACITY FACTORS FOR BATTERED PILES Batter Factor to .
to .
to .
to .
As a guide a pile may be considered driven to refusal when the driving resistance is blows per inch or blows per inch but only when the hammer stroke is equal to or above the required stroke as specified in the wave equation analysis .
This refusal value may be adjusted by the Engineer according to the results of the dynamic pile monitoring .
The Contractors driving operations shall be monitored with a pile driving analyzer supplied and operated by the Contractors Geotechnical Consultant during the installation and re striking of the test piles .
Dynamic pile load tests shall be performed on the test pile prior to driving production piles at any substructure .
Production pile driving procedures may be adjusted based on the results from the pile driving analyzer .
Dynamic monitoring shall be performed in accordance with the requirements of ASTM D with equipment capable of determining the maximum force velocity and transmitted energy as well as the ultimate static bearing capacity computed by the case method for each pile tested .
Gauges shall be attached to the pile approximately feet below the pile head and connected with a cable to recording instruments on the ground away from the pile .
The gauge system shall include two accelerometers two strain transducers and a junction box .
Dynamic monitoring shall be performed with the assistance of the Contractor as specified in this Subsection .
The Contractor may be required by the Engineer to modify the test pile driving operation based on the results from the pile driving analyzer .
The Geotechnical Consultant shall furnish the pile driving analyzer and supplemental equipment specified in these Specifications .
All test piles shall be monitored using the pile driving analyzer .
The Contractor shall make the test piles available for drilling and tapping holes prior to driving .
The Geotechnical Consultant shall furnish equipment materials and labor necessary for drilling and tapping holes in the test piles for attaching the monitoring instruments .
The Contractor shall provide the following support items and equipment a .
Access .
The Contractor shall provide the Geotechnical Consultants personnel safe and reasonable means of access to the pile head for attaching transducers .
A platform having a minimum size of feet feet shall be equipped so that it may be raised to the top of the pile while the pile is located in the leads .
b .
Power Source .
The Contractor shall furnish an electric power source for the pile driving analyzer .
If a field generator is used as the power source it shall be equipped with functioning meters for monitoring voltage and frequency levels .
Singlephase electricity A V AC with a line frequency of Hz shall be provided .
Dynamic measurements shall be taken by the Geotechnical Consultant during full length driving of all test piles and during all restriking of the test piles .
The stresses in the piles shall be monitored to ensure that the driving stresses do not exceed of the yield stress of the pile .
The Contractor shall reduce the energy transmitted to the pile by using cushions or reducing the energy of the hammer to maintain the above criteria .
The Contractor shall assist in preparing the piles to be monitored with the necessary gauge attachments on opposite sides of the pile .
The gauges shall be attached by drilling and threading appropriately sized holes .
The estimated time for performing the above tasks is approximately minutes per section of pile driven .
The Geotechnical Consultant shall do the drilling and tapping of holes in each section to be driven .
The Contractor shall assist in moving and giving access to the piles .
All drilling and tapping of holes shall be done on the ground .
After the gauge attachments are prepared and all gauges and cables are removed from the pile segment the Contractor shall lift and spot the pile according to normal procedures .
The pile shall be made available for the installation of gauges after placing the pile in the leads .
The Contractor shall then send one person up to the pile head to assist the Geotechnical Consultant in attachment of the gauges .
The time required to ascend complete the attachments and then descend is estimated to be approximately one hour .
Pile driving during monitoring is typical of conventional driving .
The cable from the gauges hangs freely down along the pile and to the monitoring equipment .
The Geotechnical Consultant may temporarily stop the pile driving during the monitoring to review the data or change gauges or other equipment .
The Contractor shall assist and cooperate with the Geotechnical Consultant as required during dynamic monitoring .
Delays to pile driving due to dynamic monitoring after pile driving has begun should not exceed more than one hour per pile .
When the level of the gauges approaches the ground the driving shall be halted to remove the gauges from the pile .
The time required for removal of gauges is estimated to be about minutes .
If additional driving is required the Contractor shall complete the pile splice and shall repeat the process of attaching gauges at the top of the next segment .
The gauges shall be attached prior to continuation of driving .
Restriking of all test piles is required .
The minimum time between the end of initial driving and restriking shall be hours .
Prior to restriking the test piles the dynamic testing gauges shall be reattached to the pile and the pile hammer shall be warmed up by striking at least blows on another pile .
Restriking shall consist of either inches of penetration or hammer blows whichever occurs first .
Wave Equation Analysis .
When load tests are not specified the Engineer will verify the required maximum ultimate axial pile capacity or nominal axial pile resistance based on the Agencys wave equation analysis .
e Steel Sheet Piling .
Permanent sheet piling shall be left in place as part of the finished structure .
f Steel Piling .
Unless otherwise specified the driving point of all piling including test piling shall be reinforced .
Point reinforcement may be either a commercially fabricated weldment or a casting designed to protect the end of the pile during driving or for seating the pile on ledge .
Point reinforcement details shall conform to the Contract requirements and shall be approved by the Engineer .
Requirements for commercially fabricated weldments are Point reinforcement cut sheets and welding procedures shall be submitted for approval in accordance with the requirements in Subsection .. Weldments shall be fabricated so that the direction of rolling of weldment plates is in the same direction as the axis of the pile .
Pile flanges shall be welded to the outside faces of a pile point with a continuous bevel groove weld .
The depth of the groove weld shall be at least of the pile flange thickness but in no case less than inch .
The minimum thickness of the cutting edge of the point shall be inch or of the flange thickness of the pile whichever is greater .
When the Contract requires the piles to be driven to point bearing on ledge the ledge bearing surface of the point shall have at least five cutting wedges a minimum of one centered along the strong axis of the web and one on each corner of the flanges. . SPLICES .
a Splices for Steel Piling .
Splices shall be made in accordance with details shown on the Plans at the locations approved by the Engineer .
The maximum allowable number of splices are shown in Table .A .
TABLE .A ALLOWABLE NUMBER OF SPLICES FOR STEEL PILING Length of Steel Piling feet Maximum Number of Splices Allowed All piles to be spliced shall be cut square and even and the flanges shall be beveled in accordance with approved welding procedures .
Webs shall be cut so that full bearing is obtained between the two surfaces .
The splice shall be made in such a manner that the spliced pile shall be straight and true .
Welds shall be continuous and develop the full strength of the parts being welded .
When a substructure unit contains only a single row of piles only one pile splice shall be allowed in the top feet of that substructure unit measured from the bottom of the pile cap .
b Splices for Steel Sheet Piling .
Splices for steel sheet piling will not be permitted unless authorized in writing by the Engineer. . WELDING .
Welding shall conform to the requirements of Subsection .. .
CUTTING OF PILING .
Piling shall be cut to the elevations shown on the Plans or as ordered by the Engineer .
Cutoffs shall remain the property of the Contractor . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT .
The quantities to be measured for payment will be measured as follows a Piling .
Steel Piling .
Steel Piling will be the total number of linear feet for each pile driven accepted and left in place measured to the nearest linear foot .
If a test pile is driven within foundation limits and subsequently accepted as permanent foundation piling measurement for payment as Steel Piling will be made for the test pile .
If a test pile is driven outside of foundation limits no measurement for payment as Steel Piling will be made for the test pile Steel Sheet Piling .
Steel sheet piling will be the total number of square feet of Permanent Steel Sheet Piling driven accepted and left in place after cutoff .
b Pile Loading Tests .
Pile Loading Tests will be measured in units of one for each load tested pile .
Any necessary retests shall be at the Contractors expense . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT .
The accepted quantities of piling will be paid for at the Contract Unit Prices as follows a Steel Piling .
Steel piling of the size specified will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per linear foot .
b Steel Sheet Piling .
Steel sheet piling of the type specified will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per square foot .
Payment for the above specified items will be full compensation for furnishing transporting storing handling and placing the material specified including metal collars metal shoes reinforcing material for ends of steel piling reinforcing steel splices wales and braces for steel sheet piling and for furnishing all labor tools equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
The accepted quantity of Dynamic Pile Loading Test will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price for each .
Payment will also be full compensation for providing cooperating with and assisting the Geotechnical Consultant in the performance of dynamic testing for providing dynamic testing equipment and for re striking the test pile .
Payment will be full compensation for cutting off the test pile at the elevation directed by the Engineer for preparing and submitting geotechnical reports and for furnishing all labor tools equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
Payment for furnishing and driving test piling driven outside of foundation limits will be included in the Unit Price bid for Dynamic Pile Loading Test .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Steel Piling HP Linear Foot .
Steel Piling HP Linear Foot .
Steel Piling HP Linear Foot .
Steel Piling HP Linear Foot .
Steel Piling HP Linear Foot .
Steel Piling HP Linear Foot .
Steel Piling HP Linear Foot .
Steel Piling HP Linear Foot .
Steel Piling HP Linear Foot .
Steel Piling HP Linear Foot .
Permanent Steel Sheet Piling Square Foot .
Dynamic Pile Loading Test Each SECTION STRUCTURAL STEEL .
DESCRIPTION .
This work shall consist of furnishing erecting and when specified coating fabricated metal structures and structural components. . MATERIALS .
Materials shall meet the requirements of the following Subsections Mortar Type IV .
Approved Structural Coating Systems .
Carbon Steel Bolts Nuts and Washers .
HighStrength Bolts Nuts and Washers .
HeatTreated Structural Bolts .
Anchor Bolts Bearing Devices .
Welded Stud Shear Connectors .
Steel Tubing .
Direct Tension Indicators .
Tension Control Assemblies .
Galvanizing .
Metalizing .
Structural Steel shall meet the requirements of Subsection .
through Subsection ..
Unless otherwise specified in the Contract all steel shall be highstrength lowalloy structural steel conforming to the requirements of AASHTO M MM Grade W Grade W. All materials shall conform to the prescribed AASHTO or ASTM Specifications and no substitutions will be allowed. . GENERAL FABRICATION REQUIREMENTS .
Material furnished under this Section that is permanently incorporated into a FederalAid Project shall be entirely manufactured and coated in the United States .
Except as modified below fabrication shall be performed in accordance with the latest editions of the applicable AASHTO design code ANSIAASHTOAWS D. hereinafter designated as AWS D. and interim Specifications in effect on the date of the Executed Contract .
Unless otherwise indicated in the Contract the applicable AASHTO design code shall be the latest edition of the AASHTO LRFD Bridge Design Specifications .
Prior to performing any work under this Section the fabricator must have received approval for all Fabrication Drawings welding procedures and any special Contract requirements and have notified the Agencys Structural Steel Fabrication Engineer at least Working Days in advance of fabrication .
The Contractor shall bear full responsibility and costs for all materials ordered raw materials stockpiled or for work performed prior to approval of the Fabrication Drawings or written authorization from the Structures Engineer .
All work shall be performed by the fabricator indicated on the approved Fabrication Drawings unless otherwise authorized in writing by the Structures Engineer .
Structural steel furnished under this Section shall be fabricated in a plant having an AISC Certified Bridge Fabricator Advanced ABR Certification and in a plant approved by the Agency prior to Contract Execution .
Minor steel components including but not limited to bridge rail expansion joints downspouts scuppers and pedestrian hand railings may be fabricated in a fabrication plant that does not have an AISC Certified Bridge Fabricator Advanced ABR Certification provided the fabrication plant is approved in writing by the Structures Engineer prior to the award of the Contract .
All plants without certification shall have an organization operation and equipment capable of producing a product equal to a certified plant .
VTrans reserves the right for the Structures Engineer to give written notification to any fabricator regardless of certification level or status restricting the types of items that they are approved to fabricate up to and including restricting all structural steel fabrication for the Agency .
Causes for such restrictions shall include concerns of quality production accountability or any other cause that is deemed justifiable by the Agency .
The fabricator shall demonstrate full capability for fabricating materials meeting the requirements of the Contract .
Failure to meet Contract requirements will result in rejection of the material being fabricated and the termination of the ability to fabricate material for the State .
All steel fabrication plants must satisfy the following minimum requirements a Reference Materials .
The plant shall have a library containing the latest editions of the following publications AWS A .
A .
A .
A .
A .
A .
A .
A. C. C. D. D. D. D. and D. AASHTO Standard Specifications for Transportation Materials and Methods of Sampling and Testing Parts I and II AISC Quality Criteria and Inspection Standards A Guide to the Shop Painting of Structural Steel Manual of Steel Construction and Structural Steel Detailing Vermont Agency of Transportation Standard Specifications for Construction AASHTO LRFD Bridge Design Specifications AASHTO LRFD Bridge Construction Specifications AASHTO Standard Specifications for Welding of Structural Steel Highway Bridges AREMA Specifications when applicable American Society for Nondestructive Testing ASNT SNTTCA SSPC Steel Structures Painting Manual Volume and Volume AASHTONSBA G. In addition to the above access to the latest editions of any applicable ASTM standards is required .
b Files .
The fabricator shall maintain an organized file containing the following records Records of material purchased Inventory of material in stock Certification records of all material and welding supplies c Personnel .
Fabrication personnel shall meet the following minimum requirements Inspectors .
The fabricators representative responsible for inspection testing and quality matters shall be qualified and certified in accordance with the provisions of AWS QC Standard for Qualification and Certification of Welding Inspectors .
Welders .
Welders shall be certified for each process and position of prequalified joints in the approved welding procedures including tacking in accordance with the requirements of AWS D. for all structural bridge items and ANSIAWS D. hereinafter designated as AWS D. for items not covered in AWS D .. d Material Fabrication Facilities .
All fabrication shall be performed in an enclosed permanent structure unless otherwise approved by the Structures Engineer .
To meet minimum requirements a plant shall have the following facilities a .
Dry storage for manual electrodes and fluxes b .
Ovens with proper temperature ranges for drying electrodes and fluxes c. Calibrated tools gauges tapes and instruments d. Suitable preheating equipment and means for measuring preheat temperatures e. DC and AC manual shielded metal arc welding equipment capable of at least A output f. Mechanicallyguided burning equipment g. Machine shop facilities sufficient to perform the work specified h. Facilities and equipment for applying shop paint to perform the work specified i .
Blast cleaning equipment suitable for preparing a surface meeting the requirements of Subsection .
j .
Suitable storage for materials and finished products A plant engaged in fabrication of plate girders rolled beams and other main member components requiring continuous welds over feet in length shall also have the following equipment a .
Automatic arc equipment b. Semiautomatic arc equipment c. Studwelding equipment capable of installing a inch diameter stud when applicable d. Equipment suitable for heat curving or heat cambering e. Hydraulic jacking equipment suitable for aligning and positioning structural components Adequate office facilities and equipment for the Agencys Quality Assurance Inspector shall be separate from the Quality Control facilities and shall include the following items a .
A standard office desk with drawers locks and keys b. Adjustable office chair c. Telephone d. Plan rack and file cabinet with lock and keys e. The following tools shall be available for the Inspectors use .
Weld gauges .
Micrometer .
Dry and wet film paint gauge .
foot steel measuring tape .
foot steel measuring tape .
foot straightedge .
Temperature and marking crayons .
Ambient air thermometer .
foot level .
foot carpenters square The Engineer reserves the right to reject inadequate office facilities and require suitable alternatives .
e Testing Equipment .
When code requirements necessitate nondestructive testing for quality control or quality assurance the fabricator shall have available the necessary nondestructive testing equipment for material or weld inspection such as magnetic particle radiograph ultrasonic or dye penetrant or employ an outside inspection firm to fulfill the necessary nondestructive test requirements of the code .
Nondestructive tests shall be performed in accordance with the applicable code in effect on the date of the Contract . .
DRAWINGS AND PROCEDURES .
a General .
As soon as practical after Contract Execution the fabricator shall prepare Fabrication Drawings in accordance with the requirements of Section .
Drawings details and welding procedures must be submitted as a complete package for each structure .
The Agency will review Fabrication Drawings details and procedures for their compliance with the Contract .
The Agency shall refer to the requirements of AASHTONSBA G. Section and use them as the basis for the review of structural steel Fabrication Drawings .
The Agency assumes no responsibility for dimensions and other information calculated by the fabricator .
The fabricator is responsible for the fit of all components .
If errors occur that cause problems during erection the Contractor is responsible for making acceptable corrections .
The Agency is responsible for all principal dimensions and material properties contained in the Contract .
The fabricator and Contractor are responsible for bringing to the Agencys attention any errors or discrepancies they discover .
The fabricator is responsible for dimensioning members and ordering material to compensate for weld shrinkage distortion elastic deformation sweep slope machining waste from cutting and other incidentals that are affected by the fabrication process .
b Details .
Details not shown on the Plans that are necessary for completing the Fabrication Drawings shall be developed by the fabricator .
The Fabrication Drawings shall provide a material list on each sheet for tabulating the number of pieces piece marks description dimensions type of material and weight of each piece .
When the Contract Item pay unit is on a per pound basis the weight of each piece shall be extended and summarized for each sheet as specified in Subsection ..
Weight extensions extended weights shall be submitted to the Agency upon completion of fabrication .
All welds shown on the Fabrication Drawings shall identify by symbol the applicable procedures and appropriate nondestructive testing requirements .
A separate symbol must be used to identify each approved welding procedure .
c Welding Procedures .
Detailed welding procedures shall be prepared in accordance with the provisions of the applicable AWSANSIAASHTO code revisions and submitted in accordance with the following Welding procedures for each structure shall be a separate package of consecutively numbered sheets .
All procedures shall be prequalified .
Procedure qualification test records shall be submitted along with each procedure .
Heat input values during welding shall be shown for each procedure .
Procedure Specifications shall be presented in a format similar to Form E of AWS D. Appendix E or Form E of AWS D. Appendix IV .
Procedure qualification test records shall be presented in a format similar to Form E of AWS D. Appendix E or Form E of AWS D. Appendix IV .
Details of welded joints not prequalified under AWS D. Section .
shall be qualified .
d Revisions .
Adjacent to or incorporated with the title box of each sheet shall be a revision record box including provision for the date of revision symbol of revision number revision made by and description of each revision .
As changes or revisions are made to previously approved sheets the appropriate information shall be recorded a revision number symbol placed adjacent to the appropriate detail and the sheet resubmitted for approval .
It is the fabricators responsibility to transfer all as noted corrections to the originals .
Revisions of welding procedures shall also be resubmitted as they occur. . QUALITY ACCEPTANCE .
Quality Acceptance is inspection of fabrication by the Agency or the Agencys representative Quality Assurance Inspector QAI to verify compliance with these Specifications .
Refer to the Vtrans Quality Assurance Manual for Metal Fabrication which may be found on the Agencys Structures website for more information .
a Scope of Work .
Inspection will include the examination of materials processes quality of work reports and test results the performance of tests specified the evaluation of reports and tests the approval disapproval or rejection of materials processes quality of work reports and test results or other work specified or directed by the Engineer .
b Control of Work .
The Quality Assurance Inspector QAI is a representative of the Engineer and will perform all the duties assigned and delegated to the Engineer in Section as they pertain to the Contract except for measuring quantities of materials and payment thereof .
The Inspector will witness interpret and accept or reject all testing .
The QAI will have the authority to reject any material or work that does not conform to the Contract requirements .
Inspection of the work will conform to the requirements of the applicable AWSANSIAASHTO codes and Specifications referenced in the Contract .
c Tools and Equipment .
QAIs are expected to furnish their own personal safety equipment .
They may make use of any tools the fabricator is required to make available however the fabricator is responsible for verifying that the equipment is properly calibrated and in working order. . QUALITY CONTROL .
a General .
Quality Control is the inspection testing and management of quality matters necessary for producing a product that conforms to the requirements of the Contract .
The fabricator is responsible for Quality Control .
The fabricator is responsible for performing all nondestructive tests required by the Contract and any nondestructive tests necessary to determine the extent of metallurgical defects discovered in the base metal .
b Qualifications of Inspectors .
The fabricators representative responsible for Quality Control shall be an AWS Certified Welding Inspector CWI qualified and certified in accordance with the provisions of AWS QC .
c Nondestructive Testing .
The fabricator shall notify the Agency sufficiently in advance of any scheduled nondestructive testing so that all tests can be witnessed by an Agency Quality Assurance Inspector .
Nondestructive tests shall be performed in accordance with the requirements of AWS D ..
Personnel performing and interpreting nondestructive tests radiographic magnetic particle ultrasonic and dye penetrant shall be NDT certified for Level II qualification in accordance with the American Society for Nondestructive Testing Recommended Practice Number SNTTCA .
d Ultrasonic Testing .
Ultrasonic testing will not be permitted as a substitute for radiographic testing however ultrasonic testing may be used by the fabricator to determine the extent of discontinuities laminations and inclusions discovered in any weld or base metal. . MATERIAL IDENTIFICATION .
a Material Traceability .
The origin of each piece of material to be incorporated in a product shall be clearly identified at all times during the fabrication of the product .
If fabrication operations could obliterate the identity the fabricator may use a lowstress die stamp placed in an area not exposed on the finished structure .
The die stamp character size shall be a minimum of inch and a maximum of inch .
Nonmetallic materials shall be identified to the satisfaction of the Engineer .
When requested the Contractor shall furnish an affidavit certifying that throughout the fabrication operation identification of the steel has been maintained in accordance with this Specification .
When a steel stamp identification is used at a tension joint transition the impression shall be placed on the thicker of the members. . BASE METAL REQUIREMENTS .
When backing bars extension bars and runoff plates are part of a welding process the material used shall be of the same chemistry as the base metal .
Discontinuities laminations inclusions or other anomalies discovered in the base metal during the manufacturing process shall be individually evaluated .
The Agency may require nondestructive testing to determine the extent of the defect .
Repair procedures or replacement will be approved on an individual case basis .
Rolled beams shall be ordered from the mill without camber unless preapproved in writing by the Structures Engineer .
Primary stresscarrying material shall be ordered and prepared so that the direction of rolling is parallel to the stress in the member in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO LRFD Bridge Construction Specifications Article Members identified as fracture critical shall be subject to additional base metal requirements as specified in Subsection .. Members or components of members designated in the Contract as requiring Charpy VNotch CVN testing or members subject to tensile or compressive stress as specified in Subsection .
shall be identified as a main member and shall therefore be subject to the requirements of main members . .
PREPARATION OF BASE METAL .
Material flame cuts by any thermal cutting process shall be made with an approved mechanicallyguided torch .
The fabricator shall use preheating postheating or control of the cutting process to ensure that flamecut edges of main members of structural steel are not flamehardened .
Flamecut edges that will not be included in a permanent weld shall have a Rockwell Hardness Value not greater than C. Pieces that are to be bent during fabrication shall be done so in accordance with the requirements of AWS D. and the applicable design code as defined in Subsection ..
Cold bending of main members will not be permitted without written approval of the Agency .
This approval may limit the radius of curvature and require nondestructive testing to verify that no internal distress or separation has occurred .
Expenses incurred in performing any such nondestructive test examination shall be the responsibility of the fabricator. . WELDING .
a General .
All design details quality of work procedures and inspection of welding shall conform to the requirements of the AWS D. Bridge Welding Code .
For welding items other than those covered in AWS D. one of the following publications shall be adhered to ANSIAWS D. Structural Welding Code Steel ANSIAWS D. Structural Welding Code Aluminum ANSIAWS D. Structural Welding Code Sheet Steel ANSIAWS D. Structural Welding Code Reinforcing Steel Welding will not be permitted without approved welding procedures and Fabrication Drawings meeting the requirements of Subsection .. Welding and inspection of shear connectors shall conform to the requirements of Section .
Stitch welds are not permitted however the skipandfill technique may be used when applicable to prevent distortion .
Prior to performing any corrective weld repairs to base metal the fabricator shall do the following Submit the proposed repair procedure to the Agencys Structural Steel Fabrication Engineer in writing .
Corrective procedures for radiographed butt welds may be included in the welding procedure .
Receive written authorization from the Agency to proceed .
Repair procedures detailed in an approved welding procedure may be authorized by the Agencys Quality Assurance Inspector .
The fabricator will be permitted a maximum of two repairs on any given welded joint .
Should nondestructive test inspection indicate weld rejection after two repairs the Agency may reject the entire weld and require its removal .
b Welding Processes .
Shielded Metal Arc Welding SMAW conforming to the requirements of AWS D. Section shall be deemed prequalified .
Submerged Arc Welding SAW Flux Core Arc Welding FCAW and Gas Metal Arc Welding GMAW shall be subject to qualification testing as described in AWS D. Section prior to approval .
Other processes may be approved on a Project byProject basis provided procedure qualification results meet the specified acceptance criteria .
Submerged Arc Welding SAW shall be used for all principal welds as follows The fully automatic process shall be used for attaching cover plates flange to web welds and attaching connection or stiffener plates to girder webs .
The semiautomatic process may be used when joint length position or physical location restricts the use of the automatic process .
The manual Shielded Metal Arc Welding process shall be limited to attaching connection plates to rolled beams welding bearing assemblies repairs tack welding joints under inches in length minor attachments and other applications where the use of an automatic process is impractical .
When prior authorization has been granted the Gas Metal Arc Welding GMAW and Flux Core Arc Welding FCAW processes will be limited to indoor shop welding of bridge rail expansion joints cross frames bearing devices scuppers sign fixtures light fixtures and lowstressed members or components .
Gas Metal Arc WeldingShort Circuit Arc GMAWS will not be permitted .
Any gas shielded process subject to wind velocities in excess of miles per hour shall be protected using draft barriers .
c Shop Welding .
The fabricator shall maintain a file of the qualifications of all welders welding operators and tackers qualified in accordance with the requirements of AWS D. Section .
Requalification may be required in accordance with the requirements of AWS D. Section .
The requirements of AWS D. shall be adhered to for welding of items not covered in AWS D ..
Groove welds shall be started and terminated with extension bars or runoff plates .
Fillet welds shall be performed in the flat or horizontal position unless restricted by member size or physical position .
d Field Welding .
Welding performed in the field shall be done by welders or welding operators who are on the prequalified welder list .
This list may be found on the Agencys Structures Section website .
The Agencys requirements for field welding are contained in the Field Welding Manual and shall be adhered to .
This manual may be obtained from the Agencys Structures Section website .
Welding performed in the field is subject to all of the requirements of Subsection ..
The SMAW process is the only process approved for field welding .
The axis of any weld used to attach miscellaneous construction fixtures to main members as defined in Subsection .
shall be in the same direction as the primary stress in the member and shall be approved in writing by the Engineer .
Welding of miscellaneous construction fixtures such as form supports screed supports and reinforcing steel chairs to any portion of the bridge structure will not be permitted without approved Drawings and welding procedures .
Any increase in material thickness made necessary by reduced allowable stresses resulting from such welding shall be at the Contractors expense .
Approval for any welding requiring an increase in material thickness must be obtained before the affected structural steel is fabricated .
Shear connectors shall be installed in accordance with the requirements of Section .
e Process and Procedure Qualification .
General .
Welding processes and procedures requiring qualification shall be qualified in accordance with the requirements of AWS D .. Welding and testing of samples shall be witnessed by the Agency or the Agencys Quality Assurance Inspector or an Authorized Representative of a testing agency that is AWS certified in accordance with the provisions of AWS QC .
Process and procedure qualification record tests shall be reported in a format similar to those provided in AWS D .. Procedure Specifications shall be reported in a format similar to those provided in AWS D ..
Acceptance Requirements .
The basis for acceptance shall conform to the requirements of AWS D ..
The requirements of AWS D. shall be adhered to for items not covered in AWS D .. . FRACTURE CRITICAL MEMBERS .
The Agency will identify in the Contract the members or member components that are categorized as fracture critical .
Material for members or member components identified as fracture critical shall be furnished and fabricated in conformance with the requirements of AWS D. for fracture critical components .
Welding performed on fracture critical members or components and testing shall be witnessed by an Agency representative .
Qualification acceptance for any welding procedure shall be based on the results of mechanical tests and chemical analysis of deposited weld metal .
Procedure requirements and basis of acceptance shall meet the requirements in AWS D. for fracture critical components .
ASSEMBLY .
a Camber .
Beams and girders shall be fabricated to the camber indicated on the approved Fabrication Drawings .
b Curved Girders .
Welded curved girders with radii less than feet shall be fabricated by cutting the flange plates to the required curvature .
Each plate shall be flame cut simultaneously on both edges to reduce unbalanced shrinkage stresses .
The flange plate lengths between shop splices shall not be less than feet .
Web plates shall be aligned to the center of the flange plates .
If the final curvature is not as specified after the flanges have been welded to the web the girder shall be corrected by application of heat in accordance with an approved procedure .
c Heat Curving and Cambering .
The final horizontal curvature and vertical camber shall be measured only after the member has cooled .
The member shall be supported in a manner that will ensure accurate measurements for sweep and camber .
The web shall be in a vertical position for measuring curvature and in a horizontal position for measuring camber .
Heating shall be performed in such a manner that the temperature of the steel does not exceed F. Artificial cooling will not be permitted until a member has cooled to F. Under no conditions will water be permitted for cooling .
Air may be used subject to the approval of the Quality Assurance Inspector .
Any member heated to a temperature of more than F shall be rejected .
d Finish .
All sharp corners and edges that are marred cut or roughened in handling shall be rounded to a inch radius by grinding .
e Connections and Bolting .
The materials and fabrication procedures shall comply with the provisions of Subsection .. f Bearing Connections .
Field bearing connections shall not be permitted .
Connections in bearing may require different tolerances of fit .
Terms used to define the fit of connections are as follows Tight Fit .
Fifty percent of the projected bearing area shall be in contact within .
inch with a permissible variation of inch for the remaining of projected area .
Grind to Bear .
Seventyfive percent of the projected area shall be in contact within .
inch with a permissible variation of inch for the remaining projected area .
Mill to Bear .
One hundred percent of the projected bearing area shall be in full contact .
g Intermediate Stiffeners .
The ends of intermediate stiffeners shall fit closely to the flanges with a maximum allowable gap of inch .
h Straightening Material .
Straightening or repair of any member or component will be subject to written approval by the Agency .
Procedures will be required describing in detail the distortion to be corrected and all procedures for heating cooling verifying final dimensions and nondestructive tests. . TOLERANCES .
Rolled steel plates shapes and bars shall be supplied to the permissible tolerances specified in ASTM A A M. The camber and sweep of fabricated rolled members shall be subject to the same dimensional tolerances specified for welded members in AWS D ..
The metal bearing surface of any masonry bearing plate shall be flat with a maximum permissible variation of .
inch from a plane determined by any three of its corners .
The fabricator is responsible for straightening to Specification tolerances any weldments that may have been distorted through stress relieving during the galvanizing process . .
SURFACE PREPARATION .
All materials shall be blastcleaned to the grade specified as defined by the Pictorial Surface Preparation Standard SSPCVIS .
Further preparation shall conform to the following a Surfaces to Remain Uncoated .
Surfaces may be blastcleaned either before or after fabrication .
The final surface appearance after fabrication shall be clean and free from any contaminants or blemishes so as to allow the metal to weather uniformly .
b Surfaces to be Galvanized or Metalized .
Prior to galvanizing or metalizing all corners and edges of steel plates shapes etc .
shall be ground to a inch radius .
c Surfaces to be Painted .
All material to be painted shall be cleaned in accordance with the appropriate painting items in the Contract . .
MARKING STORING AND SHIPPING .
a Marking .
Each member shall be identified with an erection mark corresponding with the member identification mark on the approved Fabrication Drawings .
Identification marks may be painted on members that will receive field coats of paint .
Identification marks on unpainted steel shall be impressed into the member with a lowstress stamp in a nonstressed or lowstressed area of the member .
The fabricator shall identify to the Contractor the procedure used for marking material .
b Storing .
Material at the fabricators plant shall be stored above ground on platforms skids or other suitable supports .
It shall be kept clean properly drained and protected from unwanted corrosion .
Free circulation of air shall be provided around all surfaces .
Girders and beams shall be stored in the upright position supported at their ends or points of bearing .
Long members e.g .
columns and chords shall be supported at sufficient points to prevent damage from deflection .
Special care shall be taken for unpainted steel to ensure that it can weather uniformly .
In addition to the requirements specified above material or raw material stockpile storage shall be subject to any other storage criteria deemed necessary by the Engineer in accordance with the requirements of Subsection .. c Shipping .
Beams and girders shall be transported in the upright position .
If the members size or shape prohibits shipment in the upright position the fabricator shall submit a proposed method and details of shipment to the Agency for approval .
The fabricator shall not ship any material either to the Project or to another manufacturer without the Agencys approval .
The Agencys Quality Assurance Inspector will place a seal of approval on all material that has been accepted and will approve the loading positioning and anchorage of all material being shipped. . FIELD HANDLING AND STORING .
The Contractor is responsible for providing equipment that is adequate for safely lifting and placing without damage all material furnished .
Permanent distortion caused by handling or storage will be cause for rejection .
The edges of nicks or bumps caused by handling shall be carefully ground to a inch radius .
The storage requirements in Subsection .
shall be applicable for all materials stored in the field. . ERECTION .
a Methods and Equipment .
Cranes lifting devices and other equipment for all structural steel erection shall be of adequate design and capacity to safely erect align and secure all members and components in their final positions without damage .
The Contractor is solely responsible for the methods and equipment employed for the erection of the structural steel .
However the Contractor shall lift and erect curved girders so that the web of the girder is maintained vertical within a vertical tolerance .
The Contractor shall submit Construction Drawings in accordance with the requirements of Section for the methods and sequence of structural steel erection the temporary bracing and the equipment to be used for the erection .
The Agency shall use the requirements specified in AASHTONSBA S. Appendices E and F as the basis for review of erection plans .
The erection plan shall include the necessary computations to indicate the magnitude of stress in the segments during erection and to demonstrate that all of the erection equipment has adequate capacity for the work to be performed .
The erection plan shall contain provisions for all stages of construction including temporary stoppages .
The Contractor shall include additional information in the erection plan for curved girders as indicated in AASHTO LRFD Bridge Construction Specifications Section The structural steel may be used for support of equipment prior to placement of the deck only with the written permission of the Engineer .
The proposed use of structural steel for support of equipment shall be detailed in the erection plan .
Submittal of the erection plan is for documentation purposes only and shall in no way be construed as approval of the proposed method of erection .
Unless otherwise directed by the Engineer the Contractor shall follow the erection plan as submitted b Assembly .
Parts shall be accurately assembled as shown on the Contract Plans Fabrication Drawings or erection drawings following match marks when provided .
Material shall be carefully handled so that no members or pieces will be bent broken or damaged .
Hammering that will injure or deform members will not be permitted .
Bearing surfaces and contact surfaces shall be clean .
Drift pins shall be used to align and center the connections of main and secondary members .
Only light drifting will be permitted .
Any member subjected to drifting that results in distortion of the member or elongation of the holes will be rejected .
Cylindrical erection pins the same size as the hole shall be used at least in the extreme corners of all main member connections .
Main members have been match marked and shop reamed to fit a specified profile and should fit together easily .
Main members shall not be reamed larger than the hole size indicated on the approved Fabrication Drawings without written authorization from the Engineer .
Secondary members may be subjected to limited field reaming .
Reaming or drilling to connect misaligned holes will not be permitted without the approval of the Engineer .
Reaming of secondary members shall be approved by the Engineer on a casebycase basis prior to the reaming .
Reaming or drilling shall not cause elongation of any hole more than inch for of the holes in any subassembly and inch for the remaining of the subassembly diaphragm lateral bracing etc .. Reaming that produces results in excess of these limits will be cause for rejection .
Assembled parts requiring drilling or reaming shall be disassembled to remove any burrs or shavings .
Pins used for hinged connections and bearings shall be inserted with care and aligned so the members take full and even bearing .
Nuts shall be adequately tightened and locked in position either by upsetting the threads or tack welding the nut to the bolt .
The correction of minor misfits involving reaming within specified limits and cutting will be considered a legitimate part of the erection .
However errors in shop fabrication that prevent proper assembly shall be reported immediately to the Engineer .
The Engineer shall approve any corrective action prior to it occurring. . BOLTING AND CONNECTIONS .
a General .
Connections shall be made with highstrength bolts conforming to the requirements of Subsection .
unless otherwise specified .
Bolts and nuts shall be furnished by the same supplier .
Bolts nuts and washers shall be packaged and shipped so they are kept dry .
When not in transit bolts nuts and washers shall be stored indoors under dry ventilated conditions .
All bolts and nuts shall be adequately and uniformly lubricated .
Bolts and nuts not properly lubricated shall be cleaned and relubricated prior to installation in accordance with applicable Specifications .
Bolt holes are specified as inch larger in diameter than the bolt .
Bolt holes shall be fabricated to the requirements of the AASHTO LRFD Bridge Construction Specifications Section .. except that holes shall not be punched fullsize unless otherwise permitted in the Contract Documents or approved by the Engineer .
b Bolted Parts .
Bolted parts shall fit solidly together when assembled and shall not be separated by gaskets or other interposed compressible material .
All joint contact surfaces and areas adjacent to bolt holes shall be free of scale burrs dirt and other foreign material that may prevent solid seating of the parts .
Prior to assembly contact surfaces of galvanized stresscarrying members shall be lightly brushed or blasted to a dull gray appearance .
Faying surfaces of bolted connections shall meet the Class B slip coefficient value of not less than .
as specified by AASHTO .
Splices and field connections of main members shall have all holes filled with highstrength bolts or cylindrical drift pins with bolts snugtightened before external support systems are removed .
Cylindrical drift pins shall be used in the extreme corners of all main member connections to ensure alignment and shall remain until all bolts in the connection have been fully tightened .
c Installation .
Bolted connections shall be assembled with a hardened washer under the turned element .
Hardened steel washers shall be used under both the head and the nut when bolts are used for the following connections Oversized holes fabricated as per Contract Replacing existing bolts or rivets Oversized and irregular hole conditions caused from field drilling or reaming Connections between new and existing steel members Where an outer face of the bolted parts has a slope of more than VH with respect to a plane normal to the bolt axis a smooth beveled washer shall be used to compensate for the lack of parallelism .
Bolts installed with the stem oriented vertically shall have the heads up .
Bolts installed with the stem oriented horizontally shall have the head towards the weather unless clearance restrictions dictate otherwise .
Normally the nut will be the turned element however if the position of bolt entering or wrench operation clearances prohibit this procedure the bolt may be the turned element .
Tightening of a bolt group shall progress systematically from the most rigid part of the joint to its free edges .
Previously tightened bolts shall be retightened until all bolts in the connection are tightened to the minimum required tension .
Recalibration of the tightening wrench may be required any time there appears to be a significant change in the bolt tightening conditions .
All bolts in a connection shall first be brought to a snug tight condition .
Snug tight is defined as initial tension sufficient to bring all the plies of the connection into firm contact while the drift pins remain in the connection .
Snugging shall progress systematically beginning at the most rigid part of the connection and progressing to the free edges until the connection is fully compacted .
All highstrength bolts shall be tightened to the specified tension as soon after installation as feasibly possible .
Under no circumstances shall bolts be left untightened for more than five days after installation unless specific requirements to do so are indicated in the Contract or directed by the Engineer .
Bolts left in place beyond five days without specific requirements in the Contract or as directed by the Engineer shall be removed and replaced with new bolts at the Contractors expense .
Bolts shall be tightened to develop a tension not less than more than the minimum bolt tension specified in Table .A .
Bolts shall be tensioned by the Contractor in the presence of the Engineer using one of the following methods Tension Control Assembly Method .
A tension control assembly consists of a tension control bolt with a spline end and a suitable nut and washer .
This method shall be employed when installing buttonheaded or domeheaded highstrength bolts .
All bolts shall be tightened by the application of torque to the nut and countertorque to the spline end of the bolt using an approved spline drive installation tool .
A random sample of not less than three tension control assemblies of each diameter length grade and type to be used in the work shall be checked a minimum of once each Working Day in a device capable of indicating bolt tension .
The test shall be performed to verify that the spline twistoff develops a tension at least greater than the minimum bolt tension specified in Table .A .
Additional verification of the tension control assemblies shall be performed as directed by the Engineer .
Separate checks will be required for each diameter fastener with hardened washers placed under the nut andor bolt head as they will be used in the structure .
Variations in the number or location of washers will require separate checks .
Direct Tension Indicator Method .
Direct tension indicators DTIs are compressible washers capable of indicating that a specified minimum bolt tension has been attained .
DTIs installed with high strength bolts to indicate bolt tension shall be subjected to field verification testing prior to installation and the installation requirements specified in this Subsection .
DTIs installed with highstrength bolts to indicate bolt tension shall be placed under the head of the bolt with the protrusions facing the head of the bolt and the nut shall be turned with a hardened washer underneath it to tension the fastener .
If for reasons of wrench operations clearance it is necessary to place the DTI under the turned element the DTI shall be oriented so that the protrusions face outward from the work and a hardened washer shall be placed between the DTI and the turned element .
Placement of the DTI under the turned element will only be allowed when approved by the Engineer .
The bolt DTI hardened washer and nut assembly used in the verification testing device and installed in the work shall be such that at least three and preferably not more than five threads are in the grip .
The grip is defined as the distance between the bearing face of the nut and the bolt head .
The Contractor shall supply mil tapered feeler gauges a calibrated bolt tensionmeasuring device and equipment necessary to perform field verification testing and inspection of tensioned bolts .
The feeler gauges fasteners and impact and manual wrenches shall be the same as that to be used in the work .
The Contractor shall obtain the services of a qualified technical advisor employed by the DTI manufacturer to make at least one site visit to assist the Contractor and to assure the proper installation and use of DTIs .
This requirement may be waived by the Engineer if the Contractor can demonstrate to the Agencys satisfaction successful use of DTIs on previous Projects for the Agency .
Verification testing shall be performed in a calibrated bolt tension measuring device such as a SkidmoreWelhelm Calibrator with a special flat insert supplied by the Contractor replacing the normal bolt headholding insert .
The special insert allows the DTI to be located on the flat front face of the tension measuring device for ease of observation and improved access for measuring the DTI gap during testing .
The purpose of verification testing is to validate the DTI assemblys ability to indicate installation tension above the minimum .
The verification tension specified in Table .B is higher than the minimum required installation tension in Table .A .
The increase provides confidence that the installation tension can be achieved for the lot .
Three verification tests are required to be performed on random samples of each combination of fastener rotationalcapacity lot DTI lot and DTI position under the nut or bolt head used on the Project .
All three tests must pass for the DTI and assembly combination to be approved .
Testing shall be performed at the Project site by the Contractor and witnessed by the Engineer .
When testing for the normal DTI position the nut shall be turned from the rear of the tension measuring device with the bolt head against the DTI restrained from turning with another wrench .
When testing with the DTI under the turned element the turned element shall be placed on the flat front face of the tension measuring device and the unturned element will be in the rear held by another wrench .
a. Verification Test .
The verification test shall be conducted as follows .
Tension the fastener to the Verification Tension load specified in Table .B for the grade and size of fastener .
If an impact wrench is used tension to a load twothirds below the required load and use a manual wrench to attain the required tension . .
Determine and record the number of entries of a mil feeler gauge in the spaces between the protrusions .
When using galvanized or epoxy coated DTIs under the turned element there shall be at least one entry of the feeler gauge . .
The DTI lot will be rejected if the number of entries is less than the value in column of Table .B .
If coated DTIs are used under the turned element the DTI lot will be rejected if there are no entries .
If the bolts are too short to be tested in the tension measuring device the Verification Test for the DTI shall be conducted on a longer bolt .
Three verification tests are required as specified above .
Bolts and DTIs used in verification tests shall be marked and shall not be reused in the work .
b .
Installation .
Installation of fasteners utilizing DTIs shall be conducted in two steps as follows .
Step .
All of the bolts in a connection shall be installed to a snugtight condition .
Snugging shall progress systematically beginning at the most rigid part of the connection and progressing to the free edges until the connection is fully compacted .
At the snugtight condition all of the DTIs shall be inspected with the feeler gauge to verify that they meet the number listed in Column of Table .B .
If the number of entries is less than the values specified in Table .B the fastener must be removed and another DTI installed followed by resnugging of the fastener .
This is required because a fasteners tension may have relaxed during the snugging of adjacent fasteners .
A compressed DTI does not rebound if the fastener tension is reduced .
If a DTI which has fewer entries were left in place it would give a false indication of bolt tension . .
Step .
The bolts in the connection shall then be further tensioned to the point that the number of entries for a mil feeler gauge meets the number listed in Column of Table .B .
Tightening shall progress systematically beginning at the most rigid part of the connection and progressing to the free edges .
Drift pins shall be removed during this process .
Several cycles may be required .
TABLE .A BOLT TENSION VALUES FOR ASTM F F M GRADE A BOLTS Nominal Bolt Diameter in .
Min .
Bolt Tension lbs Equal to of the specified maximum tensile strength of bolts .
TABLE .B NUMBER OF DTI ENTRIES FOR ASTM F F M GRADE A BOLTS Bolt Size in .
Number of Spaces Between DTI Protrusions Verification Tension kips Verification Required Number of Entries Installation Required Number of Entries Verification tension is .
times the minimum tension in Table .A .
An entry occurs when a mil tapered feeler gauge fits into the space between DTI protrusions and touches the bolt shank .
For coated DTIs under the turned element at least one entry is required .
For coated DTIs under the turned element entries are required d Acceptance of Bolt Tensioning .
The installation and tightening of bolted connections shall be observed to determine if the tightening procedure is working properly and the correct tension has been achieved The Contractor shall provide a tension measuring device such as a SkidmoreWilhelm Calibrator that has been calibrated within the last year and is accompanied by a certificate verifying its date of calibration .
Before the installation of fasteners in the work the Engineer shall check the marking surface condition and storage of bolts nuts and washers and the faying contact surfaces of joints for compliance with the Contract requirements .
Bolt tension for fasteners with DTIs shall be verified using mil tapered feeler gauges provided and operated by the Contractor .
All bolts installed using DTIs shall be inspected after snug tightening and again after full tensioning with of the bolts inspected visually and of the bolts in any connection but not less than two inspected by feeler gauge .
If the installation of inspected bolts is accepted then the connection shall be accepted as properly tensioned .
If any bolt in a connection does not pass inspection then all of the bolts in that connection shall be inspected with the feeler gauge .
Any bolt which does not pass inspection as described herein shall be further tensioned if required .
Bolts installed using tension control assemblies shall be visually inspected for consistent twistoff and thread stickout .
Undamaged fasteners may only be reinstalled with the approval of the Engineer and with the following exceptions galvanized bolts ASTM F F M Grade A bolts tension control assemblies and direct tension indicators shall not be reused .
An additional required inspection step is to check the bolt thread stickout on the nut side after installation to the final specified gap to look for inconsistency of pattern .
Any stickouts greater than the other bolts shall be investigated and discarded e.g .
if necking down of the bolt has occurred or the wrong length bolt was used .
The end of the properly installed bolt shall be at least flush with the nut or stick out not more than three threads .
The Engineer shall be provided with safe access in accordance with the requirements of Section to conduct all inspection deemed necessary during and after the installation of the bolts .
If the Engineer determines that the access provided is unsafe work will be ordered to halt until such time the access is made safe .
Any delays incurred by the unsafe access will not be cause for a monetary material or delay Claim. . STRAIGHTENING BENT MATERIAL .
Damaged bent or misaligned structural steel may only be straightened or corrected by procedures approved by the Agency .
The method of repair proposed by the Contractor shall be submitted as Construction Drawings for approval in accordance with the requirements of Section .
No corrective work shall be performed without Agency approval .
Heating limitations and procedures shall conform to the requirements of Subsection .. Members or parts to be heat straightened must be free of stress from external forces other than those necessary and used in conjunction with the application of heat .
Following straightening the surface of the metal shall be free of any evidence of distortion or fracture .
Required nondestructive tests shall be performed by NDT Level II or III personnel at the Contractors expense. . FIELD CLEANING .
When assembly of the fabricated structural components is complete any rust scale dirt grease or other foreign material shall be removed from the metal components .
If the components are new steel which are metalized or galvanized or which are to remain unpainted the cost of such necessary cleaning will not be paid for directly but will be considered incidental to the Section items in the Contract. . UNCOATED STEEL .
Care must be taken to keep chemicals and oils from contacting the exposed surfaces of unpainted steel during storage erection and construction of the deck .
a Staining of Masonry .
The Contractor shall protect all concrete and masonry from staining due to oxide formation on the steel b Cleaning of Steel .
After all concrete has been placed the outside surface of the fascia beams and bottom surface of their lower flanges shall be cleaned of all foreign material to a uniform appearance .
The Engineer may require the exposed surfaces to be blast cleaned to Preparation Grade SSPCSP defined by the requirements of SSPCVIS .
The use of acids for cleaning is prohibited . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT .
a Bids on a Pound Basis .
The quantity of Structural Steel or other material being paid under this item to be measured for payment will be the number of pounds used in the complete and accepted work .
The weight of the material to be measured for payment under this item will be computed based on the approved Fabrication Drawings as follows Weight determined by the volume of material will be computed based on the densities specified in Table .A .
TABLE .A MATERIAL DENSITIES Material Density lbsft Aluminum Alloy Bronze Cast Copper Alloy Copper Sheet Iron Cast Iron Wrought Lead Sheet Steel Rolled Cast Copper Bearing Silicon Nickel or Stainless For any material not listed in Table .A the material will be paid for by actual weight as measured on a certified scale .
The weight of rolled structural shapes will be computed based on their nominal weight per foot as shown on the Plans or if not shown on the Plans by the weights shown in the current edition of the AISC Manual .
The weight of rolled shapes will be based on the overall net length shown on the approved Fabrication Drawings with no allowance for milling finishing or overrun and with no deduction for cuts clips copes or open holes .
The weight of plates will be based on the net finished dimensions shown on the approved Fabrication Drawings with no allowance for milling finishing tolerance or overrun and with no deductions for copes clips and open holes .
The weights of beveled plates or curved surface plates will be based on the finished maximum thickness shown on the approved Fabrication Drawings .
For gusset plates scupper components slotted plates and similar minor fixtures the net finished dimensions will be the minimum rectangular dimensions from which the parts are cut except when it is practical to cut the parts in multiples from pieces of larger dimensions in which case the weight will be based on the dimensions of the larger pieces making necessary allowance for the material lost in cutting .
The net finished dimensions of flange plates will be the nominal width and the finished length measured along the centerline of the flange without deduction for width transitions bevels or chamfers .
The net finished dimensions of the webs of all girders and of the webs of rigid frame legs will be the actual area of the web as detailed on the approved Fabrication Drawings .
The weight of fabricated metal items such as Ubolts welding studs and lugs will be based on net dimensions of the finished product as shown on the approved Fabrication Drawings .
All welding shall be considered as incidental work to the fabrication and no measurement will be made for the weight of weld metal used .
Measurement for castings will be by weight measured on scales .
When it is specified that any part of the material is to be measured by actual weight finished work shall be weighed in the presence of the Engineer .
In such case the scales shall have been certified for accuracy within a oneyear period .
The weight of permanent shop and field bolts nuts direct tension indicators and washers incorporated into the structure and temporary erection bolts nuts and washers shall be incidental to the Structural Steel item and no measurement will be made for weight of the bolts nuts direct tension indicators and washers .
b Bids on Lump Sum Basis .
The quantity of Structural Steel or other material being paid under this item to be measured for payment will be the number of units for each structure complete and accepted as specified in the Contract . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT .
The accepted quantity of Structural Steel will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per pound for the items specified in the Contract .
Payment will be full compensation for furnishing detailing handling transporting and placing the materials specified including nondestructive testing of welds for preparing the surface of new steel to be galvanized metalized or to remain unpainted and for necessary field cleaning for sealer coating of metalized surfaces and for painting metalizing or galvanizing of surfaces unless otherwise paid for .
Payment will also be full compensation for furnishing and implementing the erection plan and for furnishing all labor tools equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
Payment for Structural Steel on a lump sum basis will be full compensation for performing all work specified and for furnishing all labor materials tools equipment erection plans and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
The costs of surface preparation of new steel to remain unpainted or to be galvanized or metalized will not be paid for directly but will be considered incidental to the Section items in the Contract .
The Engineer may authorize progress payments in the following manner a A maximum of of the estimated quantity may be paid when the steel has been delivered to the site .
b A maximum of of the estimated quantity may be paid when the steel has been erected falsework removed and painting of connections and touch up completed where required .
c After completion and acceptance of all work under this Section including extended weights being received and checked of the quantity will be paid .
All nondestructive testing and required quality control activities will be considered incidental to fabrication and no separate payment will be made .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Structural Steel Rolled Beam Pound .
Structural Steel Plate Girder Pound .
Structural Steel Curved Plate Girder Pound .
Structural Steel Truss Pound .
Structural Steel Pound .
Structural Steel Lump Sum SECTION REINFORCING STEEL .
DESCRIPTION .
This work shall consist of furnishing and placing bar reinforcement of the level specified dowels wire welded wire reinforcement WWR and mechanical bar connectors .
Levels and associated types of reinforcing steel are specified as follows a Level I Limited Corrosion Resistance .
Level I reinforcing includes plain lowalloy and epoxy coated reinforcing steel .
b Level II Improved Corrosion Resistance .
Level II reinforcing includes stainlessclad dual coated and continuouslygalvanized reinforcing steel .
c Level III Exceptional Corrosion Resistance .
Level III reinforcing includes solid stainless reinforcing steel .
The location level and when specified type of reinforcing shall be as indicated in the Plans .
Reinforcing supplied shall meet the requirements of the level specified or any higher level .
Only one type of reinforcing steel shall be used for each level for the Contract work unless permitted in writing by the Engineer. . MATERIALS .
Materials shall meet the requirements of the following Subsections Mortar Type IV .
Bar Reinforcement .
Mechanical Splices for Bar Reinforcement .
Cold Drawn Steel Wire .
Welded Wire Reinforcement .
Spiral reinforcement for columns may be bar reinforcement or colddrawn steel wire . .
FABRICATION AND SHIPMENT .
Bar reinforcement shall be deformed bar coldbent to the shapes required .
Bar reinforcement shall be fabricated bundled tagged marked and shipped in accordance with the Concrete Reinforcing Steel Institute CRSI Manual of Standard Practice .
The fabricator shall maintain records that will provide traceability of identifying heat numbers for all material being fabricated for Agency Projects or Contract orders referencing materials covered under this Section. . PROTECTION OF MATERIAL .
Reinforcing steel shall always be protected from damage by storing on blocking racks or platforms .
When multiple levels of reinforcing steel are used on a Project they shall be stored separately including during transport in order that there is no direct contact between the bars .
When placed in the work the reinforcing steel shall be free from dirt detrimental scale paint oil or other foreign substances .
All systems for handling and storing coated reinforcement shall have padded contact areas .
Epoxycoated and dualcoated reinforcement stored on a Project or between phases of work shall be covered with canvas or other suitable material that will effectively protect it against damage from ultraviolet light .
All damaged areas of reinforcement coating shall be repaired with materials and procedures recommended by the coating manufacturer .
The materials and procedures must be approved by the Resident Engineer prior to the repairs .
Coatings shall be repaired prior to installation of the reinforcement .
Repair prior to installation does not relieve the Contractor from repairing areas damaged during placement .
All repairs shall be inspected and accepted by the Resident Engineer prior to placing concrete .
All bars with total damage including previously repaired areas greater than of the bar surface area shall be rejected .
When cutting coated reinforcement a cutting torch shall not be used .
The use of a power hacksaw is acceptable .
All cut ends shall be repaired per the coating manufacturers recommendations and to the satisfaction of the Engineer .
Ends of Level II reinforcing steel where the mild steel is exposed shall be repaired in the following manner a Cut ends of dualcoated reinforcing steel shall be coated with a twopart epoxy patching material as specified by the coating manufacturer .
The materials and procedures shall be approved by the Engineer prior to the repairs being performed .
b Cut ends of stainlessclad reinforcing steel shall be epoxied and capped in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations with either stainless steel caps or plastic caps .
Caps shall be sealed to prevent the intrusion of moisture .
c Cut ends of continuouslygalvanized reinforcing steel shall be coated with a zincrich paint .
The paint used in the repair shall be organicrich and contain at least zinc by weight in the dry film .
The paint shall be applied per the manufacturers recommendations to a thickness equivalent to the surrounding galvanizing . .
PLACING AND FASTENING REINFORCING STEEL .
Steel reinforcement shall be placed in the position shown on the Plans and held securely in place during the placing of concrete .
Unless otherwise noted on the Plans placement tolerances for reinforcing steel shall be inch for cover and clearance and inch for spacing of bars .
Stirrups and spirals shall pass around main tension members and be securely attached to those members .
Reinforcing steel shall be spaced as specified from the face of the forms .
Horizontal layers shall be spaced vertically by means of approved supports .
Support material within inches of a finished concrete surface shall be stainless steel epoxy plastic coated galvanized steel or plastic .
Bar reinforcement shall not be further bent or straightened from the curvature produced at initial fabrication except when approved by the Engineer .
If heating is approved for field bends the temperature should not exceed that which produces a dull red color in the bar .
Bars spaced inches apart or further shall be tied at every intersection .
Bars spaced less than inches apart shall be tied at every other intersection .
If reinforcement shows signs of distress during construction the Engineer may direct additional tying .
Welding procedures shall be submitted for approval for any type of reinforcement welding .
Welding of reinforcement steel will not be permitted without written permission of the Engineer .
Welding shall conform to the requirements of Subsection .. Special care shall be taken so that no undercut will occur and reduce the effective area of the reinforcing bars .
Tie wires and supports used for installation of reinforcement shall be composed of the same material as any steel being contacted or shall be plastic .
When forms are to be removed in their entirety uncoated steel chairs equipped with snugfitting highdensity polyethylene tips which provide a inch clearance between the metal and any exposed surface may be used .
Horizontal mats of reinforcing steel shall have lines of support not exceeding a foot spacing in either direction .
Additional individual chairs may be required near the fascia .
Reinforcement placed in any member shall be inspected and approved before any concrete is placed .
Mechanical bar connectors shall be installed per the manufacturers instructions . .
PLACING DOWELS .
Dowels shall be placed in existing concrete or ledge at locations shown on the Plans .
Where Type IV mortar is to be used holes shall be drilled to the depth shown on the Plans and shall be at least inch greater in diameter than the dowel .
Where approved adhesives are used the manufacturers recommendations shall be followed for hole sizing .
Dowels shall be grouted with Type IV mortar or other approved material. . SPLICES .
All reinforcement shall be furnished in the lengths shown on the Plans .
No splicing of any type except where shown on the Plans will be permitted without the written approval of the Engineer .
Welded butt splices or mechanical splices shall be used only when specified in the Contract or with written approval of the Engineer. . LAPPING .
Sheets of WWR shall overlap not less than the wire spacing and be securely fastened at the ends and edges .
The edge lap shall be not less than the wire or bar spacing . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT .
The quantity of Reinforcing Steel of the type and size specified to be measured for payment will be the total number of pounds of reinforcing bars dowels wire and WWR used in the complete and accepted work except as otherwise provided computed on the following basis a The mass of bars wire and dowels will be measured as either The product of the length as shown on the approved shop bar lists and the standard weight per foot of length as adopted by the CRSI .
If approved by the Engineer the weight on a certified bill of lading from the reinforcement supplier .
The bill of lading must be broken down and subtotaled based on individual bar marks and types of reinforcement .
b The weight of WWR will be measured as either The computed weight in accordance with the details shown on the Plans based on the standard weight accepted by the trade for the unit of material specified .
If approved by the Engineer the weight on a certified bill of lading from the reinforcement supplier .
The bill of lading must be broken down and subtotaled based on individual bar marks and types of reinforcement .
c Measurement for payment will not be made for any clips wire or other material that may be used by the Contractor for keeping the reinforcing bars in their correct position .
d Measurement for payment will be adjusted for any material accepted with an overall dimensional length less than or greater than the inch CRSI tolerance .
e When the substitution of bars of greater diameter than specified is permitted by written authorization of the Engineer payment will be made for only the weight of steel that would have been required if the specified diameter had been used .
In case short bars are used when full length bars are shown on the Plans the weight to be measured will be only the equivalent of the weight of full length bars as if they had been used with no allowance for laps .
The quantity of Drilling and Grouting Dowels to be measured for payment will be for the length of hole in linear feet to be drilled as shown on the Plans .
If not shown on the Plans the depth of drilled holes shall be feet .
The dowel will be measured as Reinforcing Steel of the type specified .
The quantity of mechanical bar connectors will be the number of mechanical connectors installed in the complete and accepted work . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT .
The accepted quantities of Reinforcing Steel of the type specified will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per pound .
Payment will be full compensation for furnishing handling welding and placing the material specified and for furnishing all labor fastening devices tools equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
The accepted quantity of Drilling and Grouting Dowels will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per linear foot .
Payment will be full compensation for drilling the dowel hole grouting the dowel in the hole and for furnishing all labor tools equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
When the Contract does not contain a quantity for Drilling and Grouting Dowels this work will not be paid for directly but will be considered as incidental to all other Contract Items .
The accepted quantity of Mechanical Bar Connectors will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price for each .
Payment will be full compensation for furnishing handling placing and joining the materials and for furnishing all labor tools equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Reinforcing Steel Level I Pound .
Reinforcing Steel Level II Pound .
Reinforcing Steel Level III Pound .
Drilling and Grouting Dowels Linear Foot .
Mechanical Bar Connector Each SECTION SHEAR CONNECTORS .
DESCRIPTION .
This work shall consist of furnishing and welding shear connectors. . MATERIALS .
Materials shall meet the requirements of the following Subsections Welded Stud Shear Connectors . .
WEATHER LIMITATIONS .
Application of stud shear connectors or other welding on shear connectors shall not be done when the base metal temperature is below F or when the surface is wet or exposed to falling rain or snow . .
PLACING INSPECTING AND TESTING .
a General .
The Contractor shall install the shear connectors as detailed in the Contract and the approved structural steel Fabrication Drawings .
Shear connectors shall be placed inspected and tested in accordance with the latest edition of AWS D ..
When the base metal temperature of a member to which automatically welded shear connectors are to be attached is less than F the following requirements shall apply Base Metal in Compression Only .
The Contractor has the option of obtaining an approved welding procedure for application of the studs or preheating the base metal to a minimum temperature of F. Base Metal in Tension or Stress Reversal Zones .
The base metal shall be preheated to a minimum temperature of F. The base metal of all portions of a member in tension to which shear connectors are to be welded shall be preheated to a temperature of F for thicknesses up to inches preheated to F for thicknesses of to inches and preheated to F for thicknesses more than inches .
Preheating applies to either shop or fieldapplied shear connectors .
If during the progress of the work inspection and testing indicate that the shear connectors being furnished are not satisfactory the Contractor shall make changes in the welding procedure welding equipment and type of shear connector as necessary to provide satisfactory results .
Such changes shall be made at the Contractors expense .
b Studs .
Installation and acceptance of stud shear connectors shall be in accordance with the requirements of AWS D .. After being allowed to cool the first two studs welded on each beam or girder shall be bent by striking the stud with a hammer .
If failure occurs in the weld zone of either stud the procedure shall be corrected and two additional studs shall be successfully welded and tested before any more studs are welded to the beam or girder .
The Contractor shall promptly inform the Engineer of any changes in the welding procedure .
After the studs have been welded to the beams the Engineer will make a visual inspection and each stud will be given a light blow with a hammer .
Any stud that does not emit a ringing sound when given a light blow with a hammer that has been repaired by welding or that has less than normal reduction in height due to welding shall be struck with a hammer and bent from the correct axis of installation .
In the case of a repaired weld the stud shall be bent in the direction that will place the repaired portion of the weld in the greatest tension .
Studs that crack either in the weld or in the shank shall be replaced .
All tested shear connectors that show no sign of failure shall be left in the bent position .
The Engineer may select additional studs to be subjected to the bend test specified above . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT .
The quantity of Shear Connectors to be measured for payment will be on a lump sum basis for all the shear connectors installed in the complete and accepted work at each structure specified . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT .
The accepted quantity of Shear Connectors will be paid for at the Contract lump sum price for each structure specified .
Payment will be full compensation for detailing furnishing transporting handling preheating and welding of the material specified and for furnishing all labor tools equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Shear Connectors Lump Sum SECTION LONGITUDINAL DECK GROOVING .
DESCRIPTION .
This work shall consist of saw cutting longitudinal grooves into the surface of a concrete deck at the locations indicated in the Plans. . MATERIALS AND EQUIPMENT .
Materials shall meet the requirements of the following Subsections Water .
Saw cutting shall be completed by multibladed wet saw cutting equipment using circular saw blades .
The Engineer may allow the use of single blade circular saw equipment where it is determined such equipment is necessary to complete the work as required .
The equipment the Contractor proposes to use will be subject to the approval of the Engineer prior to use. . CONSTRUCTION DETAILS .
The Contractor is hereby notified that concrete curing requirements may have a significant effect upon the specific time at which sawcut grooving may be performed .
The Contractor shall be familiar with the limits imposed by these factors and conduct operations accordingly .
Sawcutting shall be done only after the specified curing period has elapsed unless otherwise allowed by the Structural Concrete Engineer .
Longitudinal grooves parallel to the centerline of roadway shall be cut in a single pass .
The grooves shall be spaced at inch inch .
All grooves shall be cut leaving a rectangular crosssection that is inch inch .
inch wide and inch inch deep .
During the grooving operations the Engineer will verify at random that the minimum groove depth is being achieved .
Should the Engineer determine that minimum groove depth is not being achieved the Contractor shall stop grooving operations and make all adjustments necessary to achieve the minimum depth .
The Contractor shall go back and correct any previous grooves to bring them into conformance with the Specification .
Prior to beginning grooving operations the Contractor shall supply the Engineer with two accurate easily readable gauges with which to verify groove depth .
The gauges shall come with applicable manufacturers instructions .
Unless otherwise indicated in the Contract Documents grooves shall be terminated as specified in Table .A .
TABLE .A GROOVE TERMINATION DISTANCE REQUIREMENTS Location Closest Allowable Distance in .
Farthest Allowable Distance in .
Drainage structure Face of curb or barrier Joint system Dimension measured perpendicular to the centerline of the joint system .
The Contractor shall use a selfcontained system to continuously collect any slurry or debris created by the grooving operation such that it does not accumulate on the surface . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT .
The quantity of Longitudinal Deck Grooving to be measured for payment will be the number square yards of deck satisfactorily grooved in the complete and accepted work measured transversely between curb or barrier and longitudinally between the ends of the deck computed to the nearest whole square yard .
No deduction will be made for areas left ungrooved near concrete railing joints or other objects embedded in the deck . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT .
The accepted quantity of Longitudinal Deck Grooving will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per square yard .
Payment will be full compensation for performing the work specified and for furnishing all materials labor tools equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Longitudinal Deck Grooving Square Yard SECTION PRESTRESSED CONCRETE .
DESCRIPTION .
This work shall consist of manufacturing transporting and erecting precast prestressed concrete members. . MATERIALS .
Materials shall meet the requirements of the following Subsections Portland Cement .
High EarlyStrength Portland Cement .
PortlandPozzolan Cement .
Portland BlastFurnace Slag Cement .
Ternary Blended Cement .
Fine Aggregate for Concrete .
Coarse Aggregate for Concrete .
Mortar Type IV .
Preformed Joint Filler Cork and AsphaltTreated Felt .
Polyvinyl Chloride PVC Waterstop .
Bar Reinforcement .
Prestressing Strand .
Carbon Steel Bolts Nuts and Washers .
HighStrength Bolts Nuts and Washers .
Concrete Curing Materials .
AirEntraining Admixtures .b Retarding Admixtures .c WaterReducing Admixtures .e WaterReducing and Retarding Admixtures .f WaterReducing High Range Admixtures .g WaterReducing High Range and Retarding Admixtures .h Accelerating Admixtures .i WaterReducing and Accelerating Admixtures .j Specific Performance Admixtures .k Mineral Admixtures .
Polystyrene Insulation Board .
Blanket Insulation Material .
Pipe Insulation .
Water .
Overhead and Vertical Concrete Repair Material .
Structural Steel shall meet the requirements of Subsection .
through Subsection ..
Bearing Pads for Structures shall meet the requirements of Section . . GENERAL FABRICATION REQUIREMENTS .
a General .
The manufacture of the prestressed units shall be in accordance with the latest editions of PCI MNL Manual for Quality Control for Plants and Production of Precast and Prestressed Concrete Products and PCI MNL Tolerance Manual for Precast and Prestressed Concrete Construction except as modified in this Section .
b Qualification .
The prestressed members shall be manufactured in a plant that has been certified by the Prestressed Concrete Institute PCI under its Plant Certification Program for prestressed concrete .
The plant must be certified at a minimum to the level of product being produced .
If there is an architectural finish for the product the plant shall be certified at a minimum to the level of product being produced plus the architectural certification at that level .
Prestressed concrete shall be manufactured in a plant that maintains a quality control Laboratory that meets the requirements of the Agencys Qualified Laboratory Program .
As a minimum the Laboratory shall be equipped with a compression testing machine curing room or chamber apparatuses for measuring slumpflow and air entrainment and a complete set of Aggregate sieves .
The compression testing machine shall be calibrated yearly by an independent Laboratory using equipment that is certified by the National Institute of Standards and Technology .
The testing machine shall be poweroperated and capable of applying the load continuously rather than intermittently and without shock .
c Quality Control .
The fabricator shall demonstrate a level of quality control testing that satisfies the Agency as to its ability and commitment to produce concrete to the requirements of this Section .
A satisfactory program of quality control shall include gradation and moisture determinations of the aggregates as well as slump air content and strength determinations of the concrete .
These tests shall be performed at regular and suitable intervals as specified in the Materials Sampling Manual and actively used to maintain the quality of the concrete within the specified requirements .
The fabricator shall have a plant specific Quality Control Plan approved by the Agency prior to the beginning of any fabrication activities. . SUBMITTALS .
As soon as practical after award of the Contract all required information shall be prepared and submitted .
Fabrication Drawings also referred to in the precast industry as Production Drawings or Shop Drawings for the prestressed concrete shall be submitted in accordance with the requirements of Section with an additional copy to the Structural Concrete Engineer .
Fabrication Drawings shall include such detail needed to fully describe the intended asbuilt condition of the prestressed elements including any connections between prestressed elements andor existing structures and materials .
In addition to the requirements in Section the following shall be included a Concrete Mix Design .
The concrete mix design submittal shall include but not be limited to the following items Batch weights specifying dry or saturated surface dry .
Material names and sources .
Aggregate properties and testing dates .
Aggregates shall be tested on an annual basis at a minimum to verify that they meet the requirements of AASHTO T and AASHTO T for absorption and specific gravity and AASHTO T MT for unit weight .
Chemical and physical properties of cementitious materials .
Admixture names and sources .
Lab data that shall include but not be limited to the following items a .
The maximum WCM ratio that will be allowed during production including water contributed to hydration by all admixtures when the cumulative total exceeds gallon per cubic yard .
All mix qualification test results shall be generated with concrete from batches that are produced at this maximum WCM ratio .
b .
The slumpspread minimums and maximums as determined from trial batches .
The concrete shall be classified and tested as SelfConsolidating Concrete SCC if the minimum spread is at least inches .
When the concrete is tested as a SCC mix the difference between the JRing test ASTM C C M and the spread test and ASTM C C M shall be inches or less for the minimum and maximum spread .
Concrete that fails to meet the inches minimum spread threshold will be classified and tested as conventional concrete .
The Visual Stability Index VSI determination will be included for the minimum and maximum values and shall not be greater than .
The concrete shall not demonstrate segregation at the minimum or maximum slumpspread .
c. Air Content results obtained in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO T . d. Temperature results obtained in accordance with the requirements of ASTM C MC .
e. Cylinder compression stress results obtained in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO T for early breaks and design strength and day standard cure results obtained in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO T . The type of cure shall be listed for each age of break .
f. Chloride ion penetration test results obtained in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO T . The information shall include the individual results from testing three standard inch x inch cylinder specimens but no specimen shall exceed the limits specified herein .
Testing shall be performed by an independent AMRL qualified Laboratory .
The chloride ion penetrability result must be Low as defined in the requirements of AASHTO T tested at or before days from the date specimen were cast .
Test results shall also be provided for sample ages of days days days and days .
Test results that are suspected to have been adversely affected due to the presence of polymeric admixtures in the proposed mix may be retested with the polymeric admixture omitted .
g. The AlkaliSilica Reactivity ASR of each type of aggregate shall be measured separately based on the requirements of AASHTO T Accelerated Detection of Potentially Deleterious Expansion of Mortar Bars Due to AlkaliSilica Reaction .
If one or more of the aggregates exceeds .
expansion then the aggregate shall be tested again according to the requirements of ASTM C . The Contractor may elect to go directly to ASTM C testing if they suspect that the aggregate may exceed the .
expansion if tested by AASHTO T . Testing shall be performed by an independent AMRL qualified Laboratory accredited in the specific test method .
h. Length change test results obtained in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO T . Testing shall be performed by an independent AMRL qualified Laboratory accredited in conducting testing that meets the requirements of AASHTO T . The maximum free shrinkage test result shall not exceed ..
The crosssection of the prism shall be inches inches .
AASHTO T Procedure .. shall be followed for storage and measurements .
Mix design approvals will be valid for a month period .
The approved mix design will be allowed reapproval if the following conditions are satisfied a .
A determination has been made that no material proportioning or material sources have changed from the initial approved mix design .
b .
The mix design for reapproval is submitted with updated aggregate properties and volumes adjusted accordingly .
The properties to be tested are but not limited to specific gravity unit weight and absorption .
Approval of the mix design will expire months from the date the updated aggregate testing was performed .
c. The reapproved mix design shall be accompanied by the test mix data that was completed and accepted for the initial mix design approval as well as any applicable updated test information .
New mix designs and mix designs that were initially approved approval more than months ago shall have new testing completed to be submitted for approval .
The proposed concrete mix design including performance history and all requests for variance from the material requirements of these Specifications shall be submitted for approval .
The Structural Concrete Engineer may require a minimum of weeks for testing review and approval of new mix designs .
b Dimensions and Tolerances .
The dimensions and tolerances of the sections to be fabricated shall be submitted .
Fabricators shall calculate the camber estimate at the time of release and at the estimated time of delivery .
The camber control plan shall be as detailed in Subsection .h .
c Locations .
The locations of reinforcing steel and prestress strands shall be submitted .
d Prestressing Methods .
The methods of prestressing including certified calibration charts for all jack and gauge combinations shall be submitted .
e Tensioning Calculations .
Tensioning calculations for prestress strands that include gauge pressure elongations and movement of anchorage abutments .
A Professional Engineer registered in the State of Vermont shall review and stamp the calculations .
f Strand Detensioning .
The method and sequence of strand detensioning .
g Surface Finish .
The type of surface finish and how the finish will be obtained .
h Curing Method .
The curing method detailing the sequence and duration in accordance with the requirements of Subsection .. i Minimum Strength Requirement The minimum required concrete strength for the transfer of pre stress forces .
j Lifting .
The design of the lifting attachments including the minimum required concrete strength to allow lifting based on calculations stamped by a Professional Engineer registered in the State of Vermont .
k Logistics .
Transportation handling and storage details .
l Installation .
The installation and grouting procedures .
m Quality Control .
A full description of all Quality Control procedures .
All design details shall be in accordance with the most recent edition of the VTrans Structures Design Manual available on the Agencys website and the AASHTO LRFD Bridge Design Specifications .
A Professional Engineer registered in the State of Vermont shall stamp any design calculations included in the submittal materials . .
CONCRETE .
a Batch Plants .
Batch plant equipment materials and batching procedures shall conform to the provisions of Section identified in Table .A .
TABLE .A BATCH PLANT OPERATION SUBSECTIONS AND TOPICS Subsection Topic .
Batching .b Testing laboratory .c Bins and Scales .d Production Tolerances for Batching .e Storage and Proportioning of Materials .
Mixing and Delivery Paragraphs and only .
For plants not located in Vermont the Agency has the option of waiving the requirements of Subsection .a and Subsection .c Paragraphs and only .
b Acceptance Testing .
For Acceptance testing refer to the Agencys Materials Sampling Manual for sampling curing and testing requirements .
Specimens shall be tested either at the Agencys Materials Section Central Laboratory or at the fabricators plant Laboratory .
An Agency representative shall witness all tests .
Concrete for prestressed members shall conform to the following The compressive strength test results obtained at or before days shall not be less than the design compressive strength shown on the Plans .
When a day test result is below the specified design strength all concrete represented by that test shall be unacceptable for the requirements of this Section .
The Engineer reserves the right to reject all members that were manufactured from this concrete .
The maximum total water batched shall not exceed pounds per cubic yard including water contributed to hydration by all admixtures when the cumulative total exceeds gallon per cubic yard .
If total cementitious material content exceeds pounds per cubic yard then water batched shall not exceed pounds per cubic yard .
The maximum WCM ratio in production shall not exceed maximum WCM ratio specified in Subsection .aa .
The percentage of air entrainment shall be with a tolerance of as tested in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO T . The temperature of the concrete at the time of placement shall be between ºF and ºF as tested in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO T . The concrete shall not demonstrate segregation at any time .
If the mix fails to remain within the minimum and maximum slump or spread ranges submitted in the mix design the load may be rejected .
The VSI shall be less than or equal to .
The Agency may request that the producer fabricate three concrete test cylinders that will be cured along with the piece they represent through the complete curing period .
These cylinders shall be kept with the piece they represent until collected by the Agency as specified by the requirements of AASHTO T and AASHTO T . c Cementitious Materials .
Only the cementitious combinations and sources from the approved mix design shall be used in the prestressed units required for any one structure unless otherwise authorized by the Structural Concrete Engineer .
Any admixture containing calcium chloride shall not be used . .
INSPECTION .
Materials furnished and the work performed under the requirements of Section shall be inspected by the Agency .
The Inspector shall have the authority to reject any material or work that does not meet the requirements of these Specifications .
Any work performed that has not been inspected may be rejected unless waived in writing by the Engineer .
The Inspector shall be provided with a minimum office space of square feet with the least dimension of feet .
A desk surface with minimum of two drawers and a dedicated private telephone service shall be provided in the office space .
A dedicated internet connection which provides Agency personnel a minimum download speed of Mbps without utilizing compression algorithms shall be provided in the office space .
Any variances shall be approved by the Structural Concrete Engineer .
This office space shall be located on the premises as close to the production area as practicable .
The Engineer reserves the right to reject inadequate office facilities and require suitable alternatives. . PRESTRESSING .
Prestressing shall be accomplished by the pretensioning method .
The fabricator shall provide all equipment necessary for the prestressing operations .
Prestressing shall be done with approved jacking equipment .
Hydraulic jacks shall be equipped with pressure gauges or other indicating devices .
The combination of jack and pressure gauge or other tensioning system shall be accompanied by a certified calibration chart showing the relationship between the gauge reading and the force in the ram for both ascending and descending movements of the ram .
The calibration date of each combination jack and gauge or indicating device shall be within the month period immediately prior to the start of work .
If other types of jacks are used calibrated proving rings or other devices shall be furnished so that the jacking force may be accurately determined .
Suitable precautions shall be taken by the fabricator to prevent accidents due to breaking of the prestressing steel or slippage of the grips during Prestressing operations .
The tensioning operation shall proceed until the calculated gauge reading has been reached .
The elongation of each strand shall then be measured .
If the measured elongation differs from the theoretical by more than the tensioning operation shall be stopped and the cause of the discrepancy determined prior to continuing .
Immediately after tensioning the final position of each strand shall be marked to check any strand slippage prior to placing concrete .
If slippage is suspected or if the time between tensioning and placing concrete exceeds hours then of the total number of strands including the strands that are suspected to have slipped shall be retensioned and the elongation measured .
The specific strands to be repulled will be selected by the Agency Inspector but no fewer than two strands shall be repulled .
If additional elongation is gained the amount gained shall be subtracted from the theoretical elongation .
If the result of the theoretical elongation minus the gain in elongation is less than the minimum allowable elongation per the requirements of PCI MNL for any of the strands tested the final force shall be applied to all strands .
For abutment anchorage setups where the strands are anchored to abutments that are independent from the form thermal adjustments shall be made if the ambient temperature at the time of tensioning differs by more than ºF from the concrete temperature prior to placement and if the net force differential is greater than ..
Consideration shall be given to partial bed length usage and adjustments made when the net effect on the length of the bed used exceeds the allowable .
The thermal coefficient of steel shall be taken as .
F. .
FABRICATION .
a PreProduction Meeting .
A preproduction meeting shall be requested by the producer with a minimum notice of two weeks prior to beginning concrete placement unless the Engineer deems in writing that a preproduction meeting is unnecessary .
The meeting shall be held a minimum of Calendar Days prior to beginning concrete placement unless otherwise approved by the Structural Concrete Engineer .
The preproduction meeting shall be attended by and include but not be limited to the Crew Supervisor Plant Manager Inspector or Inspectors Supervisor a representative from the Materials Section Structural Concrete Unit and the Project Manager andor Designer .
Additionally the fabricator shall have available at the preproduction meeting the Approved Fabrication Drawings and a complete anticipated production schedule for all components included in the Fabrication Drawings .
b Forming Members .
Side forms shall be supported without the use of ties or spreaders within the body of the member .
Any defects or damage due to formwork stripping or handling may be cause for rejection .
Forms for interior voids or holes in the members shall be constructed of a material that will adequately resist breakage or deformation during concrete placement and that will not materially increase the mass weight of the members .
Interior void forms shall be accurately positioned as shown on the Plans and secured to prevent displacement during concrete placement .
All voids shall be adequately vented to prevent damage to the members during curing .
Each void shall contain a suitably located drain hole .
Holes or cutouts for anchoring devices diaphragm connections openings for connection rods recesses for grout holes for railing bolts and any other related details shown on the Plans shall be provided for in the members .
Where diaphragm dowels do not pass through the member the dowels may be attached by use of an approved anchorage embedded in the concrete member .
c Placing Transverse Conduits and Tendons .
Each tendon to be posttensioned shall be encased in an approved conduit .
Unless otherwise shown on the Plans the ratio of crosssectional area of the tendon to be encased to the interior crosssectional area of the conduit shall not exceed .
except when a steel bar is used as a tendon .
The inside diameter of the conduit shall be at least inch greater than the diameter of the bar .
Conduit that has been crushed or has opened seams shall not be used .
The conduit shall be rigidly constructed completely sealed accurately placed and securely fastened to maintain the desired profile during concreting .
No conduit shall be located more than inch from the position shown on the Plans .
Bundling of conduits will not be permitted .
d Placing PreStress Strands .
Prestress strands shall be accurately placed in position to achieve the center of gravity of the steel as shown on the approved shop drawings .
Prestress strands shall be protected against corrosion and be free of nicks kinks dirt rust oil grease and other deleterious substances .
e Bar Reinforcement and Welded Wire Reinforcement .
Bar reinforcement and welded wire reinforcement shall be furnished and installed in conformance with the requirements of Subsection .
Subsection .
Subsection .
Subsection .
and Subsection ..
The chairs or spacers used to support or locate the reinforcement that bears on the faces of the forms shall be made of or be coated with a noncorrosive material so that no discoloration will show on the faces of the prestressed concrete units .
f PreTensioning .
The prestress strands shall be stressed by jacking in accordance with the requirements of Subsection .
and in the presence of an Agency representative .
The jacking force exerted and the elongation produced shall be recorded .
Several units may be cast and stressed at one time in a continuous line .
Sufficient space shall be maintained between the ends of the units to permit access for cutting strands after the concrete has attained the required strength .
g Placing Concrete .
Concrete shall not be deposited in the forms until the Agency representative has reviewed and approved the placement of the reinforcement conduits anchorages and Prestressing strands .
The concrete shall be vibrated internally externally or a combination thereof to the required consolidation .
The vibrating shall be done with care and in such a manner that the concrete is uniformly consolidated any displacement of or damage to reinforcement conduit voids and Prestressing strand is avoided and acceptable finish surfaces are produced .
When a vibrator is used with rebar with special coatings or made of nonmetallic material or material that could be susceptible to damage the vibrator head shall be nonmetallic or rubbercoated .
SCC concrete should not be vibrated .
If there is a need to vibrate SCC concrete it shall only be vibrated for the minimum time necessary so as to avoid segregation .
h DeTensioning .
No stress shall be transferred to the concrete until of the design compressive strength fc has been attained or as stated on the approved Fabrication Drawings .
The compressive strength shall be determined by cylinders tested in accordance with the Agencys Materials Sampling Manual .
The Prestressing strands shall be released in the detensioning pattern detailed on the Shop Drawings .
If detensioning is accomplished by single strand release each strand shall be cut by gradually heating the strand at both ends of the member simultaneously .
A minimum length of inches of strand shall be heated to prevent any shock or snap when the strand is finally severed .
Each strand shall be cut at all spaces between members cast continuously before starting detensioning on the following strand in sequence .
Strands shall be cut flush and epoxypainted unless otherwise specified on the Plans .
If the strands are required to be recessed a blockout shall be built into the bulkhead that will allow the strands to be cut without damaging the concrete .
The recess shall be thoroughly cleaned and patched with Mortar Type IV .
The mortar shall be wet cured for three days or as specified by the manufacturer .
i Dimensional Tolerances .
All dimensional tolerances shall be in accordance with the latest editions of PCI MNL Manual for Quality Control for Plants and Production of Precast and Prestressed Concrete Products and PCI MNL Tolerance Manual for Precast and Prestressed Concrete Construction unless otherwise noted in the Contract Documents or as approved by the Engineer .
The camber and differential camber between beams measured at preshipping inspection shall be within PCI tolerances and shall be measured with dunnage placed under bearing areas of the beam and at no less than hours after the removal of any means of camber correction .
Tolerances shall be compared to the calculated camber estimates at the time of the preshipping inspection .
The camber control plan shall detail how the fabricator will achieve the calculated camber estimate submitted in the Fabrication Drawings as required in Subsection .b .
The fabricator must achieve a beam camber at time of delivery that is within PCI tolerances of the calculated camber estimate .
In addition it is the responsibility of the General Contractor to confirm at the time of Fabrication Drawing review that the calculated camber estimate is compatible with the grades and elevations of the rest of the structure .
j Dimensional Tolerances for Prestress Deck Panels .
Prestress deck panels shall have dimensional tolerances as specified in Table .A .
TABLE .A PRESTRESS DECK PANEL TOLERANCES Element Tolerance Vertical position of strand group measured from bottom of panel inches inch Dunnage inches Warping distance from nearest adjacent corner inch per foot Finish of strands minimum extension beyond ends of panel inches k Defects .
Units that contain defects caused by manufacture or handling may be repaired at the manufacturing site .
Minor defects are defined as the intermittent presence of holes honeycombing chips or spalls which measure inches or less in the longest dimension and that do not penetrate deeper than inch into the concrete .
Minor defects may be repaired using an Approved Standard Repair Procedure as detailed in Subsection .k .
Surface voids or bug holes that are less than inch in diameter and less than inch deep need not be repaired .
Minor defects that recur with any identifiable regularity or pattern may be required to be addressed through a NonConformance Report NCR at the discretion of the Structural Concrete Engineer .
Any defect that has the potential to affect structural capacity or integrity shall be categorized as a major defect .
It is at the sole discretion of the Structural Concrete Engineer to determine into which category any defect is categorized .
Cracking .
Cracks less than .
inch in width shall be sealed by a method approved by the Structural Concrete Engineer .
Cracks equal to or greater than .
inch may be cause for rejection based on their width length location and frequency .
At the Structural Concrete Engineers discretion cracked members shall be repaired or replaced at the Contractors expense .
Detensioning procedures causing websplitting or other member cracking shall be revised before detensioning the next bed .
Cracks with a width of .
inch and greater found in any member will be cause for rejection .
Repairs .
Repairs shall be made using an overhead and vertical concrete repair material from the Agencys Approved Products List .
Any unsound concrete shall be carefully chipped out and the perimeter sawcut to a minimum depth of inch or deeper if recommended by the repair material manufacturer .
The prepared surface profile shall be as specified by the repair material manufacturer .
If not the prepared surface profile shall conform to at a minimum the International Concrete Repair Institutes Surface Preparation Chip CSP Medium Scarification .
The repair material shall be cured as specified by the manufacturer .
Standardized Repair Procedures SRP .
Standardized Repair Procedures shall be a comprehensive documented process for repairing minor defects at the fabricators facility .
At a minimum the SRP must detail the scope of defects for which that procedure is intended to be used a detailed narrative including every step of the repair procedure and the product documentation for the specific repair materials that will be used .
The SRP must include example pictures of defects for which the procedure could be used detailed example pictures covering every step of the repair procedure and example pictures of a successfully completed repair job .
Approval to use an SRP for any given defect is at the sole discretion of the Structural Concrete Engineer and all SRPs must be approved by them prior to their use .
SRPs must be submitted to the Structural Concrete Engineer at least two weeks in advance of the repair work .
The Agencys consent to use a SRP for the repair of a defect does not constitute acceptance of that repair .
NonConformance Report NCR .
Any defects existing in the pieces other than those defined as minor above shall be documented with a NonConformance Report .
NCRs must be submitted within Working Days of the discovery of the defect .
At a minimum the NCR must detail what the defect is including detailed pictures of the piece and defect and what caused it .
The NCR shall further document the proposed repair the procedure for carrying out the proposed repair and a plan of action to prevent additional similar defects from occurring .
Any approved repairs must be documented and photographed during the repair work and after completion of the repair .
l Deck Panel Rejection Criteria .
Deck panels that exhibit any of the following conditions shall be rejected .
Any crack that has a transverse or diagonal orientation relative to the strand pattern and crosses more than one strand .
Any crack that is parallel to a strand and is longer than of the panel length .
Cracks that are shorter than of the panel length and occur at more than of the total number of strands in the panel .
Voids or honeycombed areas with exposed strands .
Any other reason that the Structural Concrete Engineer determines could have an adverse impact on the structural integrity of the deck panel .
m Finishing Riding Surfaces with No Asphalt Wearing Surface .
All exposed riding surfaces not covered with an asphalt wearing surface shall be given a finish as specified on the approved Shop Drawings or if not specified in accordance with the requirements of Subsection .. n Welding .
All welding shall conform to the requirements of Subsection .. o Cold Weather Concrete .
Cold weather concrete will be any concrete placed or cured when the ambient air temperature is expected to be below freezing at any point in time or below F for an hour continuous period .
The requirements of Subsection .b shall apply in addition to the requirements of Subsection .. p Marking .
The date of manufacture the production lot number and the piece mark shall be clearly marked on each individual piece of prestressed concrete .
The mark shall be in a location that will not be visible in the finished product. . CURING .
a General .
All curing methods for restressed concrete shall be subject to the Structural Concrete Engineers approval .
The fabricator shall submit complete details of the proposed methods for approval with the Fabrication Drawings .
The curing period for prestressed concrete is defined as wet curing for a minimum of hours to begin immediately following the completion of placing and finishing of the concrete .
The following requirements shall apply The method of curing shall prevent the loss of moisture throughout the cure period .
Except where modified herein prestressed concrete structure components shall be cured by water curing by wetted burlap covered with white polyethylene sheeting or by burlapwhite polyethylene sheeting burlene as specified in Subsection ..
When a curing enclosure is used free water must be evident and the relative humidity within the enclosure shall exceed throughout the duration of the curing period .
A curing enclosure is considered any means of moistureretention that allows air to contact the surface of the piece .
The concretes strength shall be determined by test specimens cured with the product they represent or by specimens matchcured in an approved matchcuring system .
Wet curing shall continue until of the day design strength is achieved but shall be no less than hours in duration .
Curing by the approved method shall continue uninterrupted until the start of detensioning operations .
Detensioning shall be accomplished while the product is still warm .
Wet curing shall be resumed upon removal of the product from the forms .
b Curing Temperatures .
The controlling temperatures for concrete curing shall be those actually achieved within the concrete elements and not the ambient temperatures of the curing area unless specifically stated as such .
The internal temperature of the prestressed concrete shall be to raised at least ºF within the first hours of the curing period and shall be maintained at or above ºF for the remainder of the entire curing period .
The internal temperature of curing concrete shall be monitored using sacrificial thermocouples placed as near as practicable to the center of mass of the finished piece .
In addition the temperature within the curing enclosure shall be monitored using strategically placed temperature sensors so that the reported temperatures accurately represent the curing conditions .
The requirement for temperature monitoring may be waived by the Structural Concrete Engineer if the concrete is not subject to accelerated curing and ambient temperatures are expected to be well in excess of ºF throughout the duration of production .
c Accelerated Curing .
Accelerated curing procedures may be employed in lieu of the standard hour curing procedure described in Subsection .a in accordance with the requirements of PCI MNL Section .
and the following The initial time of set is defined in AASHTO T MT and ASTM C C M as the time it takes for fresh concrete to attain a compressive strength of psi .
Testing to determine the time of set shall be done when the concrete temperature is within F of the anticipated concrete placement temperature .
Alternately time of set testing may be found by taking a minimum of three different concrete temperatures at approximately F apart entering that data on a graph and then drawing a bestfit smooth curve line through the three data points .
This graph will be used to determine the time of set for the anticipated concrete placement temperature rounded up to the nearest half hour .
Immediately upon completing placement of the concrete for each prestressed concrete structure component an enclosure that is suitable for containing live lowpressure steam or heat shall be placed over the forms .
The fabricator shall make these enclosures available for inspection prior to casting .
When lowpressure steam heating methods are used for accelerated curing precautions shall be taken to prevent the live steam from being directed on the concrete or forms in such a way as to cause damage from localized high temperatures .
When radiant heat is used for accelerated curing all exposed concrete surfaces shall be covered with plastic sheeting .
Radiant heat may be applied by means of a circulation pipes containing steam hot oil or hot water or by electric heating elements .
While waiting for the initial set to take place the temperature within the concrete may be increased at a maximum rate of F per hour .
However the temperature within the concrete shall not be more than F higher than the initial concrete placement temperature or more than F whichever is less .
Following the initial set the internal concrete temperature shall be increased at a rate of not more than ºF per hour until the desired curing temperature is reached .
The maximum internal concrete temperature shall not exceed ºF .
The maximum differential between the curing enclosure temperature and internal concrete temperature shall not exceed ºF .
The selected curing enclosure temperature range shall be as approved on the Fabrication Drawings .
The accelerated curing cycle shall be considered complete when the method of supplying heat is stopped andor the concrete temperature drops below F. Two concrete cylinders shall be tested immediately upon completion of the accelerated cure cycle .
The maximum cooling rate from the sustained accelerated curing temperature shall be F per hour .
Cooling at this rate shall continue until the concrete temperature is F or less above the ambient temperature outside the curing enclosure .
Prestressed concrete that has not attained of its day design strength shall be additionally wetcured until this strength threshold is met .
If the precast concrete has attained of its day strength during the accelerated curing cycle no further curing will be required .
d Conditioning .
Following the completion of the chosen curing method precast elements that are to be exposed to Cold Weather conditions as defined in Subsection .i must be allowed to cool and dry in an environment of at least F for hours to prior to exposure to Cold Weather conditions .
For pieces cast outdoors in Cold Weather ambient conditions all requirements of Subsection .b shall apply .
e Temperature Recording .
The fabricator shall install one automatic temperature recorder for every feet of production length .
The Structural Concrete Engineer may require that additional temperature recorders be installed if it is determined that the one per feet of production length spacing does not allow for adequate monitoring of the curing conditions .
Temperatures recorded on the data logs shall be used to determine whether the prestressed concrete structure components have been cured in accordance with the Specifications and the approved Fabrication Drawings .
The recorder shall record at intervals not to exceed minutes the temperature of the air surrounding the piece as well as the internal concrete temperature .
Temperature recording shall continue until completion of the chosen curing method .
Each recorders data log shall indicate the casting bed the date of casting the start and finish times of record and the mark number of the prestressed concrete structure component being cured .
At the completion of the temperature recording period the data logs shall be given to the Agency representative .
Recorder accuracy shall be certified at least once every months and the certificate displayed with the recorder .
Calibration and certification shall be performed by either the manufacturer the supplier or an independent Laboratory .
Random temperature checks of each recorder may be made by an Agency representative. . HANDLING STORAGE AND SHIPPING .
Handling and installation of prestressed members shall be performed with members in an upright position and with points of dunnage support and direction of lifting reactions as specified in the approved lifting calculations .
Prestressed concrete shall be handled stored and shipped in such a manner as to minimize chipping cracks fractures discoloration and excessive bending stresses .
Units damaged by handling storage or shipping shall be replaced at the Contractors expense .
Prior to shipment of any members all NCRs shall be resolved and all required testing shall demonstrate that the design requirements have been met .
All applicable material certifications will be approved in accordance with Subsection .. .
INSTALLATION .
a Prestressed Concrete Members .
Methods Equipment and Erection .
Cranes lifting devices and other equipment for all prestressed concrete member erection shall be of adequate design and capacity to safely erect align and secure all members and components in their final positions without damage .
The Contractor is solely responsible for the methods and equipment employed for the erection of the prestressed concrete member .
Construction Drawings for prestressed concrete member erection shall be submitted in accordance with the requirements of Section .
The erection plan shall include the methods and sequence of prestressed concrete member erection temporary bracing requirements the equipment to be used for the erection and the necessary computations to demonstrate that all of the erection equipment has adequate capacity for the work to be performed .
The erection plan shall also include provisions for all stages of construction including temporary stoppages .
When the fabricatordesigned lifting hooks will be used by the Contractor computations indicating the magnitude of stress in the segments during erection are not required unless otherwise ordered by the Engineer .
The prestressed concrete members may be used for support of equipment prior to placement of the deck only with written permission of the Engineer .
The proposed use of the prestressed members for support of equipment shall be detailed in the erection plan .
Submittal of the erection plan is for documentation purposes only and shall in no way be construed as approval of the proposed method of erection .
The Contractor shall follow the erection plan as submitted .
Initial Posttensioning .
The Contractor shall insert posttensioning strands in the conduits and tension them to .
kips .
Grout .
Grout shall be placed in accordance with the requirements of Subsection .. Fairing Surfaces .
This work shall consist of placing grout between prestressed members as required for fairing out any unevenness between adjacent units .
Mortar Type IV shall be used and grout placement shall occur at the same time mortar is placed to fill shear keys between members and in accordance with the requirements of Subsection ..
The mortar shall be placed to eliminate unevenness forming a smooth surface from the higher beam edges to the lower surface .
The finished surface shall be feathered smoothly and be free of depressions or sharp edges .
Final Posttensioning .
Strands shall be posttensioned in accordance with the requirements of Subsection .. b Prestressed Deck Panels .
Prestressed deck panels shall be installed as shown on the Plans .
The temporary supports shall be attached to the top of the flange of the girder with an adhesive approved by the Engineer in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
The temporary supports shall be cut in the field to the required height after the blocking depth has been determined .
The bottom of the panels shall be a minimum of inch above the top of the top flange of the girder .
Prestressed deck panels shall not be used to support heavy loads such as additional deck panels until the top slab is cast and cured .
Construction loads on individual panels shall be uniformly applied and shall not exceed an average loading of pounds per square foot .
After the prestressed deck panels have been placed on temporary supports the area under the ends of the panels and over the girder flanges up to the bottom of the panels shall be completely filled with the material specified on the Plans .
Temporary supports and grout dams for prestressed deck panels shall consist of continuous strips of high density extruded Polystyrene insulation board with a minimum compressive strength of psi .
If leveling screws are used polyethylene foam weighing .
pounds per cubic foot shall be employed as a grout dam .
Prior to placement of the castinplace deck the concrete shall be wet cured until a minimum of of f c is attained by the average strength of two fieldcured concrete cylinders .
The leveling screws shall be completely removed and the holes filled with grout prior to the placement of deck concrete .
Prior to placing the deck concrete any laitance or other contaminates that would interfere with full bond to the panels shall be removed by an approved method. . GROUT .
a Surface Preparation .
The fabricator must ensure that surfaces to be grouted are clean oilfree and roughened in accordance with the Plans .
The surface to be grouted shall be thoroughly wetted yet free of all standing water .
Shear keys shall be saturated surface dry prior to grouting .
b Grout Mixes .
Grout shall be used to fill shear keys transverse tie anchor recesses and dowel holes level screw voids and for fairing joints as detailed in the Contract or as ordered by the Engineer .
Grout shall be Mortar Type IV meeting the requirements of Subsection .. Additional Aggregates shall not be added to the material during field mixing .
The Contractor shall submit a proposed grouting procedure including a premix name brand to the Engineer for their review and approval .
The Contractor with the written permission of the Engineer has the option to use readymixed mortar for the grouting process .
However the time from batching to completion of placement must not exceed minutes .
Readymixed mortar shall be used in small quantities as needed and shall not be retempered or used after it has begun to set .
Readymixed grout mix design shall be submitted to the Structural Concrete Engineer for approval .
The mix design shall include test results that meet the requirements of Subsection .c and Subsection .c .
Tests on the mix design shall be performed by an AMRLaccredited lab in those test procedures .
Materials used for grouting must be sampled and tested in accordance with the VTrans Materials Sampling Manual .
The cubes produced for testing conformance with strength requirements shall be fieldcured with the fieldplaced grout .
A minimum of six additional test cubes shall be produced to facilitate early breaks to determine when posttensioning may proceed .
c Placing Grout .
The grout shall be mixed using a mechanical mixer according to the manufacturers recommendations and shall be readily pourable so that it completely fills the shape of the shear keys or holes depending on the product being installed .
The placement of the grout for each shear key shall be continuous .
The grouting of each shear key shall be completed in its entirety within a single Working Day .
d Curing Grout .
In the absence of manufacturer curing recommendations all exposed grout shall be cured for not less than three days by the wetted burlap method in accordance with the requirements of Section .
Curing shall commence immediately following completion of grouting of individual shear keys. . POSTTENSIONING .
Posttensioning strands shall not be bonded to the concrete and shall be protected against corrosion as specified in the Contract .
Posttensioning of strands shall not commence until a minimum compressive strength of psi has been attained in the grout as tested per the requirements of Subsection .b .
If the design strength is met prior to completion of the required curing the grout cure must be maintained during the posttensioning operation .
Strands shall be stressed in the following sequence Before grouting the strands shall be pulled with a maximum force of .
kips .
After the grout has attained the required strength the strands shall be pulled to the final design tension .
Stressing shall begin by pulling the innermost strands first then proceeding symmetrically towards the members ends .
The inner strands shall be rechecked to ensure the strands still have the design tension .
In the case where the Plans call for top and bottom strands the sequence shall be followed using an initial pull of .
kips top and bottom followed by a sequence using the final design tension .
No loading of elements shall be allowed until posttensioning is completed . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT .
The quantities of Prestressed Concrete Box Beams Prestressed Concrete Voided Slabs Prestressed Concrete Girders Prestressed Concrete Solid Slabs and Prestressed Concrete NEXT D Beams to be measured for payment will be the number of linear feet of the types and sizes of prestressed concrete members used in the complete and accepted work .
The quantity of Grouting Shear Keys to be measured for payment will be the number of linear feet of grouted shear keys in the complete and accepted work .
Prestressed deck panels and concrete support beds for the panels will not be separately measured for payment but will be considered within the volume measurement limits for payment of superstructure concrete . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT .
The accepted quantities of Prestressed Concrete Box Beams Prestressed Concrete Voided Slabs Prestressed Concrete Girders Prestressed Concrete Solid Slabs and Prestressed Concrete NEXT D Beams will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per linear foot for the types and sizes of prestressed concrete members specified .
Payment will be full compensation for detailing fabricating repairing sandblasting quality control testing transporting handling and installing the materials specified including the concrete reinforcement Prestressing steel transverse ties enclosures for Prestressing steel anchorages mortar and anchor rods .
Payment will be full compensation for any other material contained within or attached to the members for furnishing and implementing the erection plans and for furnishing all labor tools equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
The Engineer may authorize progress payments in the following manner a A maximum of of the Contract bid amount may be paid when the Fabrication Drawings have been Approved by VTrans .
b In accordance with the requirements of Subsection .
stockpile payment may be authorized when the prestressed elements have met the requirements of Subsection .
for shipping .
c After completion and acceptance of all work under this Section of the quantity will be paid .
The accepted quantity of Grouting Shear Keys will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per linear foot .
Payment will be full compensation for providing all materials and performing the work specified herein and for furnishing all labor tools equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
Any other grouting work such as fairing out unevenness between adjacent units and filling leveling screw holes transverse anchor recesses and dowel holes is considered incidental to the work for prestressed concrete members .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Prestressed Concrete Box Beams Linear Foot .
Prestressed Concrete Voided Slabs Linear Foot .
Prestressed Concrete Girders Linear Foot .
Grouting Shear Keys Linear Foot .
Prestressed Concrete Solid Slabs Linear Foot .
Prestressed Concrete NEXT D Beams Linear Foot SECTION THIS SECTION RESERVED SECTION THIS SECTION RESERVED SECTION THIS SECTION RESERVED SECTION WATER REPELLENT SILANE .
DESCRIPTION .
This work shall consist of furnishing and applying a penetratingtype protective sealer on concrete surfaces. . MATERIALS .
The material shall be a onecomponent substance consisting of a penetratingtype sealer which does not alter the color or texture of the Portland cement concrete .
Acceptable penetratingtype sealers shall be those appearing on the Agencys Approved Products List. . PACKAGING DELIVERY AND STORAGE .
The material shall be delivered to the Project in the original unopened manufacturers containers and stored in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations . .
PREPARATION OF SURFACES .
All surfaces on which the protective sealer is to be applied shall be clean and thoroughly dry to the satisfaction of the Engineer and in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
Dirt grease curing compounds asphalt or other foreign materials shall be removed from the concrete surface before application of the sealer . .
APPLICATION .
The material shall be applied to the satisfaction of the Engineer and in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
In the absence of specific recommendations from the manufacturer the protective sealer shall not be applied to new concrete surfaces that are less than days old .
The concrete surfaces shall be free from precipitation for hours prior to application of the sealer .
Application of the sealer shall be completed within Calendar Days of original concrete placement. . PROTECTION .
After application of the sealer the concrete surfaces shall be protected to the satisfaction of the Engineer and in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT .
The quantity of Water Repellent Silane to be measured for payment will be the number of gallons of solution applied in the complete and accepted work measured to the nearest gallon . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT .
The accepted quantity of Water Repellent Silane will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per gallon .
Payment will be full compensation for furnishing transporting handling and placing the material specified and for furnishing all labor tools equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Water Repellent Silane Gallon SECTION THIS SECTION RESERVED SECTION EXPANSION DEVICES .
DESCRIPTION .
This work shall consist of furnishing and installing or partially removing and modifying expansion devices. . MATERIALS .
Materials shall meet the requirements of the following Subsections Joint Sealer Preformed Neoprene .
Preformed Fabric Material .
Joint Sealer Butyl Rubber Tape .
Asphalt Plug Bridge Joint .
Structural Steel .
HighStrength LowAlloy Structural Steel .
Carbon Steel Bolts Nuts and Washers .
HighStrength Bolts Nuts and Washers .
Welded Stud Shear Connectors .
Epoxy Bonding Compound .
Galvanizing .
Metalizing . .
FABRICATION DRAWINGS .
The fabricator of the expansion devices furnished under this Section shall submit detailed Fabrication Drawings in accordance with the requirements of Section and Section . .
FABRICATION .
Material furnished under this Section shall conform to all applicable provisions of Section .
Assemblies shall be fabricated to the designed roadway crosssection within inch tolerance of the theoretical dimensions at any point .
Unless otherwise specified all expansion devices shall be galvanized or metalized .
Extruded cellular and striptype sealers shall be furnished in one continuous piece without splices .
When it is specified that a neoprene seal be bonded to a steel surface that is not galvanized the contact surface area shall be blastcleaned and properly primed with adhesive .
Contact surfaces of neoprene seals that will be bonded with an adhesive shall be cleaned and primed in accordance with the seal manufacturers instructions .
Expansion devices shall be fabricated assembled and certified by one supplier .
Each device shall be completely shopassembled and shipped as a complete unit except that curbs or other assemblies designed to be attached and adjusted by field bolting may be removed for transport .
Angles or other suitable sections shall be furnished to secure opposite halves of a unit during shipment .
Temporary shipping attachments shall be attached by bolting welding will not be permitted . .
INSTALLATION .
Expansion devices shall be installed in conformance with the Plans and all applicable provisions of Section .
Final gap adjustments of an expansion joint assembly shall be made during installation in accordance with the movement chart shown on the Plans Fabrication Drawings or as directed by the Engineer .
Joint assemblies shall be properly positioned within inch of theoretical crown and straightness and attached to the structure by anchorages furnished with the assembly or as specified in the Contract .
Prior to the placement of the concrete all steel surfaces that will be embedded in concrete shall be coated with epoxy bonding compound .
Application of the epoxy bonding compound shall be done in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations . .
PARTIAL REMOVAL AND MODIFICATION .
The Contractor shall partially remove and modify the existing bridge joint at the locations indicated in the Plans and as directed by the Engineer .
Steel for new joint plates shall meet the requirements of Subsection ..
The Contractor shall remove and dispose of existing joint plates drain troughs and associated hardware .
The Contractor shall grind existing steel plates andor shoulder concrete to the configuration shown on the Plans .
The final surface shall be to the satisfaction of the Engineer . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT .
The quantity of Bridge Expansion Joint of the type specified to be measured for payment will be the number of linear feet used in the complete and accepted work measured along its centerline .
The quantity of Partial Removal and Modification of Bridge Joint to be measured for payment will be the number of linear feet of bridge joint removed and modified in the complete and accepted work measured along its centerline . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT .
The accepted quantity of Bridge Expansion Joint of the type specified will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per linear foot .
Payment will be full compensation for detailing furnishing handling transporting and placing the material specified including nondestructive testing of welds surface preparation protective coating and epoxy bonding compound and for furnishing all labor tools equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
The accepted quantity of Partial Removal and Modification of Bridge Joint will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per linear foot .
Payment will be full compensation for partially removing and modifying the existing joint as specified and as detailed in the Plans and for furnishing all labor tools equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Bridge Expansion Joint Asphaltic Plug Linear Foot .
Bridge Expansion Joint Vermont Linear Foot .
Bridge Expansion Joint Finger Plate Linear Foot .
Partial Removal and Modification of Bridge Joint Linear Foot SECTION SHEET MEMBRANE WATERPROOFING .
DESCRIPTION .
This work shall consist of the application of a membrane to bridge decks to serve as a waterproof barrier between the concrete deck and the bituminous concrete surface pavement .
This membrane shall consist of either a torch applied membrane or a spray applied membrane as required by the Contract Documents .
Torch applied membranes shall incorporate the use of a prime coat over the horizontal deck surface and an acceptable polyurethane liquid membrane on the lower portion of the curb face and adjacent deck area .
Spray applied membranes shall incorporate a primer the waterproofing membrane tack coat and any required aggregate. . MATERIALS .
The materials shall consist of an approved membrane waterproofing system of the type specified listed on the Agencys Approved Products List. . SUBMITTALS .
The following information shall be provided by the Contractor to the Engineer prior to application of the membrane system a Safety Data Sheets SDS and Material Detail Sheets prepared by the membrane manufacturer provided a minimum of Calendar Days prior to the scheduled commencement of work .
b Written certification from the manufacturer regarding the Applicators qualifications and references for a minimum of three membrane Projects completed by the Applicator within the last years provided a minimum of Calendar Days prior to the application of any system component .
The certification shall apply only to the named individuals performing the application . .
WEATHER LIMITATIONS .
Waterproofing shall not be done in rainy weather or when the temperature is below F without the authorization of the Engineer . .
SURFACE PREPARATION .
The surface of the deck shall have a smooth finetextured finish .
All honeycombed areas and surface cavities shall be cleaned and filled with Agency and manufacturer approved patching materials .
The entire deck shall be abrasive blastcleaned to achieve an anchor profile that is clean and free of laitance oil and foreign materials .
Prior to blasting the surface shall be dry and free of sharp protrusions .
In addition to these requirements the deck surface shall meet any additional requirements of the Manufacturers recommendations. . CONSTRUCTION DETAILS .
a General .
All work performed shall be in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
The entire system shall be applied by an individual Applicator certified by the manufacturer .
The manufacturer shall have a competent technical representative with necessary equipment to perform the quality control testing at the job site during all phases of preparation and installation .
The technical representative will be responsible for performing and reporting all quality control testing required during membrane application .
The technical representative will present all qualitycontrol testing equipment to the Engineer to verify calibration dates and demonstrate their competency to perform quality control testing .
Quality Control testing includes but is not limited to measuring and verifying Substrate Moisture Content and Temperature Primer Adhesion Membrane Thickness Membrane Pin Holes and Membrane Adhesion .
b Material Storage .
All components of the membrane system shall be stored in accordance with the Material Detail Sheets .
c Surface Condition .
Prior to application of primer the concrete deck shall be cured such that the moisture content reaches or less .
Except on minor areas of the deck as approved by the Engineer torching or other forms of rapidly evaporating free moisture from the surface will not be allowed to achieve initial surface conditions .
Cracks should be blown out to ensure excess water is not present .
The Contractor shall supply a portable electronic surface moisture meter capable of measuring the moisture content percentage of concrete surfaces .
Immediately prior to application of the primer the deck shall be cleaned using brooms and compressed air that is free of oil .
The concrete surfaces shall be inspected and approved by the Engineer and the Applicator prior to priming .
d Application of Primer .
The air temperature for primer application shall be at least F and rising .
The primer shall consist of one coat covering the entire deck with an overall coverage rate of square feet per gallon or as specified by the manufacturer .
The primer shall be applied by brush roller or sprayer .
The primer shall cure tackfree in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations before application of the waterproofing membrane .
e Membrane Application .
The waterproofing membrane shall be applied by equipment approved by the Engineer .
The equipment shall be capable of applying the membrane in a uniform manner onto the prepared substrate in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations to assure bond with the primed surface and elimination of air bubbles .
In small areas the membrane shall be handwelded by torch around drains joints and along the curb as directed by the Engineer .
The Applicator shall be responsible for the protection of adjacent areas .
Sheet membrane shall be installed in a shingled pattern so that water is permitted to drain to the low areas of the deck without accumulating against seams .
Laps shall be staggered at the beginning and ends of rolls shall overlap the previous roll and shall be sealed in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
Prior to suspension of work for any reason all exposed edges shall be heated troweled and sealed in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
The Contractor shall repair andor correct any deficiencies in the membrane system and substrate noted during qualitycontrol testing as recommended by the manufacturers representative to the satisfaction of the Engineer at no additional cost to the State .
If the membrane is damaged andor debonding from the deck surface occurs after application and quality control testing is complete the membrane shall be patched or repaired in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations at no additional cost to the State. . PROTECTION OF MEMBRANE .
Care shall be exercised to prevent damage to the completed membrane especially during paving operations .
All damaged areas shall be cleaned and patched to the satisfaction of the Engineer .
A rubbertired or rubbertracked paver shall be used to place the bottom course of bituminous mix .
The temperature of the bituminous concrete pavement to be placed on the membrane shall be as recommended by the membrane manufacturer and approved by the Engineer .
a Membrane Waterproofing Spray Applied .
An aggregate wearing surface shall be adhered to the top membrane coat .
Unless otherwise specified the aggregate shall be broadcast at the rate of .
to .
pounds per square foot to achieve adequate uniform coverage .
Where bituminous concrete pavement will be applied to the membrane surface a tack coat compatible with the membrane system shall be used between the membrane and the bituminous concrete pavement .
The surface preparation and tack coat shall be applied per the manufacturers recommendations .
b Sheet Membrane Waterproofing Torch Applied .
No traffic shall be permitted on an exposed membrane surface .
The specified bituminous overlay shall be placed on the membrane within three days after application .
The Contractor shall maintain a small supply of Portland cement on the Project during the time of paving .
The cement dust shall be sparingly cast over the membrane surface to reduce tackiness and thereby prevent the paver or truck tires from sticking to the membrane and damaging it .
The paver operator shall be directed not to ride the curb lines while paving such areas since the screed shoe may damage the polyurethane sealant on the vertical curb face. . PROTECTION OF EXPOSED SURFACES .
The Contractor shall exercise care in the application of the waterproofing materials to prevent surfaces not receiving treatment from being spattered or marred .
Particular reference is made to the face of curbs copings finished surfaces substructure exposed surface and outside faces of the bridge .
Any material that spatters on these surfaces shall be removed and the surfaces cleaned to the satisfaction of the Engineer . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT .
The quantity of Membrane Waterproofing Spray Applied or Sheet Membrane Waterproofing Torch Applied to be measured for payment will be the number of square yards of the specified type used in the complete and accepted work .
Measurement will be based on the horizontal distance between the face of the curbs and the horizontal length of membrane installed .
Any material specified to be lapped up the face of the curb will not be included in the measured quantity . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT .
The accepted quantity of Membrane Waterproofing Spray Applied or Sheet Membrane Waterproofing Torch Applied will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per square yard .
Payment will be full compensation for furnishing transporting handling and placing the waterproofing system specified including primer tack coat aggregate mastic polyurethane membrane sealant and surface preparation and for furnishing all materials labor tools equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Membrane Waterproofing Spray Applied Square Yard .
Sheet Membrane Waterproofing Torch Applied Square Yard SECTION THIS SECTION RESERVED SECTION LUMBER AND TIMBER .
DESCRIPTION .
This work shall consist of detailing furnishing fabricating transporting framing and placing or erecting lumber structural timber or structural glued laminated timber installing hardware and applying preservative treatment. . MATERIALS .
Materials shall meet the requirements of the following Subsections Joint Sealer Hot Poured a Coatings for Wood Structural Lumber and Timber Miscellaneous Hardware Shapes and Fabricated Materials h Nonstructural Lumber Structural Glued Laminated Timber Timber Preservative Waterproofing Pitch Galvanizing Unless otherwise specified all metal parts and hardware shall be galvanized. . GENERAL FABRICATION REQUIREMENTS .
Glued laminated timber furnished under this Section shall be fabricated by an AITC or APAEWS licensed laminator and shall comply with ANSIAITC A ..
In addition to being a licensed laminator the fabricator must have been in continuous operation for at least five years and must demonstrate the capability to fabricate the end products specified .
Unless otherwise specified all material shall be fabricated prior to preservative treatment .
Dimensions and bolt hole locations of prefabricated material shall be within a tolerance of inch of the details specified . .
DRAWINGS .
Unless otherwise specified as soon as practical after award of the Contract the Contractor shall prepare and submit Fabrication Drawings for glued laminated timber in accordance with Section .
The Contractor shall prepare and submit Construction Drawings for structural timber erection in accordance with Section .
The erection plan shall include methods and sequence of structural timber erection temporary bracing requirements the equipment to be used for the erection the necessary computations to indicate the magnitude of stress in the segments during erection and to demonstrate that all of the erection equipment has adequate capacity for the work to be performed and provisions for all stages of construction including temporary stoppages .
The Contractor shall follow the erection plan as submitted . .
STORAGE .
Timber lumber and glued laminated materials stored on the site shall be kept in orderly piles open stacked and on supports that provide at least inches of ground clearance .
For outside storage the ground area in the vicinity of the material shall be cleared of grass weeds and rubbish .
Free circulation of air shall be provided between the tiers and courses for untreated timber .
Treated timber shall be stacked together with no separation between the tiers and courses .
Free circulation of air shall be provided between the pile and the ground for both treated and untreated timber .
Both shall have free circulation of air from the ground .
Timber lumber and glued laminated timber treated or untreated shall be stored under cover .
The covering shall adequately protect these materials from direct and blowing rain or snow while providing for full circulation of air and adequate drainage .
All timber lumber and glued laminated timber treated or untreated shall meet the requirements of Subsection .b before being incorporated into the work .
All glued laminated timber shall meet the moisture requirements of Subsection .b at the time laminations are glued .
Fabricated material shall be stored in a manner that will prevent dimensional changes in the members prior to assembly. . HANDLING .
materials shall be carefully handled to avoid damaging the edges or surface and to keep them clean .
Materials shall be picked up or moved with slings or other devices that will not damage or mar the surface .
Peavies cant hooks timber dogs or other pointed tools will not be permitted .
Cranes lifting devices and other equipment for all structural timber erection shall be of adequate design and capacity to safely erect align and secure all members and components in their final positions without damage .
The Contractor is solely responsible for the methods and equipment employed for the erection of the structural timber members. . FRAMING .
Timber lumber and glued laminated timber shall be accurately cut and framed to a close fit in such a manner that the joints will have full and even bearing over the entire contact surface .
Mortises shall be true to size for their full depth and tenons shall fit snugly .
Except as indicated in the Contract shimming will not be permitted in making joints and open joints will not be accepted .
Nails and spikes shall be driven with the heads set flush with the surface of the wood .
Except as directed by the Engineer structure framing and boarding shall be constructed square plumb and straight .
When permitted by the Engineer forms or temporary braces may be attached to treated material .
Upon removal any holes cuts or abrasions shall be treated in accordance with Subsection .. .
CONNECTIONS .
a Holes for Bolts Dowels Rods and Lag Screws .
Holes for metal round driftbolts or dowels shall be bored with a bit inch less in diameter than the driftbolt or dowel to be used .
The diameter of holes for metal square driftbolts or dowels shall be equal to the least dimension of the driftbolt or dowel .
Except as required for timber connectors in Subsection .d holes for machine bolts shall be bored with a bit the same diameter as the bolt .
Holes for round wood dowels or trunnels shall be bored with a bit the same diameter as the dowel .
Holes for rods shall be bored with a bit inch greater in diameter than the rod .
Lead holes for lag screws wood screws and spikes shall conform to requirements specified within the latest edition of the AITC Timber Construction Manual .
b Countersinking .
Countersinking shall be done wherever smooth faces are required .
All recesses in treated lumber and timber formed for countersinking shall be painted with copper naphthenate solution .
Recesses likely to collect injurious materials shall be filled with a hotpoured joint sealer or other material as directed by the Engineer .
c Bolts and Washers .
A washer of the size and type specified shall be used under all bolt heads and nuts that would otherwise come in contact with wood .
All nuts shall be effectively locked after they have been finally tightened .
d Timber Connectors .
In addition to wood dowels bolts and rods timber wood member connectors may be the split ring shear plate or spike grid type .
The split ring and shear plate types shall be installed in precut grooves of dimensions as recommended by the manufacturer .
The spike grid type shall be forced into the contact surfaces of the wood members joined by means of pressure equipment .
All connectors of this type at any given joint shall be embedded simultaneously and uniformly .
Bolt holes shall be perpendicular to the face of the material and inch larger in diameter than the bolt .
e Framed Bents .
Framed bents shall be constructed in accordance with AASHTO LRFD Bridge Construction Specifications and interim Specifications in effect on the date of the Contract. . TRUSSES .
Trusses when completed shall show no irregularities of line .
Chords shall be straight and true from end to end in horizontal projection and in vertical projection shall show a smooth curve through panel points conforming to the correct camber .
All bearing surfaces shall fit accurately .
Uneven or rough cuts at the points of bearing shall be cause for rejection of the piece containing the defect. . TRUSS HOUSING .
The finished appearance of the housing is considered of primary importance .
Special care shall be taken to secure a high quality of work and finish on this portion of the structure .
Unless otherwise directed by the Engineer housing and railings shall be constructed after the removal of the falsework and the adjustment of the trusses to correct alignment and camber. . DECKING .
a Plank Flooring .
Plank material shall be of dimension lumber of the grade specified .
Unless otherwise specified all material shall be surfaced four sides SS .
Single layer plank floors shall consist of a single thickness of dimension lumber planks supported by stringers or floor beams .
The planks shall be laid heart side down with inch openings between them .
Each plank shall be securely fastened to each supporting member .
The planks shall be carefully graded as to thickness and so laid that no two adjacent planks vary in thickness by more than inch .
Unless otherwise specified the lengths of transverse planks on stringers shall be full width of the designed crosssection .
Twoply plank floors shall consist of two layers of dimension lumber planks supported on stringers or floor beams .
Each plank of the top course shall be securely fastened to the lower course .
At the ends of the bridge if required the decking shall be beveled to match the approach surfaces .
For stringer supports the top course of planks may be laid either diagonal or parallel to the centerline of roadway .
Joints in the top layer shall be staggered at least feet and care shall be taken to securely fasten the ends of each plank .
For floor beam supports unless otherwise specified the lengths of transverse top course planks shall be full width of the designed cross section .
b Nail Laminated Decking .
Nail laminated deck material shall be furnished and installed in accordance with the Contract or as ordered by the Engineer .
Deck material shall be of the grade specified .
Unless otherwise specified in transverse applications the lengths of laminations shall be the full width of the designed crosssection .
Spike placement in laminated decks shall follow the requirements of the AASHTO LRFD Bridge Design Specifications Section .
Spikes shall be placed in pilot holes that are bored through pairs of laminations at each end and at intervals of not more than .
inches .
The spikes shall be driven alternately near the top and bottom edges of the laminations and shall be of sufficient length to fully penetrate four laminations .
Laminations shall not be butt spliced within their unsupported length .
Drive spike spacing at shiplap joints shall be as shown on the Plans .
When timber nailing strips are used every other plank shall be toenailed to every other nailing strip .
The size of the spikes shall be as shown on the Plans or as directed by the Engineer .
When shown on the Plans or authorized by the Engineer the laminated decking may be attached to steel supports by the use of approved metal clips .
Care shall be taken to have each strip vertical and tight against the preceding one and bearing evenly on all supports .
c Glued Laminated Decking .
Glued laminated decking material shall be furnished and installed in accordance with the Contract approved Fabrication Drawings or as directed by the Engineer. . SAWN LUMBER STRINGERS .
Stringers shall be sized at bearings and shall be placed in position so that knots near edges will be in the compression portions of the stringers .
Outside stringers may have butt joints over intermediate supports with the ends cut on a taper but interior stringers shall be lapped to take bearing over the full width of the floor beam or cap at each end .
The lapped ends of untreated stringers shall be separated at least inch for the circulation of air and shall be securely fastened by driftbolting where specified .
When stringers are two panels in length the joints shall be staggered .
Crossbridging between stringers shall be neatly and accurately framed and securely toenailed with at least two nails in each end .
All crossbridging members shall have full bearing at each end against the sides of stringers .
Unless otherwise specified crossbridging shall be placed at the center of each span. . PRESERVATIVE TREATMENT .
a Pressure Treatment .
Timber lumber and glued laminated timber shall be pressure treated with the type of preservative specified in the Contract .
When a specific type or option is not specified Type II preservative shall be used .
Prior to handling or erecting pressure treated timber lumber or glued laminated timber the Contractor shall read and provide a copy of any Safety Data Sheets or Consumer Information Sheets required for the material to the Engineer .
The Contractor shall also provide the Engineer with a plan detailing cleanup storage and disposal procedures for pressure treated sawdust and cutoffs .
All preservative treatment shall adhere to the recommendations of the Western Wood Preservers Institute WWPI and the American Wood Protection Association AWPA .
Treatment of Cuts Abrasions and Holes .
Cuts abrasions and holes bored after treatment shall be treated with two coats of copper naphthenate solution .
Cuts and abrasions shall be carefully trimmed prior to treatment .
Holes left unfilled shall be filled with wooden plugs treated with copper naphthenate solution .
Temporary Attachments .
Holes remaining after the removal of nails and spikes used to attach temporary forms or bracing to treated material shall be filled by driving galvanized nails or spikes flush with the surface or plugging the holes with wooden plugs treated with copper naphthenate solution .
b Untreated Timber Lumber and Glued Laminated Timber .
For untreated timber lumber and glued laminated timber all cuts notches bore holes contact surfaces and other areas specified by the Contract shall be treated with two coats of copper naphthenate solution .
c Field Treatment .
When field applications of preservative are specified the materials shall be furnished prepared and applied in accordance with AWPA Standard M. . PAINTING .
The surface of any material to be painted or stained shall be dry and free of dirt dust oil or other foreign materials .
Unless otherwise specified all surfaces shall be coated with a prime coat and one finish coat . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT .
The quantity of Structural Lumber and Timber and of Nonstructural Lumber to be measured for payment will be the number of thousand feet board measure MFBM incorporated into the complete and accepted work as computed from the nominal crosssection sizes and the actual inplace lengths of members .
Final accepted inplace length of any member will be determined as the maximum length of a member as projected along one edgeline measured to the next whole foot increment .
Further measurement shall not be made for cutoffs or actual stock lengths .
For bridges requiring completely new materials for longitudinal naillaminated decking longitudinal plank decking runners or roof boards member length will be measured as the overall superstructure length of the inplace decking runners or roof boards measured to the next whole foot increment .
If round timbers are specified the number of board feet will be computed by the Vermont Log Rule as follows 𝐵𝐹 𝐷 𝑅 𝐿 where D Diameter measured under the bark at the small end inches R One half the diameter inches L Length feet The quantity of Structural Glued Laminated Timber to be measured for payment will be on a lump sum basis for each structure or each structural unit in the complete and accepted work . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT .
The accepted quantities of Structural Lumber and Timber and of Nonstructural Lumber will be paid for at the Contract Unit Prices per thousand feet board measure MFBM .
Payment for each quantity will be full compensation for detailing fabricating furnishing transporting handling placing or erecting and painting or treating the material specified including all hardware and timber connectors for providing all falsework forms bracing sheeting or other timber used for erection purposes for furnishing and implementing the erection plan when required and for furnishing all labor tools equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
The accepted quantity of Structural Glued Laminated Timber will be paid for at the Contract lump sum price .
Partial payments will be made as follows a The first payment of of the lump sum price will be made upon the original delivery of the timbers to the Project provided the materials are acceptable and certified .
b The remaining will be paid when the installation is complete and the work accepted .
Payments for the quantity of Structural Glued Laminated Timber will be full compensation for detailing fabricating furnishing transporting handling placing or erecting and painting or treating the material specified including all hardware and timber connectors for providing all falsework forms bracing sheeting or other timber used for erection purposes for furnishing and implementing the erection plan when required and for furnishing all labor tools equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Structural Lumber and Timber Untreated MFBM .
Structural Lumber and Timber Treated MFBM .
Nonstructural Lumber Untreated MFBM .
Nonstructural Lumber Treated MFBM .
Structural Glued Laminated Timber Lump Sum SECTION THIS SECTION RESERVED SECTION JOINT SEALER .
DESCRIPTON .
This work shall consist of furnishing and placing a joint sealer of the type specified at the locations shown on the Plans. . MATERIALS .
Materials shall meet the requirements of the following Subsections Joint Sealer Hot Poured .a Joint Sealer Cold Poured .b Backer Rod .c Joint Sealer Polyurethane .
Bond Breaker .c Asphaltic Plug Bridge Joint .
Joints sawn in bituminous concrete pavement shall be filled and sealed with hot poured or cold poured joint sealer or asphaltic plug joint binder appropriate backer rod and an approved bond breaker . .
TEMPERATURE LIMITATIONS .
The joint sealer shall be applied per the manufacturers recommendations however the ambient air and pavement temperatures must be greater than F at the time of application. . SAWED JOINTS .
Roadway or bridge deck joints shall be formed by means of concrete floor sawing equipment capable of drycutting the designed joint in a single pass .
The joint shall be cut and sealed in one continuous operation .
The sawed joint shall not be exposed to traffic until after the sealer has been placed cured and is not subject to picking .
When placing new bituminous concrete pavement each lift of pavement shall be scored with a single blade cut to a depth of of the lift thickness at the location of the center of the proposed joint .
This work shall be completed prior to exposing the location to traffic or where traffic is not maintained the same Working Day that the lift of pavement is placed .
The sawed joint in the newlyplaced wearing course shall be cut and sealed within hours of paving .
If the joint location will not be exposed to traffic the Engineer may allow the Contractor an additional hours to cut and seal the joint .
The width of the sawed joint shall be as shown on the Plans or may be adjusted by the Engineer for seasonal temperature variations .
The depth of the sealant shall be approximately of the width of the sawn joint when hot or cold poured materials are specified in the Contract .
The equipment for sawing the single blade cut shall be on the Project and approved by the Engineer prior to beginning paving operations . .
PREPARATION OF JOINTS .
Surfaces to which the joint sealer is to adhere shall be free of all foreign material including curing compound oil dirt sawing film laitance and rust .
All surfaces shall be thoroughly dry before placing joint sealers .
a For Poured or Preformed Joint Sealers .
Prior to placing poured or preformed joint sealers the vertical faces of the sawed joint and the horizontal pavement surfaces within inch of the joint edge shall be thoroughly blastcleaned to improve joint sealant adhesion .
The resulting dust blasting debris etc .
shall be removed with a blast of highpressure air or industrial vacuum equipment .
Regardless of the cleaning method used the Contractor shall take all necessary precautions to avoid contaminating the other Project construction work with the removed dust and debris .
b For Polyurethane Joint Sealer .
Prior to placing polyurethane joint sealer the concrete surface shall be blastcleaned to remove surface mortar and expose underlying aggregate .
Blastcleaning equipment shall be operated such that no oil is introduced into the air line .
Surfaces formerly sealed with other sealers shall be bushhammered or sawed to clean the material and then blast cleaned .
Steel surfaces shall be blast cleaned to the bare metal .
Primer shall be applied immediately after the blastcleaning is completed .
Epoxy mortar surfaces shall be cleaned by use of suitable solvents or by blastcleaning as required. . PLACEMENT .
a Joint Sealer Hot Poured .
The material shall be heated in a doublewalled oiljacketed kettle equipped with positive temperature controls that allow the sealer to be heated to and maintained within a range of F to F or such other temperature range as recommended by the sealant manufacturer .
The kettle shall arrive on the Project empty .
Heating of the sealant to the placement temperature and maintaining the sealer at placement temperature shall not exceed six hours .
The Contractor shall empty the kettle before heating more material .
New material shall not be added to a partiallyfilled kettle and cooled material shall not be reheated .
Prior to pouring the sealant into the joint a heatresistant backer rod shall be placed in the bottom of the joint .
The rod shall be inch greater in diameter than the joint width to ensure a leakproof seal and to maintain the proper depth of sealant .
The rod shall be specifically manufactured for use with hot poured sealants .
The hot sealant shall be poured into the joint in a single layer except that multiple layers will be permitted if lateral flow is a problem .
The joint shall be slightly overfilled and the excess sealant shall be leveled with a U or Vshaped squeegee to provide a thin layer of sealant spread over the blastcleaned horizontal pavement surfaces adjacent to the joint .
b Joint Sealer Cold Poured .
The twocomponent material shall be mixed in the container in which it is furnished using of both components .
Mixing shall be accomplished with a variable speed drill and mixing paddle operated at speeds not greater than rpm for a period of not less than five minutes .
Mixing by hand will not be permitted .
The mixed sealant may be transferred to a smaller clean container for ease of pouring .
All mixed sealants must be placed within the to minute pot life of the material .
Prior to pouring the sealant into the joint a backer rod shall be placed in the bottom of the joint .
The rod shall be inch greater in diameter than the joint width to ensure a leakproof seal and to maintain the proper depth of sealant .
The rod shall be specifically manufactured for use with poured sealants .
The sealant shall be poured into the joint in a single layer except that multiple layers will be permitted if lateral flow is a problem .
The joint shall be slightly overfilled and the excess sealant shall be leveled with a U or Vshaped squeegee to provide a thin layer of sealant spread over the blastcleaned horizontal pavement surfaces adjacent to the joint .
c Joint Sealer Polyurethane .
Polyurethane joint sealer shall be placed as shown on the Plans in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
Joint sealer shall not be installed until concrete has been in place for days .
A foam spacer approved by the Engineer shall be installed in such a manner as to control the depth of the sealer and give support during its cure time .
The foam spacer shall fit tightly against the sides of the opening beneath the sealer .
Polyurethanecoated tape or other strip material approved by the Engineer shall be applied to those surfaces where bond is not desired .
Primer materials shall be applied strictly as specified by the joint sealer manufacturer on the surfaces to which the joint sealer is intended to adhere .
Primed surfaces that may have been contaminated by dirt or other foreign material shall be cleaned and primed again prior to the application of the joint sealer .
The finished surface of the joint sealer shall present a smooth even appearance .
Only minimum tooling of horizontal joints will be allowed .
Overlaying or shimming material shall not be applied over material that has cured .
When it is necessary to place a portion of a joint the edge of the cured material shall be primed as specified by the manufacturer prior to placing additional sealer .
Any joint sealer that is not completely bonded to the intended surface after being in place for hours shall be removed the joint prepared again and the application repeated as specified .
d Asphaltic Plug Joint Binder .
Asphaltic plug joint binder shall only be used in the sawcut joint as indicated in the Plans .
The material shall be heated in a doublewalled oiljacketed kettle equipped with positive temperature controls that allow the sealant to be heated to the temperature range recommended by the sealant manufacturer .
The kettle shall arrive on the Project empty .
Heating of the sealant to the placement temperature and maintaining the material at placement temperature shall not exceed the time interval recommended by the manufacturer .
The Contractor shall empty the kettle before heating more material .
New material shall not be added to a partially filled kettle and cooled material shall not be reheated .
Prior to pouring the sealant into the joint a heatresistant backer rod shall be placed in the bottom of the joint .
The rod shall be inch greater in diameter than the joint width to ensure a leakproof seal and to maintain the proper depth of sealant .
The rod shall be specifically manufactured for use with hot poured sealants .
The hot sealant shall be poured into the joint in a single layer except that multiple layers will be permitted if lateral flow is a problem .
The joint shall be slightly overfilled and the excess sealant shall be leveled with a U or Vshaped squeegee to provide a thin layer of sealant spread over the blast cleaned horizontal pavement surfaces adjacent to the joint. . JOINT PROTECTION .
The completed joint shall be protected against damage from traffic during the curing time .
Polyurethane joint sealer shall be covered with an impervious material to prevent contact with the linseed oil mineral spirits mixtures paints or other materials containing mineral spirits and similar solvents . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT .
The quantity of Joint Sealer of the kind specified to be measured for payment will be the number of linear feet or gallons used in the complete and accepted work . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT .
The accepted quantity of Joint Sealer of the kind specified will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price .
Payment will be full compensation for furnishing handling placing and installing the specified materials including any required backer rod or bond breaker .
Payment will also be full compensation for preparing the joint including sawcutting where required cleaning the joint prior to installing the sealer and for furnishing all labor tools equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Joint Sealer Hot Poured Gallon .
Joint Sealer Hot Poured Linear Foot .
Joint Sealer Cold Poured Gallon .
Joint Sealer Cold Poured Linear Foot .
Joint Sealer Polyurethane Gallon .
Joint Sealer Polyurethane Linear Foot SECTION BRIDGE RAILINGS .
DESCRIPTION .
This work shall consist of furnishing and erecting bridge railing and performing repairs to existing bridge railing. . MATERIALS .
Materials shall meet the requirements of the following Subsections Mortar Type IV .
Grease Rustproofing Compound .
Structural Steel .
Anchor Bolts Bridge Railing .
Galvanizing .
Metalizing .
Preformed Fabric Bearing Pads .
Bearing Pads .
Metal Hand Railing .
Galvanized Box Beam Bridge Railing .
Steel Beam Bridge Railing .
Concrete shall meet the requirements of Section Class PCD or Class SCC .
If Class PCD is used a shrinkagecompensating admixture shall be added during the initial concrete mixing phase or as recommended by the chemical manufacturers product representative .
Reinforcing steel shall meet the requirements of Section . .
FABRICATION DRAWINGS .
The fabricator of steel components furnished under this Section shall submit detailed Fabrication Drawings in accordance with the requirements of Section and Section .
The Contractor shall submit a bending schedule for concrete bridge railing reinforcement in accordance with the requirements of Section and Section .
These requirements do not apply to work performed under Subsection .d . .
FABRICATION .
a Steel Components .
Material furnished under this Section shall conform to the applicable provisions of Section .
Railing shall be fabricated in a plant approved by the Structures Engineer .
Unless otherwise specified all ferrous metal railing components shall be galvanized .
b Concrete Forms .
Forms shall conform to the railing design shown in the Plans and forming requirements of Section .
Forms shall be constructed to allow for checking and correcting the railing alignment and grade after the concrete has been placed and prior to initial set .
The forms shall be reinforced in such a manner that finishing of the railing tops will not disturb the final adjusted alignment. . CONSTRUCTION TOLERANCES .
Tolerances for railing components shall meet the requirements of the latest edition of the AASHTO LRFD Bridge Construction Specifications .
..
INSTALLATION .
a General .
Railings shall be installed in conformance with the applicable provisions of Section Section Section and these Specifications .
Alignment grade and clearances at joints shall be adjusted to the satisfaction of the Engineer .
Posts shall be adjusted and aligned to the satisfaction of the Engineer prior to placing any mortar .
Unless otherwise specified removed railing shall become the property of the Contractor and shall be removed from the Project .
Sleeves for hand railing shall be secured and accurately aligned prior to placement of any concrete .
Galvanized surfaces that have been scratched or have received minor abrasions shall be repaired in accordance with Subsection .
or as directed by the Engineer .
Concrete railing shall receive an aesthetic finish in accordance with Subsection .. Cracks in concrete railing shall be repaired by a method approved by the Engineer .
Cracks in concrete greater than .
inch may be cause for rejection .
b Painting .
Railing required to be painted shall be coated in accordance with the appropriate painting items in the Contract .
Wherever bridge railing panels are nested or overlapped full length the surfaces on both panels that will be in contact with each other shall be coated with a grease rustproof compound .
c Delineation .
Delineation devices shall be of the design shown on the Plans and shall be securely fastened to the bridge railing posts as shown on the Plans or as directed by the Engineer .
d Bridge Railing Repair .
Bridge railing repair of the Type specified shall be performed at the locations indicated in the Plans and as directed by the Engineer .
Bridge Railing Repair Type I .
Type I bridge railing repair shall consist of installing new heavy duty steel beam panels and offset blocks on existing fasciamounted or curb mounted posts spaced at .
feet or less .
Bridge Railing Repair Type II .
Type II bridge railing repair shall consist of installing new nested heavy duty steel beam panels and offset blocks on existing fasciamounted or curb mounted posts spaced greater than .
feet .
Bridge Railing Repair Type III .
Type III bridge railing repair shall consist of installing new heavyduty steel beam panels and offset blocks on new fasciamounted or curb mounted posts utilizing existing anchor bolts . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT .
The quantity of Removal of Existing Bridge Railing or Reset Existing Bridge Railing to be measured for payment will be the number of linear feet of existing railing dismantled and disposed of or repaired and reset between the limits specified or as ordered by the Engineer .
The quantity of Bridge Railing of the type specified to be measured for payment will be the number of linear feet of the type of rail used in the complete and accepted work .
Measurement will be made along the face of the rail from end to end or between the pay limits specified .
No deductions or additions will be made for joints .
The quantity of Bridge Railing Repair of the type specified to be measured for payment will be the number of feet of railing repaired in the complete and accepted work measured within the limits shown on the Plans or as directed by the Engineer .
No additional measurement will be made for nested beam panels . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT .
The quantity of Removal of Existing Bridge Railing or Reset Existing Bridge Railing will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price bid per linear foot .
Payment will be full compensation for dismantling and disposing of or for repairing and resetting existing railing and for furnishing all labor tools equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
The accepted quantity of Bridge Railing of the type specified will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per linear foot .
Payment will be full compensation for detailing furnishing handling placing delineating galvanizing applying grease rustproof compound and painting the railing components and for furnishing all labor tools equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
The accepted quantity of Bridge Railing Repair of the type specified will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per linear foot .
Payment will be full compensation for detailing treating furnishing handling and placing railing components and for bolts and hardware necessary for installing railing components .
Payment will also be full compensation for all work necessary for verifying and adjusting post height andor bolt spacing of existing posts for furnishing all forms joint filler admixtures trial batches and connection plates for approach railing terminal connectors for satisfactory completion of any necessary repairs surface finishing and curing and for furnishing all labor tools equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
Removal and disposal of existing railing components required for performing Bridge Railing Repair of the type specified will be paid for under Removal of Existing Bridge Railing .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Removal of Existing Bridge Railing Linear Foot .
Reset Existing Bridge Railing Linear Foot .
Bridge Railing Galvanized Rail Box Beam Linear Foot .
Bridge Railing Galvanized Rail Box Beam Linear Foot .
Bridge Railing Galvanized Rail Box Beam Linear Foot .
Bridge Railing Galvanized HD Steel BeamFascia Mounted Linear Foot .
Bridge Railing Galvanized HDSBFascia MountedSteel Tubing Linear Foot .
Bridge Railing Galvanized Steel TubingConcrete Combination Linear Foot .
Bridge Railing Repair Type I Linear Foot .
Bridge Railing Repair Type II Linear Foot .
Bridge Railing Repair Type III Linear Foot .
Bridge Railing Concrete FShape Linear Foot SECTION THIS SECTION RESERVED SECTION MAINTENANCE OF STRUCTURES AND APPROACHES .
DESCRIPTION .
This work shall consist of the maintenance of existing structures and approaches within the Project limits. . ROAD MAINTENANCE .
The Contractor shall maintain all highway sections within the confines of the work under the Contract to the satisfaction of the Engineer .
When traffic is to be maintained over the present highway the full width of the roadway shall be maintained .
The maintenance shall be done by means of an approved road grader or other approved equipment of a type that will be efficient in keeping the roadway in a reasonably smooth and passable condition for traffic and shall be subject to the approval of the Engineer .
The material for and the necessary filling of holes and similar depressions that develop in the roadway shall be included in the Contract price for this item .
If in the opinion of the Engineer the Contractor fails to maintain a reasonably smooth roadway surface and fails to fix the same after written notification the Engineer will make the necessary provisions to maintain the roadway surface and the cost shall be deducted from any money due or to become due under the Contract. . BRIDGE MAINTENANCE .
When traffic is maintained over an existing structure the Contractor shall keep all parts of the structure safe for the legal or posted load of the structure including satisfactory maintenance of the substructure superstructure and the bridge surface .
The Contractor shall strengthen patch shore or renew any part or parts of this substructure or superstructure when necessary for the safety of the traveling public .
If the existing structure over which traffic is being maintained becomes unsafe for public travel and if on Written Order by the Engineer the Contractor fails to make satisfactory repairs the Engineer will make the necessary provisions to repair the structure and the cost will be deducted from any monies due under the Contract . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT .
The quantity of Maintenance of Structures and Approaches to be measured for payment will be on a lump sum basis . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT .
The accepted quantity of Maintenance of Structures and Approaches will be paid for at the Contract lump sum price .
Payment will be full compensation for performing the work specified and for furnishing all labor materials tools equipment and incidentals necessary to properly maintain substructures superstructures and roadway approaches .
Payment for this work will be made periodically as follows a of the Contract lump sum price will be paid after all required repairs to the bridges or approaches have been made to the satisfaction of the Engineer and traffic is being maintained over the existing bridges and approaches .
b The remaining of the Contract lump sum price will be paid when traffic is permanently moved to the newrehabilitated bridges and approaches .
When the Contract specifically provides for Item .
Roadway Patrol Maintenance then Maintenance of Structures and Approaches shall only cover maintenance of the existing structures .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Maintenance of Structures and Approaches Lump Sum SECTION TEMPORARY BRIDGE .
DESCRIPTION .
This work shall consist of the design construction maintenance and removal of a temporary bridge its substructures and approaches. . MATERIALS .
The Contractor may use any material or combination of materials that will conform to the requirements of this Subsection and meet the approval of the Engineer .
The Engineer reserves the right to reject materials and details that are structurally unsafe for the use proposed .
Unless specifically permitted in the Contract or upon written authorization of the Construction Engineer the use of pipes will not be allowed for temporary bridges .
Unless otherwise authorized on the approved drawings all main load carrying members shall be continuous between supports .
Splices will only be approved for the following conditions a FullyBolted Connections .
Fullybolted connections with highstrength bolts shall be designed for their location in accordance with the AASHTO LRFD Bridge Design Specifications .
b FullyWelded Connections .
Fullywelded connections shall be designed welded inspected and tested in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO LRFD Bridge Design Specifications and AWS requirements .
Any welded connection performed in the absence of and without the approval of the Agencys Welding Inspector will not be approved .
Any welding done for work under this Section must be detailed on the Working Drawings and performed in conformance with Section . .
DRAWINGS .
Working Drawings shall be prepared by the Contractor for the proposed work under this item in accordance with the requirements of Section .
Drawings for bridge approaches shall include plans profiles typical sections and specific crosssections for the temporary roadway and channel when applicable with complete details and identification of materials to be used .
Geometrics of the temporary bridge and its approaches shall be adequate for the volume of traffic served and individual conditions encountered .
Plan elevation and section views of the structure shall include size and spacing of all members or components for the following a Abutments b Piers c Main supporting members or stringers d Floor system e Diaphragms and lateral bracing f Railing bridge and approach g Curbs h Bearings i Other applicable information .
DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION DETAILS .
The design and structural details of the temporary bridge its substructures and approaches shall be signed stamped and dated by a Professional Engineer either Structural or Civil .
In designing and constructing a temporary bridge the Contractor shall provide for the waterway and clearances shown on the Plans .
When temporary bridge requirements are not shown on the Plans the opening area shall be at least equal to of the waterway provided for the year event Q for the new structure with a clear height equal to a tenyear event Q headwater this waterway to be adequate for safely conveying a mean annual flood Q . at a headwater no greater than what would be created by the existing structure during a tenyear event .
Fill placed in or adjacent to the stream shall be clean granular or rock material meeting the requirements of Subsection .
or Subsection .
and protected with sufficient stone to prevent erosion to a Q headwater elevation based on the new structure .
Any fill placed in the stream to protect the temporary bridge and approaches shall be removed to the satisfaction of the Engineer upon completion of the Project .
The sizing of any temporary bridges to be left in place between January st and May st or for any period greater than seven months shall be approved by the Engineer .
Questions regarding hydraulic information not furnished shall be addressed to the Engineer .
a Roadway .
Approach embankments shall be constructed of acceptable fill material compacted to adequately support design loading requirements .
A minimum of inches of approved gravel or other acceptable surfacing material shall be provided for the full width of the typical section .
When the Contract Plans designate paved approaches the approaches shall be paved with a minimum inch wearing course of Type III or Type IV bituminous concrete pavement and the approaches and bridge shall have temporary pavement markings applied as per Section .
Bituminous concrete pavement shall conform to the requirements of Section except the mix design submittal and plant inspection requirements set forth in Section will not be required .
The Engineer may also waive weather limitations .
The temporary pavement shall extend for the full length of the approaches and the full clearance width described below .
Turnouts with adequate space for twoway traffic shall be provided at each end of a oneway structure or coordinated with traffic signalization if used .
b Bridge .
Loading .
Unless otherwise specified all temporary bridge structures shall be designed for an HS or HL live load and for all other applicable forces in accordance with the AASHTO Standard Specifications for Highway Bridges or the AASHTO LRFD Bridge Design Specifications .
Sidewalks and pedestrian structures shall be designed for a minimum live load of pounds per square foot .
Clearances .
A oneway temporary bridge shall have a minimum clear width between faces of railing of feet inches .
A twoway temporary bridge shall have a minimum clear width between faces of railing of feet .
Sidewalks and pedestrian bridges shall have a minimum clear width of feet between faces of railing or edge of curb and face of railing .
A minimum vertical clearance of feet shall be provided for vehicular traffic and feet for pedestrian traffic .
Erection .
As part of the Working Drawings submittal the Contractor shall dependent upon the type of structure being erected include the information required under Section or Section pertaining to erection or installation .
Submittal of the computations indicating the magnitude of the stresses in the segments is not required .
c Railing .
Approach railing and temporary barrier rail shall conform to Subsection ..
Details for either rail system or combination thereof shall conform to applicable AASHTO requirements .
Rail sections shall be continuous from the approaches across the structure .
Approach railing shall be provided for a minimum of feet off the ends of any structure and shall be provided for all approach fill slopes steeper than VH .
The free end of any steel beam rail shall be protected with a Wbeam end section RE rounded as defined in the AASHTO Guide to Standardized Highway Barrier Hardware flared to a foot offset .
The free end of any concrete barrier rail shall be flared horizontally to a foot offset for a minimum panel length feet and project a maximum of inches above the adjacent roadway surface .
The top of the steel beam railing shall be inches inch above the adjacent surface and the concrete barrier railing shall be inches inch above the adjacent surface .
Vehicular bridge rail posts and anchorage shall be designed to withstand a horizontal loading of pounds per foot applied foot inches above the deck surface .
Pedestrian railings and posts shall provide protection for a height of inches above the walkway surface and be designed to withstand a horizontal loading of pounds per foot applied inches above the walkway surface .
When a pedestrian walkway is specified or used in conjunction with vehicular traffic a inch inch curb separation shall be provided .
Curbs shall be anchored to withstand a horizontal loading of pounds per foot .
The outside pedestrian railing shall be a combination of vehicular and pedestrian railing .
The pedestrian railing shall be constructed to limit clearance between horizontal rail components to inches .
When temporary barrier rail is specified or used as a movable rail system e.g .
adjusting traffic flow patterns the concrete median barrier specified herein shall be used .
An adequate connection shall be provided when concrete median barrier is used in combination with standard steel beam rail .
d Walkways and Approaches .
Temporary bridges with walkways temporary pedestrian bridges walkways and approaches to walkways shall be designed and constructed to provide width grade surface etc .
in conformance with the requirements set forth in the current ADA standards for sidewalks . .
MAINTENANCE AND LIABILITY .
The Contractor shall maintain each temporary bridge and its approaches in conformance with Contract requirements and to the satisfaction of the Engineer .
The Contractor shall assume all liability for the installation maintenance and removal of the temporary bridge and its approaches .
Unless otherwise specified all rightsofway on private property required for the performance of this work shall be provided by the Contractor .
Costs for replacing the loss of any part of the temporary bridge or its approaches shall be included in the Unit Price for the temporary bridge item except as provided in Subsection .. .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT .
The quantity of OneWay Temporary Bridge TwoWay Temporary Bridge or Temporary Pedestrian Bridge measured for payment will be on a lump sum basis for each type specified in the complete and accepted work . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT .
The accepted quantity of OneWay Temporary Bridge TwoWay Temporary Bridge or Temporary Pedestrian Bridge will be paid for at the Contract lump sum price for each type specified .
Payment will be full compensation for designing detailing constructing maintaining and removing the bridge and its approaches including placing and removing pavement and pavement markings when paved approaches are required .
When Working Drawings have been submitted and approved in accordance with the requirements of Section a payment of of the lump sum price will be allowed .
When a temporary bridge its substructures and approaches have been fully constructed and accepted by the Engineer a further payment of of the lump sum price will be allowed .
When the temporary bridge and its approaches have been removed a further payment of of the lump sum price will be allowed .
The remaining of the lump sum price will be paid when the site is cleaned up and vegetation has been established to the satisfaction of the Engineer .
Unless otherwise specified as a separate Contract Item the costs of all approach and bridge railing associated with the temporary bridge will be considered to be included in the Contract lump sum price for Temporary Bridge .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
OneWay Temporary Bridge Lump Sum .
TwoWay Temporary Bridge Lump Sum .
Temporary Pedestrian Bridge Lump Sum SECTION REMOVAL OF STRUCTURES AND BRIDGE PAVEMENT .
DESCRIPTION .
This work shall consist of the removal wholly or in part and the satisfactory disposal of all structures including accessories and appurtenances bridge pavements and the backfilling of holes when required. . GENERAL .
Unless otherwise specified all materials resulting from the Removal of Structures and Removal of Bridge Pavements shall become the property of the Contractor who shall properly dispose of them . .
REMOVAL OF BRIDGE PAVEMENTS .
The removal of pavement on bridges shall include the removal of bituminous concrete material .
If removal is by cold planing work shall be done in accordance with the requirements of Section .
Removal methods shall be subject to the approval of the Engineer and shall be such as to prevent any damage to the remaining surface .
Sealants or membranes shall remain in place as shown on the Plans or directed by the Engineer .
Any necessary deck repair will be paid for as shown on the Plans except damage caused by Contractors negligence shall be repaired at the Contractors expense . .
REMOVAL OF STRUCTURES .
The Contractor shall dismantle the structure and shall remove the dismantled members or materials .
Removal of structures spanning bodies of water will be conducted so as to avoid dropping materials into the water .
The entire site of the old structure shall be restored to a condition satisfactory to the Engineer .
The existing concrete or masonry shall be removed by drilling chipping or other methods approved by the Engineer .
All cut surfaces unless otherwise specified shall be on a reasonably vertical or horizontal plane with sharp straight corners .
Existing reinforcing steel to be retained shall be carefully preserved and cleaned for use in the new construction .
Existing reinforcing steel damaged beyond reuse as determined by the Engineer shall be replaced by splicing a bar of equal diameter to the damaged bar in a manner approved by the Engineer at no additional compensation to the Contractor .
Holes for expansion bolts or dowels shall be drilled in the retained concrete at the locations shown on the Plans .
When the material from the structure is to be retained by the Agency or others or is to be reused in the construction it shall be carefully dismantled by the Contractor and all adhering concrete removed .
Materials to be retained or reused shall be stored at the location specified in the Contract or as directed by the Engineer .
When the existing superstructure steel is to be retained for future use the Contractor shall take every precaution necessary to prevent damage to the existing steel .
Damage to the existing steel caused by the Contractors operations shall be repaired by the Contractor to the satisfaction of the Engineer at no additional cost to the Agency .
Where portions of existing structures are to be removed the portions indicated shall be removed to the lines shown on the Plans or as directed by the Engineer in such a manner as to leave the remainder of the structure undamaged and in proper condition for the intended use .
Any damages to the portions remaining in service shall be satisfactorily repaired by the Contractor at no additional cost to the Agency .
Explosives will not be permitted for partial removal of any structure .
Removed parts of the existing structure that are to be reused in the new construction shall be safeguarded cleaned or otherwise prepared as shown on the Plans or in the Contract and incorporated into the work as shown on the Plans or as directed by the Engineer . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT .
The quantity of Removal of Bridge Pavement to be measured for payment will be the number of square yards of bridge deck from which bituminous pavements have been removed as shown on the Plans or ordered by the Engineer .
The quantity of Removal of Structure to be measured for payment will be as follows a Removal of Structure will be on a unit basis for each removal at the locations shown on the Plans .
b Partial Removal of Structure will be on a unit basis for removal of the materials between the limits shown on the Plans .
c Removal of Concrete or Masonry will be the number of cubic yards or square yards of concrete or masonry measured in place and removed between the limits shown on the Plans or as ordered by the Engineer . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT .
The accepted quantity of Removal of Bridge Pavement will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per square yard .
The accepted quantity of Removal of Structure and of Partial Removal of Structure will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per each .
The accepted quantity of Removal of Concrete or Masonry will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per cubic yard or square yard .
Payment will be full compensation for the removal and disposal of the specified items for removal salvage and stockpiling of components and materials specified in the Contract for excavating backfilling regrading and performing site restoration incidental to the removal of specified items and for furnishing all labor tools equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
Removal of Bridge Pavement when not included as a separate Pay Item will not be paid for directly but will be considered incidental to either Removal of Structure or Partial Removal of Structure as specified in the Plans .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Removal of Bridge Pavement Square Yard .
Removal of Structure Each .
Partial Removal of Structure Each .
Removal of Concrete or Masonry Cubic Yard .
Removal of Concrete or Masonry Square Yard SECTION THIS SECTION RESERVED SECTION BRIDGE BEARING DEVICES .
DESCRIPTION .
This work shall consist of furnishing and installing bridge bearing devices. . MATERIALS .
Materials shall meet the requirements of the following Subsections Mortar Type IV .
Structural Steel .
HighStrength LowAlloy Structural Steel .
HighStrength Bolts Nuts and Washers .
Anchor Bolts Bearing Devices .
Galvanizing .
Metalizing .
Bearing Pads .
Elastomeric Material .
Stainless Steel .
Brass Rings .
PTFE Material .
Unless otherwise specified all materials shall conform to the AASHTO LRFD Bridge Design Specifications Section VTrans Structures Design Manual Section available on the Agencys website AASHTO LRFD Bridge Construction Specifications Section and all AASHTO or ASTM Specifications referenced in this Section .
Substitutions will not be allowed unless approved on the Fabrication Drawings . .
FABRICATION DRAWINGS .
The fabricator of bearings furnished under this Section shall submit detailed Fabrication Drawings bonding procedures welding procedure Specifications and welder qualification test records in accordance with Section .
Fabrication Drawings shall identify the number of layers of vulcanized sheets and corresponding sheet thicknesses to be used for fabricating the bearing pad and shall include detailed procedures for bonding these sheets together . .
FABRICATION .
a General .
Material furnished under this Section shall conform to all applicable provisions of Subsection .
through Subsection .. Bearings shall be fabricated in a plant having as a minimum an AISC Certified Bridge Fabricator Advanced ABR Certification or in a plant approved by the Agency prior to the award of the Contract .
Plants that are not certified must satisfy the requirements of Subsection .. During any welding surfaces in contact with the elastomer shall be restricted to F and surfaces in contact with PTFE shall be restricted to F. Temperatures shall be determined by temperature indicating wax pencils or other suitable means .
All corners and edges of steel plates shall be ground to a inch radius .
Bearing devices shall be fabricated assembled and certified by one supplier .
Anchor bolt assemblies may be fabricated and supplied by an alternate supplier .
Alternate configurations for bearings from that shown in the Plans may be submitted for approval .
Any alternate submitted shall be designed and stamped in accordance with Subsection .. All designs shall meet the design loads and criteria specified in the Plans .
The fabricator may propose minor alterations to the design of each device from that shown on the Plans to conform to the particular method of fabrication used at that fabricators plant .
The general design intent of the Plans shall be followed with modifications approved on the Fabrication Drawings including minor changes to the overall height of the bearing .
If proposed bearing height varies from that shown in the Contract Documents the Contractor shall propose a method for accommodating the difference in height which shall be shown in the submittal .
b Surface Protection .
All bearings except interior surfaces of pot bearings shall be galvanized in accordance with Subsection .
or metalized in accordance with Subsection .. c Tolerances .
After fabrication and application of surface protection bearing devices or components shall be within the following tolerances Plain elastomeric pads and steel reinforced elastomeric pads shall be within the tolerances specified in of AASHTO M Table .
Highload multirotational bearings external load plates and guides shall be within the tolerances specified in the AASHTO LRFD Bridge Construction Specifications Section .
d Sliding Surfaces .
Stainless Steel .
Stainless steel used as a mating surface with PTFE shall conform to the following parameters a .
The thickness of the stainless steel sheet shall be at least gauge when the maximum dimension of the surface is less than or equal to inches and at least gauge when the maximum dimension is larger than inches .
b .
For bonded applications stainless steel sheets may be affixed to backup plates with a combination of hightemperature resistant epoxy and mechanical attachment by spot welding or other approved procedures .
The fabricator must demonstrate that any proposed alternate procedure for attachment will maintain adhesion between the backup material and stainless steel under loading movement and weather conditions anticipated to be encountered during life of the bearing .
c. For welded applications stainless steel sheets shall be circumferentially seal welded to backup plates .
Procedure qualification will be required for any welding process and welding procedures shall be submitted for approval in accordance with Subsection .
and Subsection .. d. Prior to adhesion or attachment of the stainless steel to a backup plate the contact surface of the backup plate shall meet the sliding surface tolerance specified herein and shall be blast cleaned to an appearance equivalent to SSPCSP .
The contact surface of stainless steel sheets to be bonded with epoxy shall be mechanically abraded or etched prior to application of adhesive .
e High Load MultiRotational Pot or Disc .
In addition to the requirements of the AASHTO LRFD Bridge Design Specifications Section and the AASHTO LRFD Bridge Construction Specifications Section the following shall apply to the design and fabrication of pot bearings General .
Bearings shall be designed for the vertical and horizontal forces shown on the Plans .
Exposed PTFE material on a guide bar or other component shall be pigmented to prevent penetration of ultraviolet light .
The shape characteristics clearances and sealing mechanism of the piston and cylinder must be designed to prevent extrusion of the elastomer under load and rotational movement .
Either PTFE sheets or other approved material shall be provided to lubricate compressive surfaces of the elastomer .
The internal floating portion of the bearing must be sealed to prevent the intrusion of foreign material .
The steel housing shall be manufactured by welding or machining from a single piece of plate .
The shear restriction mechanism shall be connected to the bearing plate by mechanically fastening welding or other means approved by the Engineer .
High load multirotational bearings shall be tested in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO LRFD Bridge Design Specifications and the AASHTO LRFD Bridge Construction Specifications Section and modified as follows a .
For each structure or pair of structures on a Project one of every ten fixed bearings and one of every ten expansion bearings shall be selected at random from the production lot .
Sample or speciallymade test bearings will not be permitted .
b .
Load measuring instruments used in conjunction with the testing equipment should be calibrated yearly and be accompanied by a certificate indicating their date of calibration .
c. The measured static coefficient of friction shall be less than .
d. The measured dynamic coefficient of friction shall be less than .
e. The basis for acceptance shall be the following .
The coefficients of friction are less than . .
Acceptable material certifications . .
Assembled bearings meet requirements and tolerances specified in the Contract . .
Inspection of tested bearings shows no visual defects such as extruded or deformed elastomer polyether urethane or PTFE damaged seals or limiting rings evidence of metaltometal contact between the pot wall and the top plate or cracked steel .
f. Test results and material certifications shall be sent to the Agencys Materials Section with a copy of the test results sent to the Structures Engineer .
g. Acceptable test results are a prerequisite for certification acceptance .
Expenses for performing any testing shall be incidental to the work . .
INSTALLATION .
a General .
Bearings shall be set level and parallel with full and uniform bearing .
Pedestals detailed to be on a slope shall be set at the elevation and position specified .
The concrete under the bearing device shall be level .
Anchor bolts shall be positioned to the alignment and dimensions specified or approved in the Fabrication Drawings .
When preset or castin anchorages are not specified the Contractor shall drill holes and set the anchor bolts in a Type IV mortar .
Additional aggregates shall not be added to the material during field mixing .
Prior to ordering materials and starting the work the Contractor shall submit a drilling and mortaring proposal to the Engineer for approval including a premixed mortar material brand name .
The drilled holes to be mortared shall be thoroughly cleaned wetted and free of standing water .
The mortar shall be mixed in a mechanical mixer in accordance the manufacturers recommendations and shall be readily pourable so that when poured it completely fills the remaining hole cavities .
The placement of mortar for each bearing shall be continuous and complete at all hole locations .
All exposed mortar shall be cured for a period of not less than three days by the wetted burlap method in accordance with Section .
Curing shall commence as soon as practical after mortar placement .
The Contractor shall not apply any forces to the anchor bolts during the curing period .
If allowed in the Contract or ordered by the Engineer a preapproved adhesive may be used to set the anchor bolts into the concrete .
If an adhesive is used the manufacturers installation requirements for the adhesive shall be followed during installation .
The Engineer shall be provided a copy of the Safety Data Sheet SDS and a copy of the manufacturers installation requirements .
Unless otherwise specified on the Plans anchor bolts shall have a minimum embedment of inches into the concrete and shall conform to Subsection .. Anchor bolts to be double nutted shall use the following procedure install lower nut in contact with top of sole plate and then back off turn install upper nut snug tight to prevent lower nuts from loosening .
Whenever a bridge seat is off by inch or more from its designed or adjusted elevation corrective measures shall be required .
If shims are required they shall be a single thickness plate that meets the requirements of AASHTO M MM Grade Grade or Grade Grade steel galvanized in accordance with the requirements of Subsection .
or metalized in accordance with the requirements of Subsection ..
Details of shims shall be furnished and approved in accordance with the requirements of Subsection ..
The cost of any necessary corrective measures including any costs due to a delay shall be borne by the Contractor .
b Elastomeric Pad with External Load Plate and HighLoad MultiRotational Bearings .
During any welding surfaces in contact with the elastomer shall be restricted to F and surfaces in contact with PTFE shall be restricted to F. Temperatures shall be determined by temperature indicating wax pencils or other suitable means .
No welding current shall be permitted to pass between the pot and piston components .
The welds for the sole plate connection should only be along the longitudinal girder axis .
Transverse joints should be sealed with an acceptable caulking material .
Metal bearing plates shall be placed on a inch thick bearing pad conforming to the requirements of Subsection ..
The bearing pad shall be the same size as the bearing plate with holes to accommodate the anchor bolts .
PTFE and stainless steel sliding surfaces shall be protected from splatter during welding grouting or painting operations if applicable .
Highload multirotational bearings shall not be disassembled once they have left the manufacturer since the process could result in damage to the components or malfunction of the device .
Pot bearings that have been disassembled shall not be accepted unless recertified by the manufacturer . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT .
The quantity of Bearing Device Assembly of the type specified to be measured for payment will be the number of units used in the complete and accepted work .
All bearing device components and anchor bolt assemblies will be included as part of the measured unit .
Anchor bolt assemblies include bolts threaded rods nuts washers and beveled plates required for attachment of bearing devices to the superstructure and substructure .
The quantity of Remove and Replace Existing Anchor Bolt to be measured for payment will be the number of each anchor bolt removed and replaced in the complete and accepted work . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT .
The accepted quantity of Bearing Device Assembly of the type specified will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price for each .
Payment will be full compensation for detailing furnishing handling transporting and placing the material specified including surface preparation protective coating testing anchor bolt assemblies drilling for anchor bolts mortar proprietary anchoring systems bearing device components and welding and for furnishing all labor tools equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
Payment for alternate bearing designs and submittals will be considered incidental to the appropriate Section Pay Item in the Contract .
Payment for Remove and Replace Existing Anchor Bolt will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price for each .
Payment will be full compensation for removing the existing anchor bolt removing and replacing the existing bearing assembly welding drilling for new anchor bolt mortar proprietary anchoring systems and for furnishing all labor tools equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Bearing Device Assembly High Load MultiRotational Each .
Bearing Device Assembly Plain Elastomeric Pad Each .
Bearing Device Assembly Steel Reinforced Elastomeric Pad Each .
Bearing Device Assembly Elastomeric Pad wExternal Load Plates Each .
Remove and Replace Existing Anchor Bolt Each SECTION THIS SECTION RESERVED SECTION THIS SECTION RESERVED SECTION PRECAST CONCRETE .
DESCRIPTION .
This work shall consist of manufacturing transporting and erecting precast concrete structure components .
This Specification also addresses the manufacture of precast concrete mechanically stabilized earth MSE wall panels .
Hereafter the phrase precast concrete will be used to include both precast concrete structure components and MSE wall panels. . MATERIALS .
Materials shall meet the requirements of the following Subsections Portland Cement .
High EarlyStrength Portland Cement .
PortlandPozzolan Cement .
Portland BlastFurnace Slag Cement .
Ternary Blended Cement .
Fine Aggregate for Concrete .
Coarse Aggregate for Concrete .
Mortar Type IV .
Preformed Joint Filler Cork and AsphaltTreated Felt .
Polyvinyl Chloride PVC Waterstop .
Bar Reinforcement .
Mechanical Splices for Bar Reinforcement .
Welded Wire Reinforcement .
Prestressing Strand .
Carbon Steel Bolts Nuts and Washers .
HighStrength Bolts Nuts and Washers .
Concrete Curing Materials .
AirEntraining Admixtures .b Retarding Admixtures .c WaterReducing Admixtures .e WaterReducing and Retarding Admixtures .f WaterReducing High Range Admixtures .g WaterReducing High Range and Retarding Admixtures .h Accelerating Admixtures .i WaterReducing and Accelerating Admixtures .j Specific Performance Admixtures .k Mineral Admixtures .
Sheet Membrane Waterproofing Preformed Sheet .
Polystyrene Insulation Board .
Blanket Insulation Material .
Pipe Insulation .
Water .
Overhead and Vertical Concrete Repair Material .
Structural Steel shall meet the requirements of Subsection .
through Subsection ..
Bearing Pads for Structures shall meet the requirements of Section . . GENERAL FABRICATION REQUIREMENTS .
a General .
The manufacture of the precast units shall be in accordance with the latest editions of PCI MNL Manual for Quality Control for Plants and Production of Precast and Prestressed Concrete Products and PCI MNL Tolerance Manual for Precast and Prestressed Concrete Construction except as modified in this Section or with the National Precast Concrete Association NPCA Quality Control Manual for Precast Plants .
b Qualification .
Precast concrete shall be manufactured in a plant that has been certified by either the Prestressed Concrete Institute PCI under its Plant Certification Program for precast concrete or by the National Precast Concrete Association NPCA Plant Certification Program .
Precast concrete shall be manufactured in a plant that maintains a quality control Laboratory that meets the requirements of the Agencys Qualified Laboratory Program .
As a minimum the Laboratory shall be equipped with a compression testing machine curing room or chamber apparatuses for measuring slumpflow and air entrainment and a complete set of aggregate sieves .
The compression testing machine shall be calibrated yearly by an independent Laboratory using equipment that is certified by the National Institute of Standards and Technology NIST .
The testing machine shall be power operated and capable of applying the load continuously rather than intermittently and without shock .
c Quality Control .
The fabricator shall demonstrate a level of quality control testing that satisfies the Agency as to its ability and commitment to produce precast concrete to the requirements of this Section .
A satisfactory program of quality control shall include gradation and moisture determinations of the aggregates as well as slump air content and strength determinations of the concrete .
These tests shall be performed at regular and suitable intervals as specified in the Materials Sampling Manual and actively used to maintain the quality of the concrete within the specified requirements .
The fabricator shall have a plant specific Quality Control Plan approved by the Agency prior to the beginning of any fabrication activities. . SUBMITTALS .
As soon as practical after award of the Contract all required information shall be prepared and submitted .
A complete copy of the structural design calculations for the precast concrete shall be submitted as Construction Drawings in accordance with the requirements of Section .
The design calculations shall substantiate that the proposed precast concrete satisfies the design parameters of the Contract .
The design calculations shall include a load rating for superstructures for the seven standard axle configurations shown in the load rating block in the Plans and any general or construction notes required for the fabrication and construction of the precast concrete .
The applicable design code will be the latest edition of the AASHTO LRFD Bridge Design Specifications unless indicated otherwise in the Contract Documents .
Fabrication Drawings also referred to in the precast industry as Production Drawings or Shop Drawings for the precast concrete shall be submitted in accordance with the requirements of Section with an additional copy to the Structural Concrete Engineer .
Fabrication Drawings shall include such detail needed to fully describe the intended asbuilt condition of the precast elements including any connections between precast elements andor existing structures and materials .
In addition to the requirements for Fabrication Drawings in Section the following shall be included a Concrete Mix Design .
The concrete mix design shall include but not be limited to the following components Batch weights specifying dry or saturated surface dry .
Material names and sources Aggregate properties and date tested .
Aggregates shall be tested on an annual basis at a minimum for absorption and specific gravity per the requirements of AASHTO T and AASHTO T and unit weight per the requirements of AASHTO T T M. Chemical and physical properties of cementitious material .
Admixture names and sources .
Lab data that shall include but not be limited to the following items a .
The maximum watercementitious materials WCM ratio that will be allowed during production including water contributed to hydration by all admixtures when the cumulative total exceeds gallon per cubic yard .
All mix qualification test results shall be generated with concrete from batches that are produced at this maximum WCM ratio .
b. Slumpspread minimum and maximum determined from trial batches .
The concrete shall be classified and tested as SelfConsolidating Concrete SCC if the minimum spread is at least inches .
When the concrete is tested as a SCC mix the difference between the JRing test the requirements of ASTM C C M and the spread test the requirements of ASTM C C M shall be two inches or less for the minimum and maximum spread .
Concrete that fails to meet the inches minimum spread threshold will be classified and tested as conventional concrete .
The Visual Stability Index VSI determination will be included for the minimum and maximum values and shall not be greater than .
The concrete shall not demonstrate segregation at the minimum or maximum slumpspread .
c. Air Content as tested in accordance with the requirements of AASTHO T . d. Temperature as tested in accordance with ASTM C C M. e. Cylinder compression results obtained in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO T for early breaks design strength and the day standard cure as defined in AASHTO T . The type of cure shall be listed for each age of break .
f. Chloride ion penetration test data that meets the requirements of AASHTO T with information that includes the individual results from testing three standard inch inch cylinder specimens .
No specimen shall exceed the limits specified herein .
Testing shall be performed by an independent AMRL qualified Laboratory .
The chloride ion penetrability result must be Low as defined in AASHTO T tested at or before days from the date specimen were cast .
Test results shall also be provided for sample ages of days days days and days .
Test results that are suspected to have been adversely affected due to the presence of polymeric admixtures in the proposed mix may be retested with the polymeric admixture omitted .
g. The AlkaliSilica Reactivity ASR of each type of aggregate shall be measured separately based on the requirements of AASHTO T Accelerated Detection of Potentially Deleterious Expansion of Mortar Bars Due to AlkaliSilica Reaction .
If one or more of the aggregates exceeds .
expansion then the aggregate shall be tested again according to the requirements of ASTM C . The Contractor may elect to go directly to ASTM C testing if they suspect that the aggregate may exceed the .
expansion if tested by AASHTO T . Testing shall be performed by an independent AMRL qualified Laboratory accredited in the specific test method .
h. Length change test data that meets the requirements of AASHTO T shall be performed by an independent AMRL qualified Laboratory accredited in testing in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO T . The maximum free shrinkage test result shall not exceed ..
The crosssection of the prism shall be inches inches .
Follow Procedure .. for storage and measurements .
Mix design approvals will be valid for a month period .
The approved mix design will be allowed reapproval if the following conditions are satisfied a .
No material proportioning or material sources have changed from the initial approved mix design .
b .
The mix design for reapproval is submitted with updated aggregate properties and volumes adjusted accordingly .
The properties to be tested shall include but not be limited to specific gravity unit weight and absorption .
Approval of the mix design will expire months from the date the updated aggregate testing was performed .
c. The mix design shall be accompanied by the previously completed and accepted test mix data and any applicable updated test information .
New mix designs and mix designs that were approved more than months ago shall have new testing completed to be submitted for approval .
The proposed concrete mix design including performance history and all requests for variance from the material requirements of these Specifications shall be submitted for approval .
The Structural Concrete Engineer may require a minimum of weeks for testing review and approval of new mix designs .
b Dimensions and Tolerances .
The dimensions and tolerances of the sections to be fabricated .
c Steel Locations .
The location of reinforcing steel welded wire fabric mechanical bar connectors and inserts .
d Surface Finish .
The type of surface finish and how the finish will be obtained .
e Curing Method .
The curing method detailing the sequence and duration in accordance with the requirements of Section .. f Minimum Required Strength .
The minimum required concrete strength for form removal .
g Lifting Attachments .
The design of the lifting attachments including the minimum required concrete strength to allow lifting with calculations stamped by a Professional Engineer registered in the State of Vermont .
h Logistics .
A description of the transportation handling and storage details .
i Installation and Grouting .
A description of the installation and grouting procedures .
j Quality Control .
A description of the Quality Control procedures .
All design details shall be in accordance with the most recent edition of the VTrans Structures Design Manual available on the Agencys website and the AASHTO LRFD Bridge Design Specifications .
A Professional Engineer registered in the State of Vermont shall stamp any design calculations included in the submittals . .
CONCRETE .
a Batch Plants .
Batch plant equipment materials and batching procedures shall conform to the provisions of Section listed in Table .A .
TABLE .A BATCH PLANT OPERATION SUBSECTIONS AND TOPICS Subsection Subject .
Batching .b Testing Laboratory .c Bins and Scales .d Production Tolerances for Testing .e Storage and Proportioning of Materials .
Mixing and Delivery Paragraphs and only .
For plants not located in the State the Agency has the option of waiving the requirements of Subsection .a and Subsection .c paragraphs and only .
b Acceptance Testing .
For acceptance testing refer to the Agencys Materials Sampling Manual for sampling curing and testing requirements .
Specimens shall be tested either at the Agencys Materials Section Central Laboratory or at the fabricators plant Laboratory .
An Agency representative shall witness all tests .
Concrete for precast concrete shall conform to the following requirements Compressive strength test results obtained at or before days shall not be less than the design compressive strength shown on the Plans .
When a day test result is below the specified design strength all concrete represented by that test shall be unacceptable for the requirements of this Section .
The Engineer reserves the right to reject all members that were manufactured from this concrete .
The maximum total water batched shall not exceed pounds per cubic yard including water contributed to cement hydration by all admixtures when the cumulative total exceeds gallon per cubic yard .
If total cementitious material content exceeds pounds per cubic yard then water batched shall not exceed pounds per cubic yard .
The maximum WCM ratio in production shall not exceed maximum WCM ratio determined in Subsection .aa .
The air entrainment value shall be with a tolerance of as tested in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO T . The temperature of the concrete at the time of placement shall be between ºF and ºF as tested in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO T . The concrete shall not demonstrate segregation at any time .
If the mix fails to remain within the minimummaximum slump or spread submitted in the mix design the load may be rejected .
The Visual Stability Index VSI shall be less than or equal to .
The Agency may request that the producer fabricate three concrete test cylinders that will be cured with the piece they represent through the complete curing period .
These cylinders shall meet the testing requirements of AASHTO T and AASHTO T and shall be kept with the piece they represent until collected by the Agency .
Any admixture containing calcium chloride shall not be used .
Only the cementitious combinations and sources from the approved mix design shall be used in the precast units required for any one structure unless otherwise authorized by the Structural Concrete Engineer . .
INSPECTION .
Materials furnished and the work performed under Section shall be inspected by the Agency .
The Inspector shall have the authority to reject any material or work that does not meet the requirements of these Specifications .
Any work performed that has not been inspected may be rejected unless waived in writing by the Engineer .
The Inspector shall be provided with a minimum office space of square feet with the least dimension of feet .
There shall be provided a desk surface and with minimum of two drawers .
A dedicated private telephone service shall be provided in the office space .
A dedicated internet connection which provides Agency personnel a minimum speed of Mbps download without utilizing compression algorithms shall be provided in the office space .
Any variances shall be approved by the Structural Concrete Engineer .
This office space shall be located on the premises as close to the production area as practicable .
The Engineer reserves the right to reject inadequate office facilities and require suitable alternatives . .
FABRICATION .
a PreProduction Meeting .
Unless the Engineer deems in writing that a preproduction meeting is unnecessary a preproduction meeting shall be requested by the producer with a minimum notice of two weeks prior to beginning concrete placement .
The meeting shall be held a minimum of Calendar Days prior to beginning concrete placement unless otherwise approved by the Structural Concrete Engineer .
The preproduction meeting shall be attended by and including but not limited to the Crew Supervisor Plant Manager Inspector or Inspectors Supervisor a representative from the Agency Materials Section Structural Concrete unit and Project Manager andor Designer .
Additionally the fabricator shall have available at the preproduction meeting the approved Fabrication Drawings and a complete anticipated production schedule for all components included in the Fabrication drawings .
b Forming Members .
Any defects or damage due to form work stripping or handling may be cause for rejection .
Holes or cutouts for anchoring devices diaphragm connections openings for connection rods recesses for grout holes for railing bolts and any other related details shown on the Plans shall be provided for in the members .
c PostTensioning Strands and Conduits .
Each posttensioning strand to be posttensioned shall be encased in an approved conduit .
Unless otherwise shown on the Plans the ratio of crosssectional area of the post tensioning strand to be encased to the interior crosssectional area of the conduit shall not exceed .
except when a steel bar is used as a tendon the inside diameter of the conduit shall be at least inch greater than the diameter of the bar .
Conduit that has been crushed or has opened seams shall not be used .
The conduit shall be rigidly constructed completely sealed accurately placed and securely fastened to maintain the desired profile during concreting .
No conduit shall be located more than inch from the position shown on the Plans .
Bundling of conduits will not be permitted .
d Bar Reinforcement and Welded Wire Reinforcement .
Bar reinforcement and welded wire reinforcement shall be furnished and installed in conformance with the requirements of Subsection .
Subsection .
Subsection .
Subsection .
and Subsection ..
The chairs or spacers used to support or locate the reinforcement that bears on the faces of the forms shall be made of or be coated with a noncorrosive material so that no discoloration will show on the faces of the precast concrete units .
e Placing Concrete .
Concrete shall not be deposited in the forms until the Agency representative has approved placement of the reinforcement conduits and anchorages .
The concrete shall be vibrated internally externally or a combination thereof to the required consolidation .
When a vibrator is used with rebar with special coatings or made of nonmetallic material or a material that could be susceptible to damage the vibrator head shall be nonmetallic or rubbercoated .
SCC concrete should not be vibrated .
If there is a need to vibrate SCC concrete it shall only be vibrated for the minimum time necessary so as to avoid segregation .
The vibrating shall be done with care and in such a manner to ensure that the following conditions are met The concrete is uniformly consolidated .
Displacement of or damage to reinforcement inserts conduits and anchorages is avoided .
Acceptable finish surfaces are produced .
f Dimensional Tolerances .
All dimensional tolerances shall be in accordance with the latest editions of PCI MNL Manual for Quality Control for Plants and Production of Precast and Prestressed Concrete Products and PCI MNL Tolerance Manual for Precast and Prestressed Concrete Construction or with the National Precast Concrete Association NPCA Quality Control Manual for Precast Concrete unless otherwise noted in the Contract Documents or as approved by the Engineer .
g Defects .
Units that contain defects caused by manufacture or handling may be repaired at the manufacturing site .
Minor defects are defined as the intermittent presence of holes honeycombing chips or spalls which are inches or less in the longest dimension and that do not penetrate deeper than inch into the concrete .
Minor defects may be repaired using an Approved Standard Repair Procedure as detailed in Subsection .g .
Surface voids or bug holes that are less than inch in diameter and less than inch deep need not be repaired .
Minor defects that recur with any identifiable regularity or pattern may be required to be addressed through a NonConformance Report at the discretion of the Structural Concrete Engineer .
Major defects are anything beyond the scope of minor as described above .
It is at the sole discretion of the Structural Concrete Engineer to determine into which category any defect is categorized .
Cracking .
Cracks less than .
inch in width shall be sealed by a method approved by the Structural Concrete Engineer .
Cracks equal to or greater than .
inch in width may be cause for rejection based on their width length location and frequency .
At the Structural Concrete Engineers discretion cracked members shall be repaired or replaced at the Contractors expense .
Members with crack widths of .
inch and greater will be rejected .
Repairs .
Repairs shall be made using an overhead and vertical concrete repair material from the Agencys Approved Products List .
Any unsound concrete shall be carefully chipped out and the perimeter saw cut to a minimum depth of inch or deeper if recommended by the repair material manufacturer .
The prepared surface profile shall be as specified by the repair material manufacturer or if not specified it shall be at a minimum to International Concrete Repair Institute Surface Preparation Chip CSP .
The repair material shall be cured as specified by the manufacturer .
Standard Repair Procedures SRP .
Standardized Repair Procedures will document a prescribed procedure for repairing Minor defects at the fabricators facility .
At a minimum the SRP must detail the scope of defects for which that procedure is intended to be used detailed narrative including every step of the repair procedure and the product documentation for the specific repair materials that will be used .
The SRP must include example pictures of defects for which the procedure could be used detailed example pictures of every step of the repair procedure and pictures of an example completed repair .
All SRPs must be approved by the Structural Concrete Engineer prior to their use .
Allow two weeks for approval of the SRP .
Approval to use an SRP for any given defect is at the sole discretion of the Structural Concrete Engineer .
The Agencys consent to use a SRP for the repair of a defect does not constitute acceptance of that repair .
NonConformance Report NCR .
Any defects existing in the pieces other than those defined as minor above shall be documented with a NonConformance Report .
At a minimum the NCR must detail what the defect is including adequate pictures of the piece and defect what caused it the proposed repair the procedure for carrying out the proposed repair and a plan of action to prevent additional similar defects from occurring .
Any approved repairs must be documented and photographed during the repair work and after completion of the repair .
NCRs must be submitted within Working Days of the discovery of the defect .
h Welding .
All welding shall conform to the requirements of Subsection .. i Cold Weather Conditions .
Cold weather concrete will be any concrete placed or cured in ambient conditions when the ambient air temperature is expected to be below freezing at any point in time or below F for an hour continuous period .
The requirements of Subsection .b shall apply in addition to the requirements of Subsection .. j Marking .
The date of manufacture the production lot number and the piece mark shall be clearly marked on each individual piece of precast concrete .
The mark shall be in a location that will not be visible in the finished product .
k Form Removal .
Unless otherwise specified form removal shall be permitted only after the strength required and approved in Subsection .f is achieved as specified in the Agencys Materials Sampling Manual .
l MSE Wall Panel Tolerances and Acceptance Criteria .
MSE wall panels shall have a minimum structural thickness of inches and a minimum cover for steel reinforcement of inches .
The concrete surface for the front face shall have a form liner finish as required on the approved Fabrication Drawings .
The concrete surface on the rear face shall be an unformed flat finish .
The concrete panels shall be constructed using colored concrete as specified in the Plans .
A fullsize test panel shall be produced and approved by the Agency prior to production of the MSE wall panels .
The panel shall be available for review a minimum of Working Days prior to the start of production .
The approved test panel shall be used as a benchmark for the correct color and form liner finish .
All MSE wall panels shall be manufactured within the following tolerances with respect to the dimensions shown on the approved Fabrication Drawings Attachment Device Locations and Alignment .
The lateral position of reinforcing element attachment devices shall be within inch .
The embedment measured from the back face of the panel shall be inches inch inch .
Panel Dimensions .
All panel dimensions shall be within inch .
All hardware embedded in the panel except for attachment devices shall be within inch .
Panel Squareness .
The panels squareness as determined by the difference between the two diagonals shall not exceed inch .
Panel Surface Finish .
Surface defects on smoothformed surfaces measured on a length of feet shall not exceed inch .
Surface defects on texturedfinished surfaces measured on a length of feet shall not exceed inch .
MSE wall panels shall be accepted for use in wall construction provided the concrete strength meets or exceeds the design compressive strength the soil reinforcement connection devices and the panel dimensions are within tolerances and any chipping cracks honeycombing or other defects are repaired to the satisfaction of the Structural Concrete Engineer using methods submitted and approved under Subsection .g .
The MSE wall panels shall be subject to inspection by the Engineer at the time of unloading and once placed in their final position .
MSE wall panels that do not meet the requirements of this Subsection may be subject to rejection. . CURING .
a General .
All curing methods for precast concrete shall be subject to the Structural Concrete Engineers approval .
The fabricator shall submit with the Fabrication Drawings complete details of the proposed methods for approval .
The curing period for precast concrete is defined as a minimum hours wet curing to begin immediately following completion of placing and finishing of the concrete .
The following requirements shall apply The method of curing shall prevent the loss of moisture throughout the curing period .
Except where modified herein precast concrete structure components shall be cured by either water curing wetted burlap covered with white polyethylene sheeting or white burlappolyethylene sheeting burlene as specified in Subsection ..
When a curing enclosure is used free water must be evident and the relative humidity within the enclosure shall exceed throughout the duration of the curing period .
A curing enclosure is considered any means of moisture retention that allows air to contact the surface of the piece .
The strength of the product shall be determined by test specimens cured with the product they represent or by specimens matchcured in an approved matchcuring system .
Wet curing shall be continued until of the day design strength is achieved but shall be no less than hours in duration .
MSE wall panels shall have an approved curing compound applied to the back face of the panel immediately following finishing .
b Curing Temperatures .
The controlling temperatures shall be those actually achieved within the concrete elements not ambient temperatures of the curing area unless specifically stated as such .
The precast concrete shall be raised to an internal temperature of not less than F within the first hours of the curing period and shall be maintained at or above F for the remainder of the curing period .
The internal temperature of curing concrete shall be monitored using sacrificial thermocouples placed as near as practicable to the center of mass of the finished piece .
In addition the temperature within the curing enclosure shall be monitored using temperature sensors placed carefully within the curing enclosure in such a way that temperatures being measured accurately represent the curing conditions .
The requirement for temperature monitoring may be waived by the Structural Concrete Engineer if the concrete is not subject to accelerated curing and ambient temperatures are expected to be well above F throughout the duration of production .
c Accelerated Curing .
Accelerated curing procedures may be employed in lieu of the standard hour curing procedure described in Subsection .a accordance with the requirements of PCI MNL Section .
and the following conditions a .
The initial time of set is defined in AASHTO T MT and ASTM C C M as the time it takes fresh concrete to reach a compressive strength of psi .
Testing to determine the time of set shall be done when the temperature is within F of the anticipated concrete placement temperature .
Alternately time of set testing may be found by taking a minimum of three different concrete temperatures at approximately F apart entering that data on a graph and then drawing a bestfit smooth curve line through the three data points .
This graph will be used to determine the time of set for the anticipated concrete placement temperature rounded up to the nearest half hour .
Immediately upon completing placement of the concrete for each precast concrete structure component an enclosure that is suitable for containing live lowpressure steam or heat shall be placed over the forms .
The fabricator shall make these enclosures available for inspection prior to casting .
When lowpressure steam heating methods are used for accelerated curing precautions shall be taken to prevent the live steam from being directed on the concrete or forms in such a way as to cause damage from localized high temperatures .
When radiant heat is used for accelerated curing all exposed concrete surfaces shall be covered with plastic sheeting .
Radiant heat may be applied by means of a circulation pipes containing steam hot oil or hot water or by electric heating elements .
While waiting for the initial set to take place the temperature within the concrete may be increased at a maximum rate of F per hour .
However the temperature within the concrete shall not be more than F higher than the initial concrete placement temperature or more than F whichever is less .
Following initial set the internal concrete temperature shall increase at a rate not exceeding ºF per hour until the desired curing temperature is reached .
The maximum internal concrete temperature shall not exceed ºF .
The maximum differential between the curing enclosure temperature and internal concrete temperature shall not exceed ºF .
The selected curing enclosure temperature range shall be as approved on the Fabrication Drawings .
The accelerated curing cycle shall be considered complete when the method of supplying heat is stopped andor the concrete temperature drops below F. Two cylinders shall be tested immediately upon completion of the accelerated cure cycle .
The maximum cooling rate from the sustained accelerated curing temperature shall be F per hour .
Cooling at this rate shall continue until the concrete temperature is F or less above the ambient temperature outside the curing enclosure .
Precast concrete that has not attained of the day design strength shall be additionally wet cured until this strength threshold is met .
If the precast concrete has attained of the day strength during the accelerated curing cycle no further curing will be required .
d Conditioning .
Following the completion of the chosen curing method precast elements that will then be exposed to cold weather conditions as defined in Subsection .i must be allowed hours to cool and dry in an environment of at least F prior to exposure to cold weather conditions .
For pieces cast outdoors in cold weather ambient conditions all requirements of Subsection .b shall apply .
e Temperature Recording .
The fabricator shall install a minimum of one automatic temperature recorder per contiguous form group and common heat source per day .
The Structural Concrete Engineer may require that additional temperature recorders be installed if it is determined that one per day of production does not adequately monitor the curing conditions .
The recorder shall record at intervals not to exceed minutes the temperature of the air surrounding the piece as well as the internal concrete temperature .
Temperature recording shall continue until completion of the chosen curing method .
Each recorders data log shall indicate the casting bed date of casting time of start and finish of record and the mark number of the precast concrete structure component being cured .
At the completion of the temperature recording the data logs shall be given to the Agency representative .
Temperatures recorded on the data logs shall be used to determine whether the precast concrete structure components have been cured in accordance with the Specifications and the approved Fabrication Drawings .
Recorder accuracy shall be certified at least once every months and the certificate displayed with the recorder .
Calibration and certification shall be performed by either the manufacturer the supplier or an independent Laboratory .
Random temperature checks of each recorder may be made by an Agency representative. . HANDLING STORAGE AND SHIPPING .
All precast concrete shall be handled stored and shipped in such a manner as to minimize chipping cracks fractures discoloration and excessive bending stresses .
Units damaged by handling storage or shipping shall be replaced at the Contractors expense .
MSE wall panels shall be stored and shipped in stacks front face down .
Firm blocking of sufficient thickness to prevent the reinforcement attachments from contacting the adjacent panels shall be used .
Lifting inserts shall be installed on the top edge of the MSE wall panels to permit lifting at the Project site .
Reinforcement connection inserts tie strips shall not be used for lifting or handling the panel at the Project site .
Prior to shipment of any members all NCRs shall be resolved .
All applicable material certifications will be approved in accordance with Subsection ..
In addition all required testing shall demonstrate the design requirements have been met . .
INSTALLATION .
a Methods Equipment and Erection .
Cranes lifting devices and other equipment for precast concrete structure erection shall be of adequate design and capacity to safely erect align and secure all members and components in their final positions without damage .
The Contractor is solely responsible for the methods and equipment employed for the erection of the precast concrete structure components .
Construction Drawings for precast concrete structure component erection shall be submitted in accordance with the requirements of Section .
The erection plan shall include the necessary computations to indicate the magnitude of stress in the units during erection and to demonstrate that all of the erection equipment has adequate capacity for the work to be performed and provisions for all stages of construction including temporary stoppages .
When the fabricatordesigned lifting hooks will be used by the Contractor computations indicating the magnitude of stress in the segments during erection are not required unless otherwise ordered by the Engineer .
Submittal of the erection plan is for the Agencys documentation only and shall in no way be construed as approval of the proposed method of erection .
The Contractor shall follow the erection plan as submitted .
b MSE Walls .
When included in the Contract Documents the installation of MSE wall panels shall be as specified in the MSE wall Specification .
c Sheet Membrane Waterproofing .
A reinforced asphalt synthetic resin or coaltar based preformed sheet membrane shall be placed over the joints of precast concrete units in accordance with the Contract Documents .
All work performed shall be in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
Membrane material shall meet the requirements of Subsection .. Waterproofing shall not be performed in wet weather or when the temperature is below F without the authorization of the Engineer .
The concrete surfaces that are to be waterproofed shall be reasonably smooth and free from projections or holes and shall be cleaned of dust and loose material .
The surfaces shall be visibly dry prior to and during application of the membrane system. . GROUT .
a Surface Preparation .
The fabricator must ensure that surfaces to be grouted are clean oilfree and roughened in accordance with the Plans .
The surface to be grouted shall be thoroughly wetted yet free of all standing water .
Shear keys shall be saturated surface dry prior to grouting .
b Grout Mixes .
Grout shall be used to fill shear keys transverse tie anchor recesses and dowel holes level screw voids and for fairing joints as detailed in the Contract or as ordered by the Engineer .
Grout shall be Mortar Type IV meeting the requirements of Subsection .. Additional aggregates shall not be added to the material during field mixing .
The Contractor shall submit a proposed grouting procedure including a premix name brand to the Engineer for their review and approval .
The Contractor with the written permission of the Engineer has the option to use readymixed mortar for the grouting process .
However the time from batching to completion of placement must not exceed minutes .
Readymixed mortar shall be used in small quantities as needed and shall not be retempered or used after it has begun to set .
Readymixed grout mix design shall be submitted to the Structural Concrete Engineer for approval .
The mix design shall include test results that meet the requirements of Subsection .c and Subsection .c .
Tests on the mix design shall be performed by an AMRLaccredited lab in those test procedures .
Materials used for grouting must be sampled and tested in accordance with the VTrans Materials Sampling Manual .
The cubes produced for testing conformance with strength requirements shall be fieldcured with the fieldplaced grout .
A minimum of six additional test cubes shall be produced to facilitate early breaks to determine when posttensioning may proceed .
c Placing Grout .
The grout shall be mixed using a mechanical mixer according to the manufacturers recommendations and shall be readily pourable so that it completely fills the shape of the shear keys or holes depending on the product being installed .
The placement of the grout shall be continuous .
The grouting of each shear key shall be completed in its entirety within a single Working Day .
Grout shall be placed between precast concrete structure components as required for fairing out any unevenness between adjacent components .
Mortar Type IV shall be used .
The mortar shall be placed to the thickness necessary to eliminate unevenness forming a smooth surface from the higher edges to the lower surface .
The finished surface shall be feathered smoothly and be free of depressions or sharp edges .
d Curing Grout .
In the absence of manufacturer curing recommendations all exposed grout shall be cured for not less than three days by the wetted burlap method in accordance with the requirements of Section .
Curing shall commence as soon as practical after grout placement. . POSTTENSIONING .
Posttensioning strands shall not be bonded to the concrete and shall be protected against corrosion as specified in the Contract .
Posttensioning of strands shall not commence until a minimum compressive strength of psi has been attained in the grout as tested per the requirements of Subsection .b .
If the design strength is met prior to completion of the required curing the grout cure must be maintained during the posttensioning operation .
Strands shall be stressed in the following sequence Before grouting the strands shall be pulled with a maximum force of .
kips .
After the grout has attained the required strength the strands shall be pulled to the final design tension .
Stressing shall begin by pulling the innermost strands first then proceeding symmetrically towards the members ends .
The inner strands shall be rechecked to ensure the strands still have the design tension .
In the case where the Plans call for top and bottom strands the sequence shall be followed using an initial pull of .
kips top and bottom followed by a sequence using the final design tension .
No loading of elements shall be allowed until posttensioning is completed . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT .
The quantity of Precast Concrete Structure of the type and size specified to be measured for payment shall be on a lump sum basis .
The lump sum shall include all of the precast concrete structure components in the complete and accepted work for each location specified in the Contract .
MSE wall panels will not be measured separately for payment but will be considered in the measurement for the Mechanically Stabilized Earth MSE Wall item in the Contract . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT .
The accepted quantity of Precast Concrete Structure of the type and size specified will be paid for at the Contract lump sum price .
Payment shall be full compensation for designing detailing fabricating repairing transporting handling and erecting the materials specified for furnishing and implementing the erection plan and for furnishing all labor tools equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
The Engineer may authorize progress payments in the following manner a A maximum of of the Contract bid amount may be paid when the Fabrication Drawings have been approved by VTrans .
b In accordance with Section .
stockpile payment may be authorized when the prestressed elements have met the requirements of Section .
for shipping .
c After completion and acceptance of all work under this Section of the quantity will be paid .
Furnishing and placing preformed sheet membrane waterproofing including primer mastic polyurethane membrane sealant and surface preparation is considered incidental to the work for Precast Concrete Structure .
Any grouting work such as fairing out unevenness between adjacent precast concrete structure components and filling leveling screw holes shear keys transverse anchor recesses and dowel holes is considered incidental to the work for Precast Concrete Structure .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Precast Concrete Structure Lump Sum SECTION STRUCTURAL CONCRETE .
DESCRIPTION .
This work shall consist of furnishing and placing Portland cement concrete for structures and incidental construction .
The Portland cement concrete may consist of a homogeneous mixture of cement fine aggregate coarse aggregate water admixtures and pozzolans when used proportioned and mixed according to these Specifications. . MATERIALS .
Materials shall meet the requirements of the following Subsections Portland Cement .
High EarlyStrength Portland Cement .
PortlandPozzolan Cement .
Portland BlastFurnace Slag Cement .
Fine Aggregate for Concrete .
Coarse Aggregate for Concrete .
Lightweight Coarse Aggregate for Structural Concrete .
Mortar Type IV .
Preformed Joint Filler Cork and AsphaltTreated Felt .
Polyvinyl Chloride PVC Waterstop .
Concrete Curing Material .
AirEntraining Admixtures .b Retarding Admixtures .c WaterReducing Admixtures .e WaterReducing and Retarding Admixtures .f WaterReducing High Range Admixtures .g WaterReducing High Range and Retarding Admixtures .h Accelerating Admixtures .i WaterReducing and Accelerating Admixtures .j Specific Performance Admixtures .k Mineral Admixtures .
Ground Granulated BlastFurnace Slag GGBFS .c Polystyrene Insulation Board .
Blanket Insulation Material .
Pipe Insulation .
Water .
Precast concrete stayinplace forms prestressed deck panels shall conform to the requirements of Section . .
CLASSIFICATION AND PROPORTIONING .
The classes of concrete shown in Table .A are included in these Specifications and shall be used as shown on the Plans .
TABLE .A PORTLAND CEMENT CONCRETE CLASSES AND PROPERTIES Concrete Class Min .
Cement lbscy Max .
WCM Ratio SlumpSpread Range in .
Air Content percent Coarse Aggr .
Gradation Table Day Compressive Strength psi Day Mod .
of Rupture psi AA .
. . .A A . . . .B B . . . .B C C . . . .B C D . . . .B C LW TBD .
. . .B Controlled Density Flowable Fill TBD TBD TBD min .
.A max .
The mix shall not exhibit segregation at the slumpspread used at placement .
If the Engineer suspects there is segregation the Engineer will require a slumpspread test be performed by the Contractor to visually observe the characteristics of the mix .
If in the opinion of the Engineer the mix does exhibit segregation the load will be rejected and subsequent loads shall be tested for a minimum of three loads or until the problem is corrected .
If the Contractor needs a concrete with a slumpspread greater than inches the Contractor shall propose to the Engineer to use an SCC mix which shall be submitted to the Engineer for review and acceptance .
The listed day compressive strength or modulus of rupture will serve as the basis of designing or approving the concrete mix .
A mineral admixture may be used to replace a portion of the cement .
The minimum amount of water shall be used to produce the desirable flow for the intended use without showing segregation .
The slumpspread flowability shall be such that material can completely fill the voids or area as needed without segregation .
A minimum of three cylinders per test age are required to constitute a test .
If average strength at days exceeds of the maximum strength then payment for Contract Item .
will be of the Contract bid price .
LW Lightweight Concrete a The maximum unit density of Class LW concrete shall be Plastic pounds per cubic foot Dry pounds per cubic foot Unless otherwise specified in the Contract Class B concrete shall be used .
The Contractor following mix design criteria and procedures outlined by the Agency shall submit the mix design required data and test results to the Structural Concrete Engineer for review and acceptance .
For initial submittals a minimum of two weeks shall be allowed for evaluation of the submitted mix design test results and required data .
No production of concrete for the Project shall commence until the Structural Concrete Engineer has reviewed and accepted the concrete mix design .
b The mix design must contain the following information Class of concrete Type of mix conventional or SCC Specify if saturated surface dry or dry weights Name source specific gravities and absorptions of aggregates Specified day design compressive strength Cementitious content and the amount of each in pounds per cubic yard Specified air content and range Specified surface resistivity value Slump target and range for conventional concrete Spread minimum and maximum for SCC WCM Ratio target Volumetric quantities of each material in the mix design Design unit weight of the mix Chemical admixtures types brand names dosages A waterreducing retarding or waterreducingretarding admixture shall be used for all Class AA Class A Class B and Class LW concrete unless otherwise authorized in writing by the Engineer .
These admixtures may be used in Class C and Class D concretes when required or approved by the Engineer .
The use of an accelerating or waterreducing accelerating admixture to alter the setting characteristics of concrete mixtures shall be employed only with the approval of the Engineer .
The use of chlorides or admixtures containing chlorides is prohibited .
All admixtures will be considered incidental to the work and included in the Contract Unit Price of the concrete .
The concrete materials may be proportioned using the absolute volumes method in accordance with the requirements for each class as specified in Table .A .
The volumetric proportioning method such as that outlined in ACI Standard .
Recommended Practice for Selecting Proportions for Normal Heavyweight and Mass Weight Concrete or other approved volumetric proportioning methods shall be employed in the mix design .
Production activities shall operate so that no intentional deviations are made from the reviewed and accepted mix design .
If test results indicate a failure to obtain the day compressive strength as specified in Table .A as tested in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO T or AASHTO T changes to the mix design shall be made with no extra payment .
Changes may include but are not limited to using additional cement changing the source of cement or aggregates using a water reducer or other additives or if necessary obtaining concrete from another supplier .
After the materials to be furnished by the Contractor have been approved no proposed change in the source proportions or characteristics of the materials shall be made without the review and acceptance of the Engineer .
No new materials shall be used until such materials and their proportions have been reviewed and accepted by the Engineer .
In no case shall concrete from more than one batch plant be permitted on the same structure without prior written approval of the Engineer .
The Engineer may order concrete production and delivery suspended and a new mix or altered mix design submitted if components or final product material characteristics are determined to be out of tolerances unsatisfactory or if proposed changes in the source proportions or characteristics of the materials are proposed .
No production of concrete for the project shall resume until the Engineer has reviewed and accepted the new or altered mix design .
For evaluation new mix design submittals shall be considered as initial mix design submittals .
The various classes of concrete shall have an air content by volume as specified .
The entrained air may be obtained using an approved admixture .
The Contractor at their option or as required by the Structural Concrete Engineer may substitute fly ash for Portland cement .
The minimum substitution rate shall be .
of the required Portland cement for concrete .
The fly ash shall be substituted at a ratio of pound of fly ash for pound of Portland cement .
When any mineral admixture is incorporated into a standard class of concrete necessary adjustments to the mix design shall be made by the Contractor and reviewed and accepted by the Engineer .
Proportioning of the concrete mixtures containing mineral admixture shall be by the absolute volumes method in accordance with the requirements for each class as specified in Table .A except that the listed WCM ratio shall be based on total cementitious material Portland cement and fly ash .
The Contractor at their option or as required by the Structural Concrete Engineer may substitute ground granulated blastfurnace slag GGBFS Grade or for Portland cement .
The minimum substitution rate shall be .
of the required Portland cement for concrete .
The GGBFS shall be substituted at a ratio of one unit of GGBFS for one unit of Portland cement .
Fly ash and GGBFS will not be permitted in the same concrete mixture .
The proportioning of the concrete mixture shall be by the absolute volumes method and in accordance with the requirements for each class of concrete as specified in Table .A except that the listed water cement ratio shall be based on the total cementitious material Portland cement plus GGBFS .
Strict adherence to the requirements of Subsection .
is required when using concrete with mineral admixtures .
The setting time may be retarded in cool weather .
The Resident Engineer after consultation with the Agencys Structural Concrete Engineer may require that the curing period as designated in Table .A be extended. . BATCHING .
Measuring and batching of materials shall be done at an approved batch plant .
Batch plants shall have an inspection completed prior to the first concrete placement on an Agency project if it has been longer than calendar months from the last inspection .
Request for inspection and required documentation must be received by the Materials Section a minimum of Calendar Days prior to the date of the requested inspection .
All deficiencies shall be corrected and verified a minimum of Calendar Days prior to the first concrete placement for any Agency project .
The batch plant shall meet the requirements of AASHTO M except as modified in this Specification and shall be maintained in good repair at all times and shall be subject to a periodic inspection by an Authorized Representative of the Agency .
The batch plant shall have an approved method of storing measuring and dispensing approved mineral admixtures .
All new or relocated concrete batch plants offered for Agency approval shall be equipped for semiautomatic batching and proportioning of all cementitious material aggregates water and fly ash when used and for automatic insertion of admixtures .
The plants shall be equipped to automatically and accurately record the quantity of all aggregates cementitious material and the water incorporated into each batch and shall identify and record the addition of the required admixtures .
Proper facilities shall be provided for the Engineer to inspect ingredients and processes used in the batching and delivery of the concrete .
The Contractor shall without charge afford the Engineer all reasonable facilities for securing samples to determine whether the concrete is being furnished in accordance with these Specifications .
The batch room area the producer shall provide the Inspector with a inches inches horizontal working surface at sufficient height to sit at supplied with a seat with adequate view of the batching controls display and power supply .
The Contractor shall give the Engineer hour notice of intent to place concrete so that arrangements can be made for Laboratory inspection and control .
Failure to give notice which causes postponement of placing operations shall not be reason for determining extension of Contract time per the requirements of Subsection .. a Semiautomatic Batch Plants .
When actuated by a starting mechanism the semiautomatic batch controller shall start the weighing operation of the materials and stop the flow automatically when the designated weight has been reached .
It shall be interlocked to ensure that the discharge mechanism can not be opened until the weight is within the tolerance specified in Subsection .d .
Water and admixtures may be batched in a weigh batcher or by volume in a volumetric device .
When actuated volumetric controls shall start the measuring operation and stop the flow automatically when the designated volume has been reached .
b Testing Laboratory .
The Contractor shall provide a weatherproof building or room at the plant site for the use of Agency personnel as a testing Laboratory .
The Contractor shall attain and maintain a qualified Laboratory status in accordance with the current edition of the Agencys Qualified Laboratory Program .
Failure to comply with this program may result in suspension or revocation of acceptance testing at the facility .
The testing Laboratory shall have a minimum gross internal area of square feet with a layout providing a minimum internal width of feet in which to house and use the equipment specified .
Should the Contractor elect to provide additional equipment relevant to testing of Portland cement concrete and materials the gross inside floor area of the Laboratory shall be increased in proportion to the area required to house and operate the additional equipment .
If the additional equipment is to be operated on a bench the length of bench sections shall also be proportionally increased .
Adequate ventilation lighting heating and any necessary electrical or gas connections shall be provided .
Proper sanitary toilet facilities with a lavatory shall be available for use by Agency personnel at the plant site .
Dedicated private telephone and internet services shall be provided to the Laboratory .
The internet connection shall have a minimum download capacity of Mbps without utilizing compression algorithms and the bandwidth speed shall be verified using an online speed test .
The Laboratory shall be equipped with the following items and equipment Standard office desk with lockable drawers or a separate lockable twodrawer file cabinet and chair VTrans Qualified Laboratory Binder with producer equipment calibration data Set of bench sections at least feet wide providing a minimum of square feet of working area with undercounter shelving Standard laboratory stool Fully automatic electronic calculator with eightdigit capacity Standard laboratory sink and faucet provided with an adequate supply of water meeting the requirements of Subsection ..
The sink shall drain to the outside of the Laboratory Bench brush Floor brush Motorized inch sieve shaker with an adjustable timer .
The sieve shakers operation shall be conducted by means of lateral and vertical motion of the sieve accompanied by jarring action with the following inch diameter sieves inch .
mm No. . mm No. . mm No. . mm No. . mm No. . mm No. . mm pan and cover Mechanical aggregate shaker with an adjustable timer a cubic foot capacity together with the following screens inch .
mm inch .
mm inch .
mm inch .
mm inch .
mm inch .
mm inch .
mm No. . mm No. . mm No. . mm and pan .
The aggregate shaker may be placed in a separate enclosed area that is shielded for dust and sound is welllighted and is properly ventilated .
There shall be a minimum of feet of clear space measured from the front frame of the aggregate shaker outward as well as a bench section measuring approximately inches high inches deep and inches long located adjacent to the aggregate shaker Square pointed shovel Five gallon plastic buckets with handles Electronic balance with a minimum capacity of pounds and accurate to .
pounds .
If separate fine and coarse aggregate scales are to be used the fine aggregate scale shall meet the requirements of AASHTO M Table Class G with a minimum capacity of .
pounds and readable to .
pounds .
The coarse aggregate scale shall meet the requirements of AASHTO M Table Class G with a minimum capacity of pounds and readable to .
pounds Set of standard masses weights to use for verifying the accuracy of the electronic balance Doubleburner hot plates with variable temperature controls Metal pans with a nominal size of inches inches inches Metal pans with a nominal size of inches inches inches Sample splitter with a inch chute inch blunted trowel foot foot minimum heavy canvas for quartering samples Brass wirebristle brush Pair of heatresistant gloves F shortcontact inch soft bristle paint brushes Acceptable substitutes for these items and equipment may be made with the approval of the Structural Concrete Engineer .
Batching operations shall not begin until the testing Laboratory has been approved as being in compliance with these Specifications and all equipment and equipment calibration requirements of the current VTrans Quality Assurance Program and Qualified Laboratory Program documents .
Removal of any equipment except with written request and written approval of the Structural Concrete Engineer will revoke any prior approvals andor qualifications and require the termination of batching operations .
The building or room designated as a testing Laboratory shall be maintained in a clean condition by the producer and kept free of all articles not necessary for the testing of materials .
Cleaning supplies shall be furnished by the Contractor .
c Bins and Scales .
The batch plant shall include bins weighing hoppers and scales with adequate separate compartments for fine aggregate and for each required separate size of coarse aggregate .
If cement is used in bulk a bin hopper and scale for cement shall be included .
Each compartment shall be designed to discharge efficiently and freely into the weighing hopper or hoppers .
Means of control shall be provided so that when required the material may be added slowly in minute quantities and shut off with precision .
Means of removing the overload of any one of the several materials shall be provided .
Hoppers shall be constructed to eliminate accumulations of tare materials and to discharge fully without jarring the scales .
Partitions between compartments shall be configured to prevent spilling under any working condition .
All batch plant structures shall be properly leveled and maintained in that condition within the tolerance required by the design of the weighing mechanism .
The scales for determining the mass weight of aggregate and cementitious material shall be comprised of a suitable system of levers or load cells .
The levers or load cells will determine the mass weight consistently within .
under operating conditions with loads indicated either by means of a beam with balance indicator a fullreading dial or a digital readout or display .
Adequate means for checking the accuracy of the scales shall be provided by the Contractor either using pound weights or by other methods approved by the Structural Concrete Engineer .
Weights shall be certified annually by the Division of Weights and Measures of the Agency of Agriculture Food and Markets .
All exposed fulcrums clevises and similar working parts shall be kept clean .
When beamtype scales are used provision shall be made for indicating to the operator that the required load in the weighing hopper is being approached .
Poises shall be designed to be locked in any position to prevent unauthorized change of position .
All weighing and indicating devices shall be in full view of the operator while charging the hopper and the operator shall have convenient access to all controls .
The scales shall be serviced and their accuracy verified annually by a hopperscale service person licensed by the Division of Weights and Measures .
For Vermont plants an Inspector representing the Division of Weights and Measures shall witness all testing conducted by the service person and will attach a seal to each hopper scale provided it meets the current Specifications tolerances and regulations adopted by the Division of Weights and Measures .
Standard test weights used to determine the accuracy of hopper scales shall be certified yearly by the Division of Weights and Measures in accordance with their established standards .
The readymixed concrete producer shall hire a licensed hopperscale service person for annual checking and service of scales .
In addition Vermont producers shall schedule an inspection with the Division of Weights and Measures between February th and April th of each year .
After April th Vermont plants without current seals affixed to the hopper scales will not be permitted to supply concrete to Agency projects unless otherwise directed by the Engineer or until the seals are affixed .
Outofstate concrete producers shall observe all annual hopper scale weighing and seal requirements of their respective states .
d Production Tolerances for Batching .
For weighed ingredients the accuracy of batching is determined by a comparison between the desired weight and the actual scale reading .
For volumetric measurement of water and admixtures accuracy is determined by checking the quantity either by weight on a scale or by volume in a calibrated container .
Admixturedispensing systems shall at a minimum be annually calibrated by an admixture distributor representative .
The admixture distributor representative shall check at least two volumes with a check done at approximately of the minimum and at of the maximum manufacturers recommended dosage range or other targets as approved by the Structural Concrete Engineer .
Batching shall be conducted to accurately measure the desired quantities of materials within the tolerances specified in Table .A .
TABLE .A CONCRETE PRODUCTION TOLERANCES FOR BATCHING Material Tolerance Cement Water Aggregates Chemical admixtures Mineral admixtures e Storage and Proportioning of Materials .
Portland Cement .
Either sacked or bulk cement may be used .
No fraction of a sack of cement shall be used in a batch of concrete unless the cement is weighed .
All bulk cement shall be weighed on an approved weighing device .
The bulk cement weighing hopper shall be properly sealed and vented to preclude dusting during operation .
Facilities shall be provided for the sampling of cement at the batch plant either from the storage silo or from the weighing hopper .
It shall provide a sample that represents the true nature of the material being used .
This device shall be a permanent installation located to allow for safe and easy access .
Water .
Water may be measured either by volume or by weight .
When measurement is by meter the water meter shall be so located that the measurements will not be affected by variable pressures and temperatures in the water supply line .
Measuring tanks shall be equipped with an outside tap and valve to provide for checking the setting unless other means are provided for readily and accurately determining the amount of water in the tanks .
All water metering methods shall be verified and calibrated on an annual basis or at any time there is a question of accuracy .
All water added to the concrete at any point shall be through an approved metering method .
Aggregates .
Aggregate stockpiles shall be formed on hard welldrained areas that prevent contamination from underlying material and accumulation of excessive moisture .
Aggregates from different sources or of different gradations shall not be stockpiled together .
Only rubbertired equipment shall be permitted to operate on aggregate stockpiles .
Stockpiles shall be constructed as follows a .
If the stockpile is to be made using mechanical equipment front end loader clam bucket rock ladder radial stacker or other approved equipment the stockpile shall be made in such a manner that segregation is kept to a minimum .
b .
If the stockpile is to be made by dumping from trucks in multiple layers each layer shall be approximately feet in depth .
Each layer shall be completely in place before commencing the next layer .
Care shall be taken that successive layers do not cone down over the previous layer .
c. No equipment shall be used to haul aggregate over the stockpiled material except to deposit the material for the layer being placed .
It shall be the responsibility of the Contractor to ensure that the aggregate is kept free from deleterious material or degradation .
Stockpiles shall be maintained in such a manner that twice the anticipated aggregate requirement for any Agency project placements will be on hand and available for sampling and testing at least hours before mixing operations for the placements are scheduled to begin .
The Engineer may modify this requirement when special aggregates are required .
Aggregates shall be handled from stockpiles or other sources to the batch plant in such a manner as to secure a uniform grading of the material .
Aggregates that have become segregated or mixed with earth or foreign material shall not be used .
All aggregates produced or handled by hydraulic methods and washed aggregates shall be stockpiled or binned for draining at least hours before being batched .
In case the aggregates contain high or nonuniform moisture content storage or stockpile period more than hours may be required by the Engineer .
Stockpiles being watered per the Specifications or allowed through producer QC procedures shall be watered for a sufficient time to ensure consistent moisture throughout the stockpile .
aggregate stockpiles being watered shall be loaded in the bin within hour of being batched .
The Contractor shall conduct moisture content tests within .
hours of the anticipated concrete batching time .
If there is a visual difference in aggregate moisture appearance aggregate moisture content will be tested again and new moisture test results shall be obtained and used as soon as possible .
Material that has been stored in a storage bin for more than hours shall be retested for moisture content .
A minimum of one cubic yard of aggregate will be removed from the bottom of the storage bin .
A minimum of one cubic yard of aggregate will then be removed and a moisture content sample taken .
Plants that employ moisture probes shall have them calibrated and verified a minimum of hours prior to batching or as directed by the Structural Concrete Engineer .
The procedure for checking the meter involves running aggregate over the probe and then collecting a portion of the aggregate on which to perform a moisture content test .
If the difference between the meter and the tested moisture content is greater than .
then the meter must be calibrated .
d. Lightweight aggregate stockpiles shall be presoaked for a minimum period of hours immediately prior to use .
Soaking shall be accomplished by continuous sprinkling or other suitable means that will provide a uniform moisture content throughout the stockpile .
The stockpile shall be allowed to drain for to hours immediately prior to use .
Admixtures .
The Contractor shall follow an approved procedure for adding the necessary amounts of admixtures to each batch .
Admixtures shall be dispensed in such a manner that will ensure uniform distribution of the material throughout the batch within the required mixing period .
Except as specified herein all admixtures shall be added to the batch at the plant unless otherwise authorized by the Structural Concrete Engineer .
Chemical admixture containers metering equipment and scales shall be calibrated annually by a qualified admixture distributor representative .
Admixture calibration and verification shall be done at of the high at approximately the middle and at of the low recommended ranges for the admixture being dispensed by the system .
The calibration and verification shall be done in the presence of an Agency representative when requested by the Agency .
All dispensers shall include visual inspection aids such as graduated transparent cylinders .
A separate dispenser shall be provided for each liquid admixture .
If the dispensing system does not provide visual inspection aids then periodic verification tests shall be done at a frequency satisfactory to the Structural Concrete Engineer .
Calibration and verification records shall be kept at the production facility for a minimum of one year .
The producer shall do the calibration and verification of the metering systems when requested .
Storage and dispensing systems for liquid admixtures shall be equipped to allow thorough circulation or agitation of all liquid in the system .
This shall be required prior to the first batching of concrete for Agency projects in any calendar year and periodically thereafter at intervals not to exceed Calendar Days for the duration of the period the plant is supplying concrete for Agency projects .
If the plant has received a delivery of at least of the volume of the storage container this will be considered as a method of circulation or agitation .
If the circulation method is used the admixture shall be circulated until a complete exchange of admixture is achieved .
If an agitation method is used the method shall be subject to approval by the Structural Concrete Engineer .
If an admixture does not need agitation then the admixture manufacturer shall submit in writing stating this annually .
Storage and dispensing systems for liquid admixtures shall be maintained within the manufacturers stated temperature and environmental conditions .
It shall be the responsibility of the Contractor to use the quantity of Agencyapproved admixtures needed to obtain concrete meeting the requirements of the Contract .
All admixtures will be approved by the Structural Concrete Engineer prior to incorporation into the mix .
a. AirEntraining Admixture .
Airentraining admixture shall be used as required to obtain the specified air content .
b. WaterReducing Retarding and WaterReducing and Retarding Admixtures Accelerators and Specialty Admixtures .
Dosages shall be in the recommended range as stated by the Manufacturer unless otherwise approved by the Manufacturer .
Fly Ash or GGBFS .
Fly Ash or GGBFS shall be stored at the batch plant in separate storage or holding bins or other approved holding containers and shall be protected from rain and moisture. . MIXING AND DELIVERY .
a General .
Concrete may be mixed at the site of construction at a central point or wholly or in part in transit mixers .
The production of concrete shall meet the requirements of AASHTO M with the following additional requirements All concrete shall reach its final position in the forms within .
hours after the cement has been added to the water .
When the ambient air temperature is F or above the elapsed time may be reduced as necessary as directed by the Engineer or in accordance with the requirements of Subsection .a .
If in the opinion of the Engineer the concrete visual characteristics appear to be noticeably different from the last acceptance test or previous concrete for that pour the Engineer may direct the Contractor to perform QC tests to confirm the concrete is within conformance to the Specifications .
Authorization by Field Inspection personnel must be obtained prior to the addition of water or admixtures at the project site .
If water is added in excess of the specified maximum WCM ratio amount at time of placement the concrete shall not be used .
Each load of concrete delivered at the job site shall be accompanied by a State of Vermont Batch Slip signed by the authorized Agency representative if present at the plant .
The Contractor shall provide direct communication service from the site of the work to the batch plant that shall always be available to the Engineer during concrete operations .
The cost of this service will be considered incidental to the work .
When use of a WaterReducing High Range Admixture or WaterReducing High Range and Retarding Admixture is specified for deck concrete the Contractor shall submit for the Engineers approval information about the admixture manufacturer the admixture addition rate and when the admixture is to be added to the mixture i.e .
at the plant on Project or a combination thereof .
To obtain the required concrete characteristics a representative from the concrete producer is required on the Project to determine the final admixture dosage and water addition for each load of concrete .
The dosage shall be applied by means of a dispenser or by other means of accurately measuring volume as approved by the Engineer .
The Contractor shall provide QC concrete testing personnel with current ACI Concrete Field Testing Technician Grade I Certification to confirm the concrete is within Specifications for the required work .
All concrete shall be discharged into the forms before revolutions of the drum or blades not including initial mixing revolutions .
The total allowed number of revolutions may be increased as directed by the Engineer .
Mortar shall be mixed in an approved mixer at the site of placement or in transit mixers when approved by the Engineer .
The Engineer will withdraw approval for use of transit mixers if necessary to ensure a quality product or if the rate of delivery can not be coordinated with finishing requirements .
b Stationary Mixers .
When a stationary mixer is used for the complete mixing of the concrete the mixing time for mixers that have a capacity of cubic yards or less shall be not less than seconds .
For mixers that have a capacity of more than cubic yards the mixing time shall be determined by the concrete producer .
The time is valid provided that mixer efficiency tests prove the concrete is satisfactory for uniformity and strength .
The plant shall be equipped with a timing device that will not permit the batch to be discharged before the predetermined mixing time has elapsed .
Vehicles used in hauling shall comply with the requirements of Subsection .c .
c Transit Mixers .
Transit mixers and agitators shall be subject to periodic inspections by an Authorized Representative of the Agency .
Such equipment shall bear a currently dated inspection sticker supplied by the Agency indicating that the transit mixer or agitator conforms to the Agencys requirements .
Transit mixers shall be equipped with a watermeasuring tank with a visible sight gauge for use when the water for the batch is supplied from the transit mixer tank .
The gauge shall be clean and legibly graduated .
Measuring tanks shall be provided with outside drain valves or other means to check their calibration .
These should be easily opened for checking at any time .
No transit mixer or agitator shall be charged with the ingredients of the concrete unless an authorized Agency representative is present and authorizes it .
This requirement may be waived by the Engineer if a batch weight slip accompanies the delivery vehicle to the site .
Electricallyactuated revolution counters shall be required on all transit mixers except on mixers charged at central mix plants and utilized as agitator trucks only .
If bagged mineral admixtures are being used agitators when loaded shall also not exceed of the manufacturers rated mixing capacity or legal load restrictions and shall be capable of maintaining the mixed concrete in a thoroughly mixed and uniform mass and of discharging the concrete with a satisfactory degree of uniformity .
The Engineer may require the Contractor to perform uniformity tests on a transit mixer or agitator .
Two samples shall be taken .
The first shall be after of the load volume discharge and the second prior to of the load volume discharge .
Slump and air content tests shall be performed on each sample .
The maximum difference in air content between the two samples shall be .
For concrete with a specified slump of inches or less the maximum difference shall be inch .
For concretes with a specified slump greater than inches the maximum difference shall be inches .
If both conditions are not met then the Contractor will be required to either modify the mixing procedure andor batching sequence or that transit mixer or agitator will not be allowed to deliver concrete to the Project .
The Contractor will be required to perform uniformity tests to confirm the changes have satisfactory results .
All mechanical details of the mixer or agitator such as water measuring and discharge apparatus condition of the blades speed of rotation of the drum general mechanical condition of the unit and clearance of the drum shall be checked before a further attempt to use the unit will be permitted .
Mixers and agitators shall be kept free from accumulation of hardened concrete or mortar .
The mixing blades shall be rebuilt or replaced when any part or section is worn inch or more below the original height of the manufacturers design .
A copy of the manufacturers design showing the dimensions and arrangements of blades shall be available to the Engineer at the plant at all times .
The mixing of concrete containing silica fume is very important and shall be mixed in accordance with the appropriate situation When silica fume is added to the batch by bags or in bulk from a silo each batch of concrete shall be mixed for not less than revolutions of the drum or blades at the rate of rotation designated by the manufacturer of the equipment as the mixing speed .
The mixing and agitating speeds shall be found on the metal plate on the mixer .
When silica fume is blended with cement or a combination of cement and mineral admixture at the cement plant prior to being delivered to the concrete plant each batch of concrete shall be mixed for not less than nor more than revolutions of the drum or blades at the rate of rotation designated by the manufacturer of the equipment as the mixing speed .
The mixing and agitating speeds shall be found on the metal plate on the mixer .
If inconsistent test results are obtained or the batch of concrete appears not to be completely mixed the mixing revolutions shall be extended as necessary .
When a transit mixer or agitator is used for transporting concrete mixing during transport shall be continuous and at the speed designated by the manufacturer of the equipment as agitating speed .
Failure to do so is cause for rejection of the concrete .
Transit mixers and agitators assigned to a Project shall not be used for other purposes until the desired work is completed at the site and shall arrive at the Project within the cycle that anticipated placement conditions dictate .
The interval between loads shall be controlled in order that concrete in place shall not become partially hardened prior to placing succeeding batches .
The plant capacity and transportation facilities shall be sufficient to ensure continuous delivery at the rate required .
Before discharging from a transit mixer that has been operating at agitating speed the drum or blades shall be rotated approximately one minute at mixing speed .
The same procedure shall apply to agitators if admixtures water or other ingredients are added to the mix in the field .
If additional mixing water is required to maintain the specified slump and is added with the permission of the Engineer a minimum of revolutions of the transit mixer drum at mixing speed shall be required before discharge of any concrete .
At no time shall the total water introduced into any mix exceed the maximum WCM ratio specified in Table .A .
Upon discharge of the concrete from the drum enough water shall be charged into the drum to properly cleanse the drum .
This water shall not be used as a part of the next succeeding batch but shall be discharged from the drum prior to the charging of the drum with the concrete ingredients .
The drum shall be completely emptied before receiving materials for the succeeding batch .
Re tempering of concrete or mortar that has partially hardened by remixing with or without additional materials shall not be permitted. . FIELD TESTS .
The Contractor shall provide assistance equipment materials and curing for field sampling and testing as required by the Engineer .
All costs shall be included in the Contract Unit Prices under Section .
The Engineer shall perform all acceptance sampling and testing in accordance with the Agencys Quality Assurance Program .
For bridge deck pours the Contractor shall perform all onsite Quality Control QC sampling and testing .
The person performing the QC sampling and testing shall have as a minimum current ACI Concrete Field Testing Technician Grade I Certification .
a Sampling .
Sampling for tests shall be taken in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO R or other procedures approved by the Agency .
Sampling will be done at point of placement or as close to it as practical .
Changes .
Any time that there is a change in admixture dosage outside of the allowable tolerances whether modified at the batch plant or at the site additional QC sampling and testing shall be performed on the modified load prior to incorporating the concrete into the work .
Beginning of Load Sampling .
Beginning of Load Sampling is sampling for QC testing purposes that is taken before of the load has been discharged .
Beginning of Load Sampling shall be performed as required by the Engineer or as needed to ensure that the Concrete meets the Contract requirements at the point of placement .
The QC personnel shall monitor the placement operation and adjust the mix accordingly to ensure that the material being incorporated into the work meets Contract requirements .
b Slump Tests .
Slump tests shall be made in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO T M T . c Air Content Tests .
Air content tests shall be made in accordance with the pressure method specified in AASHTO T for acceptance or rejection .
The Chace meter may be used in conjunction with the pressure method of AASHTO T for monitoring other air content tests .
A volumetric air meter shall be used for determining the air content of Class LW concrete in accordance with AASHTO T MT .
d Compressive Strength Tests .
General .
The number of compressive strength tests performed should be in accordance with the guidance given in the current edition of the VTrans Materials Sampling Manual .
The Engineer may order additional tests as deemed necessary .
Compressive test cylinders shall be made in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO T and tested for compressive strength in accordance with AASHTO T . Test beams with dimensions of inches x inches x inches shall be made in accordance with AASHTO T and tested for flexural strength in accordance with AASHTO T . Beam molds for constructing test beams shall be reusable steel molds conforming to the requirements of AASHTO T . Categories of Testing .
a .
Acceptance Testing .
Acceptance testing utilizes specimens to determine the compliance with requirements for the Project .
All test cylinders used for quality acceptance testing shall be stored in an approved curing box until they are shipped to the Agencys Materials Section Central Laboratory .
b .
Job Control Testing .
Job control testing utilizes specimens to determine whether adequate curing procedures are being followed and for early form removal or early loading of structure .
All job control specimens shall be stored on the structure and shall receive the same curing and protection from the elements as the concrete that they represent up until hours before anticipated testing of specimens .
c. Specimen Curing Requirements .
Specimen curing requirements shall be as stated in the Specifications or as directed by the Engineer .
If not specifically stated the curing shall be as specified in Table .A .
TABLE .A CONCRETE SPECIMEN CURING REQUIREMENTS Testing Category Number of Specimens Curing Location Acceptance Curing box Job control applicable curing period On structure e Concrete Temperature .
Concrete temperature tests shall be made in accordance with the requirements of ASTM C C M. .
WEATHER AND TEMPERATURE LIMITATIONS PROTECTION OF CONCRETE .
The temperature of the concrete just prior to placement in the forms shall not be less than F nor more than F. Aggregates and water shall be heated or cooled as necessary to produce concrete within these temperature limits .
Placement and curing procedures shall be approved by the Engineer prior to actual placement .
a Hot Weather Concrete .
Placement of concrete during hot weather may be limited by the Engineer based on an assessment of temperature humidity wind velocity and sun radiation conditions .
No concrete shall be placed when the ambient air temperature is or is expected to be above ºF .
No Concrete Class AA mix shall be placed when the ambient air temperature is or is expected to be above ºF during the placement except by written permission of the Engineer .
b Cold Weather Concrete .
General .
Cold weather concrete will be any concrete placed or cured when the ambient air temperature is expected to be below freezing at any point or below F for a continuous hour period .
No concrete shall be placed when the ambient air temperature is lower than F except by written permission of the Engineer .
A cold weather concrete plan shall be submitted to the Engineer for their review and approval before any cold weather concrete is placed .
When placing cold weather concrete the Contractor shall have adequate equipment that meets the approval of the Engineer for heating and protecting the materials and freshlyplaced concrete .
This equipment shall be on the job and ready to deploy prior to the commencement of concrete placing operations .
No concrete shall be placed in any superstructure or thin section under cold weather conditions .
Heating of Materials .
The heating equipment deployed for cold weather concrete placement shall be capable of heating the materials uniformly .
Aggregates shall not be heated to a temperature exceeding F. If water is heated to a temperature exceeding F the water shall be mixed with the aggregate before the cementitious material is added .
The materials shall be heated in such a manner for such a period of time and in such quantity as to produce concrete having a uniform temperature within the specified temperature range at the time of placement .
Materials containing frost or frozen lumps shall not be used .
Stockpiled aggregates may be heated using dry heat or steam .
Aggregates shall not be heated directly by gas or oil flame or on sheet metal over fire .
When aggregates are heated in bins steamcoil or watercoil heating or other methods that will not be detrimental to the aggregates may be used .
Antifreeze Compounds .
Salts chemicals or other foreign materials shall not be used in the mix to lower the freezing point of the concrete .
Preparation of Forms .
Before placing concrete any ice snow or frost shall be completely removed from the forms .
Concrete shall not be placed on any surface or in forms that are frozen have surface temperatures below ºF or that contain frozen materials .
The frozen surface or forms shall be completely thawed the day before the placement of the concrete and shall be kept continuously thawed until the concrete is poured .
The temperature difference between forms or substrate and the plastic concrete shall not exceed ºF .
Housing .
The Contractor shall furnish sufficient canvas with a supporting framework or other suitable type of housing to fully enclose and protect the structure when placing and curing cold weather concrete .
The sidewalls and roofing of the protective housing shall be completely built before the placing of any concrete .
The sidewalls for decks shall extend below and fully enclose the entire superstructure .
The protective housing shall be constructed independently of the forms and bracing and with adequate space to allow for form removal and the initial finishing of the concrete as required during the heating period .
Joists shall be located to suitably support the housing roof with no sagging .
The protective enclosure shall be constructed and heated to the proper temperature before placing any concrete .
When the temperature readings taken on or in the concrete indicate the temperature of the concrete may fall below F the Contractor shall without exposing the concrete immediately build the necessary enclosures around the area involved and supply heat to ensure curing conditions as specified in Subsection ..
The enclosure shall be removed when directed by the Engineer .
Heating the Enclosure .
The enclosure shall be heated in such a manner that the temperature of the concrete and the enclosed air shall be kept above F and not more than F above the concrete temperature for the designated curing period .
During this time the concrete shall be kept continuously wet to provide proper curing .
After the curing period the temperature shall be gradually lowered to that of the surrounding atmosphere taking at least hours for the transition but at no time exceeding a F change per hour .
When dry heat is used a means of maintaining atmospheric moisture shall be supplied .
The Contractor shall maintain adequate fire protection and shall provide personnel to keep the heating units in continuous operation .
When concrete placement operations are in locations where water levels may fluctuate the heating equipment supports shall be built so that the equipment can be raised and steam lines shall be placed above the probable high water level .
When using directfired or indirectfired heaters the enclosure shall be wellventilated to avoid accumulation of carbon dioxide and carbon monoxide .
When using a hydronic heating system with heattransfer fluid that circulates through a series of hoses the heattransfer hoses shall be laid on top of the vapor barrier usually plastic sheeting then covered with approved insulating materials or by other approved methods for retaining heat .
Temperature Records .
The Contractor shall provide an automatic temperature recorder to continuously record concrete curing temperatures and ambient air temperatures for the entire curing period .
Recording thermometers shall be capable of measuring and recording temperatures within the range of F to F with maximum graduations of F. Temperature sensors shall be carefully placed within the curing enclosure or in the concrete to ensure that temperatures are measured at typical locations .
The recorders accuracy shall be certified once every months with the certificate displayed with each recorder .
The Engineer may make random checks of each recorder .
On each recorder chart the Engineer shall indicate the location of the representative concrete the placement date and start and finish times of the temperature record .
At the completion of the curing period the recorder charts shall be submitted to the Engineer .
A thermometer shall be employed that can display the current temperature with a maximum gradation of F. The Inspector will use the thermometer to take periodic temperature measurements of the concrete and enclosure temperatures at varying locations .
When the Contractor places concrete at more than one location within the specified curing period or if the Engineer determines that monitoring of a single pour is necessary in multiple locations additional monitoring and recording equipment shall be furnished to provide temperature records at each location. . FORMS .
The Contractor shall be responsible for and shall make good any injury arising from inadequate forms .
The Engineer shall inspect and accept all forms prior to concrete placement .
Unless the Plans specifically allow for the use of stayinplace forms such forms shall not be used in the construction of any superstructure or bridge deck .
Stayinplace forms will only be allowed in the construction of substructure elements in locations where the Engineer agrees that removable formwork is impossible to use .
a Falsework .
In general falsework that can not be founded upon a solid footing shall be supported by falsework piling .
The Engineer may require the Contractor to employ screw jacks or hardwood wedges to correct any deflections however slight occurring in the falsework .
b Construction .
Forms shall be mortartight and sufficiently rigid to prevent distortion due to the pressure of the concrete and other loads incidental to the construction operations including vibration .
Forms shall be constructed and maintained to prevent the opening of joints due to shrinkage of the lumber .
Sealers and caulking as approved by the Engineer shall be used where forms abut structural steel members such as top flanges of beams and girders etc .
To ensure their easy removal forms shall be filleted and chamfered at all sharp corners unless otherwise shown on the Plans or directed by the Engineer and shall be given a bevel or draft in the case of all projections such as girders and copings .
Falsework and forms for slabs beams and girders shall be constructed to provide the camber shown on the Plans or ordered by the Engineer .
c Form Lumber .
All face form lumber for exposed surfaces shall be concrete form exterior grade plywood not less than five ply and with a minimum thickness of inch .
In computing stud spacing plywood shall be considered inch lumber if the grain of three of the plies runs perpendicular to the studs .
Form lumber for unexposed surfaces may be dressed tongueandgroove dressed shiplap or square edge sized four sides of uniform width and thickness with a minimum thickness after finishing of inch .
All form lumber shall be sound and free from loose or rotten knots knotholes checks splits or wanes showing on the surface that will be in contact with the concrete .
Used face form lumber having defects or patches which may produce work inferior to that resulting from new material shall not be used .
Other form materials may be used with the permission of the Engineer .
d Form Ties .
Metal ties or anchorages within the forms shall be constructed to permit their removal to a depth of at least inch from the face without injury to the concrete .
Wire ties shall be used only in locations where they will not extend through surfaces exposed in the finished work and then only when authorized .
The cavities shall be filled with cement mortar in accordance with the requirements of Subsection .. e Surface Treatment .
All forms shall be treated with commercial form oil prior to placing reinforcement and wood forms shall be saturated with water immediately before placing the concrete .
Any material that will adhere to or discolor the concrete shall not be used .
f Metal Forms .
The Specifications for wood forms regarding design mortartightness filleted corners beveled projections bracing alignment removal reuse and oiling also apply to metal forms .
The metal used for forms shall be of such thickness that the forms will remain true to shape throughout the concrete placement operations .
All bolt and rivet heads shall be countersunk .
Clamps pins or other connecting devices shall be designed to hold the forms rigidly together and to allow removal without injury to the concrete .
Metal forms that do not present a smooth surface or do not line up properly shall not be used .
Care shall be exercised to keep metal forms free from rust grease or other foreign matter .
g Removal of Forms .
Deck Superstructure .
The forms or their supports for any portion of a structure shall not be removed before the end of the day cure period for the deck .
Forms under beams or floor slabs may be removed upon approval of the Engineer after the concrete attains of the minimum compressive strength as specified in Table .A but not prior to the end of the day cure period .
Substructure .
The forms or their supports for any portion of a substructure shall not be removed without the approval of the Engineer .
Forms under arches pier caps or other special design conditions may be removed upon approval of the Engineer after the concrete attains of the minimum compressive strength as specified in Table .A .
The removal of forms and supports may begin when the concrete is found to have the required strength .
In no case shall the number of curing days be less than specified in Table .A .
Methods of form removal likely to cause overstressing of the concrete shall not be used .
Forms and their supports shall not be removed without approval .
Supports shall be removed in such a manner as to permit the concrete to uniformly and gradually take up the stresses due to its own dead load . .
PLACING CONCRETE .
a Workforce .
The Contractor shall always have sufficient skilled personnel during the concreting operations to properly place consolidate and finish the concrete .
If in the opinion of the Engineer the Contractor does not have sufficient skilled personnel to handle the concrete properly the Engineer may postpone the start of the concreting operations until the Contractor has remedied this situation .
b PrePlacement Meeting .
For deck pours or as required by the Engineer a preplacement meeting shall be scheduled by the Contractor to take place at least Calendar Days before concrete placement and prior to the Trial Pour if required .
Attendees at the preplacement meeting shall include but not be limited to the Contractors Project Superintendent the Engineer the Agencys Structural Concrete Engineer and the concrete producer .
The Contractor shall provide a placement plan that addresses but is not limited to the following topics Time of concrete placement and amount Batch plant testing Delivery of concrete Method of concrete placement on the deck Consolidation and finishing of concrete QC testing of the plastic concrete Curing of the concrete How to avoid long delays for balance loads Screed work bridge and rail setup Dry run schedule Contingency plans for long delays break downs weather events and other potential problems Crew size and responsibilities Available equipment Project layout including locations for all pumps cranes testing cleanouts staging etc .
c Placement Limitations .
All concrete shall be placed in daylight unless otherwise authorized in writing by the Engineer .
Authorization to place concrete at any other time shall not be given unless an adequate lighting system is provided prior to beginning the concrete placement operations .
Concrete shall not be placed under adverse environmental conditions that the Engineer determines will interfere with acceptable placement andor finishing operations .
Concrete shall not be placed until the depth and character of the foundation the apparent adequacy of the forms and falsework and the placing of the reinforcing steel have been approved by the Engineer .
The interior of the forms shall be clean of all debris before concrete is placed .
The Contractor shall submit to the Engineer a schedule of batching delivery and placement prior to the beginning of the concreting operations .
The Contractor shall comply with the requirements of Subsection .. Equipment and tools necessary for handling materials and performing all parts of the work shall meet the approval of the Engineer as to design capacity and mechanical condition and must be on the site before the work is started .
Any equipment in the judgment of the Engineer that proves inadequate to obtain results prescribed shall be improved or new equipment substituted or added .
The Engineer may suspend the pour or reject the pour if the Contractor deviates from the accepted pour plan which will also include unacceptable delivery rates .
The Contractor will not be allowed compensation due to the pour being suspended or rejected do to the Contractor deviating from the accepted pour plan or uncontrolled delivery rates .
For simple spans concrete should be deposited by beginning at the lower end of the span and working toward the upper end .
For continuous spans where required by design considerations the concrete placing sequence shall be as shown on the Plans .
Concrete shall not be deposited in the forms more than feet from its final position .
The dropping of unconfined concrete more than feet will not be permitted .
Concrete shall not be deposited in running water .
The rate of placing the concrete shall be so regulated that no excessive stresses are placed on the forms .
Concrete in all slabs decks girders or ribs of arches shall be placed in one continuous operation unless otherwise specified .
Concrete shall be placed in continuous horizontal layers the thickness of which shall not exceed inches unless otherwise directed by the Engineer .
Each succeeding layer shall be placed before the underlying layer has taken initial set and shall be consolidated in a manner that will eliminate any line of separation between the layers .
When it is necessary due to any emergency to place less than a complete horizontal layer at one operation such layer shall terminate in a vertical bulkhead .
After the concrete has taken its initial set care shall be exercised to avoid jarring the forms or placing any strain on the ends of projecting reinforcing bars .
Flowable fill shall be applied to voids and other locations as specified in the Contract Documents and as directed by the Engineer .
Flowable fill shall be able to completely fill the existing voids .
If voids are discovered the Engineer may direct the Contractor to submit a plan for filling the remaining voids .
This work including preparing and submitting the plan and filling any remaining voids will be at the Contractors expense .
d Placement of Overlays .
Unless otherwise shown on the Plans existing expansion joints and dams shall be maintained through the overlay .
A bulkhead equal in width to that of the joint shall be installed to the required grade and profile prior to placing the overlay material .
Expansion dam treatment shall be as shown on the Plans .
e Screed Rails .
Screed rails shall be placed and fastened in position to ensure finishing the new surface to the required profile .
Supporting rails shall be anchored in such a manner as to provide horizontal and vertical stability .
Screed rails shall not be placed to create a recess in the overlay surface and shall not be treated with form oil .
A construction dam or bulkhead shall be installed in case of major delay in placement .
During minor delays of one hour or less the end of the placement shall be protected from drying with several layers of wet burlap .
For a period of at least hours before the placement of overlay material the prepared surface shall be flooded with water .
After removal of all free water the overlay material shall be deposited on the damp surface and manipulated to coat the horizontal and vertical surfaces to be covered .
The rate of progress shall be controlled to prevent the drying of previously deposited material .
f Use of Chutes .
Chutes troughs and pipes used in placing concrete shall be arranged to avoid segregation of the materials and the displacement of the reinforcement and shall be approved by the Engineer .
Aluminum chutes troughs or pipes will not be permitted .
All chutes troughs and pipes shall be kept clean and free of hardened concrete by thoroughly flushing with water after each run .
Open troughs or chutes shall be either of metal or metallined and shall extend as nearly as possible to the point of deposit .
When the discharge must be intermittent a hopper or other device for regulating the discharge shall be provided .
Dropping of unconfined concrete more than feet or depositing a large quantity at any point and running or working it along the forms will not be permitted .
g Use of Vibrators .
Unless otherwise specified the concrete shall be consolidated with mechanical vibrators of an approved type and design operating within the concrete .
When required vibrating may be supplemented by handspading with suitable tools to ensure proper and adequate consolidation .
Vibrators shall be manipulated to work the concrete thoroughly around the reinforcement and imbedded fixtures and into corners and angles of the forms to produce surfaces free of imperfections .
Vibrators shall not be used to cause concrete to flow or run into position instead of placing .
The vibration at any point shall be of sufficient duration to accomplish consolidation but shall not be prolonged to the point where segregation occurs .
Vibrators shall have nonmetallic or rubbercoated heads .
Vibrating machines shall at no time be left running unattended in the concrete .
When it is necessary due to an emergency to discontinue the placing of a monolithic section the use of vibrators shall cease .
Vibrators shall not again be used until a sufficient depth of fresh concrete is placed to prevent any possibility of the effect of vibration on the concrete already in place and in no case shall this depth be less than feet .
The number of vibrators used shall be ample to consolidate the incoming concrete immediately after it is deposited in the form .
The Contractor shall have at least one spare vibrator in serviceable condition at the site of the structure in which more than cubic yards of concrete are to be placed .
The vibrators shall be capable of transmitting vibration to the concrete at frequencies of not less than impulses per minute under load .
The vibration shall be of sufficient intensity and duration to cause plasticity settlement and complete consolidation of the concrete without causing segregation .
The vibrator shall visibly affect a mass of concrete of inch slump over a radius of at least inches .
h Blasting Operations .
All blasting operations within feet of any concrete work shall be completed prior to the placement of the concrete .
Regardless of the above limitation on blasting operations the Contractor shall be responsible for any damage resulting from blasting operations. . DEPOSITING CONCRETE UNDER WATER .
a General .
Concrete shall not be deposited under water except as specified by the Contract Documents or upon approval of the Engineer and shall be subject to the following Specifications .
The Contractor shall submit for the Engineers review and acceptance a Portland cement concrete mix meeting all the submittal requirements outlined in Subsection .. Additional mix design requirements a .
The mix shall contain a minimum of pounds per cubic yard of cementitious material with a minimum of GGBFS substitution or a minimum of Fly Ash substitution or other approved mineral admixture substitution at an approved rate .
b .
Air content shall be . . unless any portion of this concrete shall be subjected to freezethaw conditions in which case the air content shall be .. c. The maximum WCM ratio shall be ..
When a waterreducing highrange admixture that meets the requirements of AASHTO M MM Type F or Type G has been included in the reviewed and accepted mix design the concrete shall not demonstrate segregation at the proposed slump as determined by the Engineer but at no time shall the slump be less than inches .
d. If needed for a cofferdam andor seal design the concrete shall provide a minimum day design strength of psi .
Otherwise minimum strength requirements for underwater concrete shall be as specified in the Contract Documents .
b Placement .
When placing concrete underwater the Contractor shall use a tremie or an alternate method of conveyance approved by the Engineer which minimizes the mixing of fresh concrete and water .
A tremie shall have a hopper at the top that empties into a watertight tube at least inches in diameter .
The discharge end of the tube on the tremie shall include a device to seal out water while the tube is first filled with concrete .
An inflatable ball will not be permitted .
The device shall keep its shape and float without danger of deflation .
The placement shall be continuous to the elevations shown on the Plans and the resulting concrete shall be monolithic and homogeneous .
Concrete shall not be deposited in water that has a temperature of F or below .
When the water temperature is between F and F the mixing water the aggregates or both shall be heated as specified in Subsection .b .
A tremie shall be constructed of heavygauge steel pipe and consist of watertight joints between the tremie sections with a diameter of not less than inches .
The tremie hopper shall have a capacity of at least cubic yard .
When a batch is dumped into the hopper the flow of the concrete shall be induced by slightly raising the discharge tube always keeping it in the concrete .
Tubes shall be kept continuously submerged in concrete during discharge .
The depth that the tube is submerged in concrete and the height of the concrete in the tube shall be sufficient to prevent water from entering the tube .
The Contractor shall continuously monitor the difference in elevation between the top of the concrete and the end of the discharge tube .
Horizontal movement of discharge tubes through the concrete will not be allowed .
For minor quantities at the sole discretion of the Engineer a direct pumping method may be approved .
If a direct pumping method is to be implemented the pipe discharging the concrete shall consist of heavygauge steel sections .
The Contractor shall demonstrate the ability to pump the concrete without the pump line surging or otherwise moving in the water as concrete is being pumped .
Cylinders cured as field cure shall be cured at the same temperature as the water covering the concrete. . PUMPING .
Where concrete is conveyed and placed by mechanicallyapplied pressure the equipment shall be suitable in kind and adequate in capacity for the work .
The pump shall be capable of pumping concrete within the specified slump limits .
The use of aluminum pipe as a conveyance for the concrete will not be permitted .
The operation of the pump shall be such that a continuous stream of concrete without air pockets is produced .
When pumping is completed the concrete remaining in the pipeline if it is to be used shall be ejected in such a manner that there will be no contamination of the concrete or separation of the ingredients .
The equipment shall be arranged so that no resulting vibrations may damage freshly placed concrete .
The pumping of Class LW concrete shall not be permitted. . CONSTRUCTION JOINTS .
a Construction Joint Locations .
Joints shall be formed at the location shown on the Plans .
Any variation or new location of joints shall require written permission of the Engineer .
Feather edges at construction joints will not be permitted .
Joints shall be formed with inset form work so that each layer of concrete will have a thickness of not less than inches .
b Joining Fresh Concrete to Previously Set Concrete .
When joining fresh concrete to concrete that has hardened the surface of the set concrete shall be roughened in a manner that will not leave loosened particles or damaged concrete at the surface and be thoroughly cleaned of all laitance loose and foreign material .
Immediately prior to placing of the new concrete the surface shall be saturated with water .
When shown on the Plans or ordered by the Engineer the surface shall be thoroughly coated with a very thin coating of mortar neat cement grout or approved bonding agent and all forms drawn tight against the face of the concrete .
This coating shall not be allowed to dry out before being covered with fresh concrete .
c Keys .
Suitable keys shall be formed at construction joints .
Unless otherwise directed by the Engineer these keys shall be of the type and detail shown on the Plans .
d Filled Construction Joints .
Filled construction joints shall contain a preformed cork joint filler or other preformed joint filler that may be shown in the Contract Documents .
Joint filler shall be cut to fit exactly and shall completely fill the space that is shown on the Plans .
Where a pour grade or caulking grade filler is indicated to be used in the joints that portion of the joint to be filled shall be formed with a separate material other than the preformed joint filler that can easily be removed prior to placement of the above indicated filler .
e Water Stops .
Approved water stops shall be placed at locations shown on the Plans .
They shall form continuous watertight joints .
f Bond Breakers .
Bond breakers shall be made from asphalttreated felt pipe insulation or tar emulsion as shown on the Plans . .
EXPANSION JOINTS .
All expansion joints shall be constructed according to details shown on the Plans .
a Filled Compression and Expansion Joints .
Filled compression and expansion joints shall be made with a preformed selfexpanding cork joint filler or other preformed joint filler that may be shown in the Contract Documents .
Joint filler shall be cut to fit exactly and shall completely fill the space that is shown on the Plans .
Where a pour grade or caulking grade filler is indicated to be used in the joint that portion of the joint to be filled shall be formed with a separate material other than the expansion joint filler that can easily be removed prior to placement of the above indicated filler .
b Special Types of Expansion Joints .
Special types of expansion joints may be used when shown on the Plans or ordered by the Engineer. . PATCHING .
Patching of existing concrete shall be accomplished with the type of material shown on the Plans .
Type IV mortar shall be used where a nonshrink or expansive mortar is shown on the Plans .
Patching of new concrete shall be as specified in Subsection .a . .
CONCRETE FINISHING .
a General .
Unless otherwise specified the surface of the concrete shall be finished immediately after form removal .
All concrete surfaces shall be given a dressed finish .
If further finishing is required exposed surfaces shall be given a rubbed finish .
Other finish classes may be shown on the Plans for designated surfaces .
Dressed Finish .
The dressed concrete finish work shall begin within hours after removal of forms and shall continue until completed .
All fins and irregular projections shall be removed from all surfaces except from those that are not to be exposed .
On all surfaces the cavities produced by form ties and all other holes honeycomb spots broken corners or edges and other defects shall be thoroughly cleaned saturated with water and carefully pointed and trued with a mortar composed of the same type of cement and fine aggregate and mixed in the same proportions used in the grade of the concrete being finished .
Mortar used in pointing shall be not more than one hour old .
The mortar patches shall be cured a minimum of hours in accordance with Subsection .. All construction and expansion joints in the completed work shall be left carefully tooled and free of all mortar and concrete .
The joint shall be left exposed to its full length with clean and true edges .
All surfaces that can not be repaired to the satisfaction of the Engineer shall be rubbed as specified for a Rubbed Finish .
Rubbed Finish .
After removal of forms the rubbing of concrete shall be started as soon as its condition will permit .
Immediately before starting this work the concrete shall be kept thoroughly saturated with water .
Sufficient time shall have elapsed before the wetting down to allow the mortar used in the pointing to thoroughly set .
Surfaces to be finished shall be rubbed with a mediumcoarse carborundum stone using a small amount of mortar on its face .
The mortar shall be composed of the same type of cement and fine sand mixed in proportions used in the concrete being finished .
Rubbing shall be continued until all form marks projections and irregularities have been removed all voids filled and a uniform surface has been obtained .
The paste produced by this rubbing shall be left in place .
After all concrete above the surface being treated has been cast the final finish shall be obtained by rubbing with a fine carborundum stone and water .
This rubbing shall be continued until the entire surface is of a smooth texture and uniform color .
After the final rubbing is completed and the surface has dried it shall be rubbed with burlap to remove loose powder and shall be left free from all unsound patches paste powder and objectionable marks .
Float Finish .
A float finish for horizontal surfaces shall be achieved by placing an excess of material in the form and removing or striking off the excess with a template forcing the coarse aggregate below the mortar surface .
Creation of concave surfaces shall be avoided .
After the concrete has been struck off the surface shall be made uniform by longitudinal or transverse floating .
When the concrete has hardened sufficiently the surface shall be given a broom finish burlap drag finish or left smooth as determined by the Engineer .
b Finishing Bridge Deck .
General .
The Contractor shall follow the procedures and details for placing the deck in accordance with the preplacement meeting .
The procedure shall provide for adequate labor equipment and material supply to complete placement of concrete on the entire deck or specified portion thereof .
If during the placement unforeseen circumstances delay the progression of the pour to a point where the concrete begins to lose plasticity the Contractor shall be prepared to place a bulkhead as directed by the Engineer .
A finishing machine shall be provided on all decks constructed with Class LW concrete regardless of length .
Approval of the method and equipment will not relieve the Contractor of full responsibility for obtaining the required surface finish .
Finishing shall continue until there remains no deviation greater than inch when tested for trueness with a metal straightedge at least feet in length .
The Contractor shall furnish the straightedge .
When a bituminous concrete surface is to be placed on a bridge deck the deviation shall be not greater than inch .
When a sheet membrane is being applied sharp ridges shall not be allowed .
Immediately after finishing has been completed and as soon as all excess moisture has disappeared the bridge deck shall be textured as specified in the Plans .
Where bridge deck finish is not specified it shall be textured to a uniform gritty surface using a burlap felt or other drag satisfactory to the Engineer .
Sidewalks and safety curbs shall receive their final finish with a fine bristled broom .
If the bridge deck concrete does not meet the above smoothness requirements the Contractor shall remove high spots up to inch high by means of grinding .
Any other corrections shall be made only with the written approval of the Engineer .
The use of bush hammers will not be allowed .
No concrete shall be removed that will result in a concrete slab thickness less than that shown on the Plans .
Any deck that can not be corrected by a method satisfactory to the Engineer shall be removed and replaced at the Contractors expense .
Overall Length of Bridge Over Feet .
Bridge floors over feet in length or any deck using Class LW concrete shall be struck off and finished by an approved selfpropelled finishing machine .
This machine will be supported on suitable rails and equipped with adjustable strikeoff or finishing screeds capable of producing the required finish surface for the full width of the bridge from facetoface of curbs .
Machines shall not be used until proper adjustments have been made and the adjustments have been checked and approved by the Engineer .
Machines shall be kept in true adjustment for the duration of the deck placement .
Sufficient time shall be provided prior to beginning concreting operations for the finishing machine to be operated over the full length of the bridge deck segment to be placed .
This test run shall be made with the screed adjusted to its finishing position .
While operating the finishing machine in this test the screed rails shall be checked for deflection and proper adjustment the cover on slab reinforcement measured and the controlling dimensions of slab reinforcement and forms checked .
After the concrete has been placed it shall be struck off by a selfpropelled finishing machine and the operation repeated as necessary to produce a uniformly consolidated dense smooth surface .
The final passage of the finishing machine shall result in a uniform surface at the required grade and slope over its entire area .
At any time the screed machine does not advance in a minute period due to delayed concrete delivery mechanical breakdown or other problem the Contractor shall immediately cover concrete that is under the screed machine past the leading edge of the concrete with wet burlap .
Just before concrete placement is to begin the burlap will be removed the screed machine will be moved back fresh concrete added to the area that was directly under the screed to the leading edge and this area will be vibrated again .
The screed machine may then be advanced forward to continue the placement .
The Contractor shall furnish a work bridge or bridges of an approved type capable of spanning the entire width of the deck and supporting construction loads without deflection to the concrete slab surface .
Overall Length of Bridge Feet and Less .
Screed rails shall be rigidly set to grade and supported sufficiently on adjustable chairs to allow no deflection in the rails under operating conditions .
Screed guides or chairs shall be supported on structural members where possible .
Sufficient screed rails shall be provided so that all rails necessary for any one continuous pour may be preset and graded before the start of concreting operations .
The removal of screed rails and exposed chairs shall be accomplished without walking in the fresh concrete .
The Contractor shall furnish a minimum of one work bridge of an approved type capable of spanning the entire width of the deck and supporting construction loads without deflection to the concrete slab surface .
After the concrete is placed it shall be struck off by one of the following methods a .
A selfpropelled concrete finishing machine used as specified in Subsection .b for concrete finishing on bridges longer than feet .
b .
A straight steel roller with a minimum diameter of inches at least inches longer than the distance between screed strips and equipped with handles at each end which shall be rolled back and forth until the surface is smooth and even with all holes filled .
c. An approved mechanical vibrating screed exerting a force of not less than pounds per foot the vibrations of which shall be of not less than vibrations per minute when checked by a vibration reedtype tester uniform throughout its entire length and adjusted so as not to drive the aggregate more than inch below the surface .
d. An approved wood metalshod template fitted with handles .
If satisfactory results are not obtained with the type of screed selected the Engineer may direct the use of another type of screed .
After the preliminary screeding floats shall be operated with a combined longitudinal and transverse motion planing off the high areas and floating the material removed into the low areas .
Each pass shall lap the previous pass by of the length of the float. . CURING CONCRETE .
a General .
Water for use in curing concrete shall conform to the requirements of Subsection ..
The effective cure time shall be only the time that the concrete has been maintained in a wet condition with the concrete surface temperature above F. If the concrete is not maintained in a wet condition andor the concrete surface temperature drops below F it shall not be counted as an effective cure time .
The cure period will be extended hours for every hour the concrete is below F beginning when the concrete temperature is raised to or exceeds the minimum curing temperature .
Regardless of the curing medium specified the entire surface of the newly placed concrete shall be kept damp .
This shall be achieved by applying water with a nozzle that atomizes the flow so that a mist and not a spray is formed .
The moisture shall not be applied under pressure directly upon the concrete and shall not be allowed to accumulate in a quantity sufficient to cause a flow or washing of the surface .
The atomized flow shall be applied continuously until the surfaces can be covered by the specified curing mediums .
For bridge barriers curbs and sidewalks the curing method shall be applied within minutes of the completion of the finishing process .
For bridge decks the curing method shall promptly follow the screed machine within a maximum lag time of minutes and without interruption .
Concrete components shall be cured for the times specified in Table .A .
TABLE .A CURING TIMES FOR CONCRETE COMPONENTS Type of Construction Curing Methods Subsection Effective Cure Time Days Substructure .b Superstructure .b Retaining walls .b Headwalls .b Sidewalks curbs and gutters .b There shall be no activity on the superstructure during the cure period b Curing Methods .
All exposed surfaces of newly placed concrete shall be cured by one of the following specified methods Water Curing .
Curing with water shall be by continuously sprinkling or flooding of all exposed surfaces for the entire required curing period .
Burlap Curing .
The entire exposed surface of the concrete shall be covered with two layers of approved burlap that has been presoaked with water .
The burlap shall then be covered with a lapped layer of white polyethylene sheeting .
Once the concrete superstructure has hardened sufficiently a stream of water applied with a soaker hose or similar device shall be run continuously under the polyethylene sheeting until the cure period is complete .
Sand Cover .
The entire exposed surface of the concrete shall be covered with at least inches of approved sand that shall be kept wet for the entire curing period .
White Polyethylene Sheeting .
The entire exposed surface of the concrete shall be covered with a blanket of white polyethylene sheeting maintained and fastened to provide a nearly airtight condition in contact with the surface where possible .
If in the opinion of the Engineer this cover is not adequately provided or maintained to ensure the proper conditions for the concrete cure then the white polyethylene sheeting cure shall be terminated and another method substituted .
White BurlapPolyethylene Sheeting .
The entire exposed surface of the concrete shall be covered with a blanket of white burlappolyethylene sheeting .
The burlap shall be thoroughly dampened prior to placing and shall be placed next to the concrete .
All joints shall be lapped a minimum of inches .
The burlap shall be kept damp throughout the curing period .
MembraneForming Curing Compounds .
Whitepigmented or fugitivedye membrane forming curing compounds may be used for curing concrete in minor drainage structures .
All other uses of curing compounds shall be approved in writing by the Engineer .
Only membraneforming curing compounds approved by the Agencys Materials Section may be used .
When membrane curing is used the exposed concrete shall be thoroughly sealed immediately after the free water has left the surface .
The concrete inside the forms shall be sealed immediately after the forms are removed and necessary finishing has been done .
The solution shall be applied in one or two separate applications .
If the solution is applied in two increments the second application shall follow the first application within minutes .
Satisfactory equipment shall be provided together with means to properly control and ensure the direct application of the curing solution to the concrete surface to result in a uniform coverage of the surface area at the rate of gallon of solution for every square feet .
If rain falls on the newlycoated concrete before the film has dried sufficiently to resist damage or if the film is damaged in any other manner a new coat of the solution shall be applied to the affected portions equal in curing value to that specified above .
Should the surface be subject to continuous injury or the use of curing compound results in a streaked or blotchy appearance the method shall be stopped and water curing applied .
White Polyethylene Sheeting with Sand Cover .
This method may be used only when approved by the Engineer and shall conform to the requirements of Subsection .b .
The airtight condition shall be obtained by the addition of a uniform sand cover with a minimum depth of inches .
PreDampened Cotton Mats .
The entire exposed surface of the concrete shall be covered with a blanket of cotton mats that has been predampened with water .
The mats shall be maintained in a damp condition until the curing period is complete .
Bridge Decks .
For bridge decks the curing method shall promptly follow the screed machine within a maximum lag time of minutes and without interruption .
If this lag time can not be met then fogging of the area shall be performed in a manner that keeps the relative humidity above the evaporation rate of the concrete surface but not so excessive that water begins to collect on the surface prior to texturing or other surface manipulating procedures .
If in the opinion of the Engineer the Contractors curing procedure is not producing an adequate cure the Engineer may direct a change in the cure method at no additional cost to the Agency. . LOADING OF CONCRETE .
After the concrete has been placed and the finishing operations concluded it shall not be walked on or disturbed in any manner including removal of forms for a minimum period of hours .
If retarder is used as an admixture this minimum period may be extended as directed by the Engineer .
a Substructure .
No backfill material shall be placed against a newly completed structure until the concrete has been cured in accordance with Table .A and until the field cured test cylinders have attained of the compressive strength specified in Table .A .
However the Contractor may erect forms for subsequent concrete placement on footings after hours have elapsed from the time that the footing placement was completed provided the concrete has sufficient strength to allow it to be worked on without damage and proper cure is maintained .
Static loads such as forms reinforcing steel or other materials necessary for construction may be placed on any concrete after it has been in place hours or a compressive strength of pounds per square inch has been obtained provided proper curing is maintained .
Superimposed loads from subsequent concrete pours will not be allowed on any substructure unit or section in place until the field cured test cylinders have attained of the compressive strength specified by Table .A and provided curing of the supporting section is maintained in accordance with Table .A .
b Superstructure .
Static loads such as forms granite curbing castinplace concrete curb and other materials necessary for deck construction shall not be placed on deck concrete until the effective cure time specified in Table .A is complete and the fieldcured test cylinders for this concrete have attained of the compressive strength specified in Table .A .
c The Contractor shall keep bridge floors free of all motor vehicles transit mixers and heavy construction equipment until the curing period is satisfactorily completed the fieldcured test cylinders for the bridge floor concrete have attained the compressive strength specified in Table .A and the fieldcured test cylinders for the curb concrete have attained of the compressive strength specified in Table .A .
d Vertical Joints .
Concrete shall not be placed against a vertical construction joint until the previously placed concrete has been in place a minimum of hours .
The Contractor must not allow loads that are in excess of the legal loads permitted by the laws of the State to travel over the completed structure except with written permission of the Engineer .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT .
The quantity of Concrete Class AA A B C D LW or Controlled Density Flowable Fill to be measured for payment will be the number of cubic yards of the class of concrete specified in the complete and accepted work as determined by the prismoidal method using dimensions shown on the Plans or as directed by the Engineer including the volume of superstructure precast concrete stayinplace forms but excluding the volume of steel or other stayinplace forms and form filling materials .
No deductions will be made for the volume of concrete displaced by steel reinforcement structural steel expansion joint material scuppers weep holes conduits tops of piles scoring chamfers or corners inset panels of inches or less in depth or any pipe less than inches in diameter .
The quantity of Mortar Type I or Mortar Type IV to be measured for payment will be the number of cubic yards of the type of mortar specified in the complete and accepted work .
The number of cubic yards will be based on sack count of cement used .
One cubic yard of Type I or Type IV mortar is considered equivalent to pounds of Portland cement . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT .
The accepted quantity of Concrete of the class specified Mortar of the type specified or Controlled Density Flowable Fill will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per cubic yard .
Payment will be full compensation for performing the work specified including designing the mix satisfactory finishing and curing and for furnishing all forms materials including joint filler and bond breaker labor tools admixtures equipment including automatic temperature recording units trial batches and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
The cost of heating materials and protecting the concrete against cold weather and any additional cost for cement will not be paid for separately but will be considered incidental to the Contract Unit Prices for Section Pay Items .
The cost of furnishing testing facilities and supplies at the batch plant and the setting of inserts benchmarks and bridge plaques furnished by the Agency will not be paid for separately but will be considered incidental to the Contract Unit Price of structural concrete .
Costs for all materials labor and incidentals for steel or other stayinplace forms and form filling materials will not be paid for separately but will be considered incidental to the Contract Unit Prices for concrete .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Concrete Class AA Cubic Yard .
Concrete Class A Cubic Yard .
Concrete Class B Cubic Yard .
Concrete Class C Cubic Yard .
Concrete Class D Cubic Yard .
Concrete Class LW Cubic Yard .
Controlled Density Flowable Fill Cubic Yard .
Mortar Type I Cubic Yard .
Mortar Type IV Cubic Yard SECTION THIS SECTION RESERVED SECTION CONTRACTORFABRICATED PRECAST CONCRETE STRUCTURE .
DESCRIPTION .
This work shall consist of manufacturing transporting handling and erecting precast concrete structure components fabricated by the Contractor at a location other than a Precast Concrete Institute PCI or National Precast Concrete Association NPCA certified precast concrete facility. . MATERIALS .
Materials shall meet the material requirements specified in Subsection .
Subsection .
and Subsection ..
Concrete shall meet the material requirements specified in Subsection .. . GENERAL FABRICATION REQUIREMENTS .
Unless noted otherwise herein Contractor Fabricated Precast Concrete CFPC shall meet the requirements of Section Section and Section . . SUBMITTALS .
As soon as practical after award of the Contract all required information shall be prepared and submitted .
Fabrication Drawings mix designs and erection plans shall be submitted as separate submittals .
If the Contractor proposes a different configuration than what is provided in the Contract Plans then a complete copy of the structural design calculations for the CFPC shall be submitted accompanying the Construction Drawings in accordance with Section .
The design calculations shall substantiate that the proposed precast concrete satisfies the design parameters of the Contract .
The applicable design code will be the latest edition of the AASHTO LRFD Bridge Design Specifications unless indicated otherwise in the Contract Documents .
Fabrication Drawings for the precast concrete shall be submitted in accordance with Section .
In addition to the requirements for Fabrication Drawings in Section the following shall be included a The concrete mix design in accordance with Subsection .a b Dimensions and tolerances of the sections to be fabricated c The location of reinforcing steel splices welded wire fabric mechanical bar connectors and inserts .
Reinforcing steel material lists material designations and bending details d The type of surface finish and how the finish will be obtained e The curing method detailing sequence and duration in accordance with the requirements of Subsection .
f The minimum required concrete strength for form removal g The design of the lifting attachments including the minimum required concrete strength to allow lifting .
A Professional Engineer registered in the State of Vermont shall stamp calculations .
h Transportation handling and storage details along with calculations to substantiate the proposed CFPC units will not be crackeddamaged by handling andor transport .
A Professional Engineer registered in the State of Vermont shall stamp calculations .
i The installation procedures including a detailed grouting procedure .
INSPECTION .
Materials furnished and the work performed herein shall be inspected by the Agency .
The Agency will test all concrete incorporated into the work in accordance with Section .
The Inspector shall have the authority to reject any material or work that does not meet the requirements of the Specifications .
Advance notification of at least weeks shall be provided by the Contractor to the Agencys Engineer and the Structural Concrete Engineer concerning the proposed intention to commence work .
A minimum notification of Working Days shall be provided by the Contractor to the Agencys Engineer and the Structural Concrete Engineer to confirm the fabrication start date .
Prior to placing any precast concrete elements produced under these Specifications all materials shall have all applicable certifications approved in accordance with Subsection .. .
FABRICATION .
a Forming Members .
Forms and formwork shall meet the requirements of Subsection .. b Reinforcing Steel .
Bar reinforcement shall be furnished and installed as per Section .
c PreProduction Meeting .
Unless the Engineer deems in writing that a preproduction meeting is unnecessary then a pre production meeting shall be held a minimum of Calendar Days prior to beginning concrete placement .
The preproduction meeting shall be attended by as a minimum but not limited to the Crew Supervisor Contractor Project Manager Concrete Producer Resident Engineer Construction Structures Engineer and Project Manager .
d Placing Concrete .
Concrete placement shall be in accordance with Subsection .
and as specified herein .
Concrete shall not be deposited in the forms until the appropriate Agency representative has approved placement of the reinforcement conduits and anchorages .
e Curing .
Curing shall meet the requirements of Subsection .. f Removal of Forms .
Forms shall not be removed until the curing period has ended .
g Concrete Finishing .
Finishing shall conform to the requirements of Subsection .. h RepairsPatching .
CFPC structure components that contain minor defects caused by manufacture or handling may be repaired at the manufacturing site .
Minor defects are defined as holes honeycombing or spalls which are inches or less in diameter and that do not penetrate deeper than inch into the concrete .
Surface voids or bug holes that are less than inch in diameter and less than inch deep need not be repaired .
Repairs shall be made using a material from the Agencys Approved Products List for overhead and vertical concrete repair .
The repair material shall be cured as specified by the manufacturer .
Repairs shall be approved by the Engineer .
i Cracking .
Cracks less than .
inch in width shall be sealed by a method approved by the Engineer .
Cracks in excess of .
inch may be cause for rejection .
At the Engineers discretion cracked CFPC structure components shall be repaired or replaced at the Contractors expense .
j Dimensional Tolerances .
All tolerances shall be in accordance with the latest editions of both PCI MNL Manual for Quality Control for Plants and Production of Precast and Prestressed Concrete Products and PCI MNL Tolerance Manual for Precast and Prestressed Concrete Construction or with the National Precast Concrete Association NPCA Quality Control Manual for Precast Concrete unless otherwise noted in the Contract Documents or as approved by the Engineer .
k Marking .
The date of manufacture the production lot number and the piece mark shall be clearly marked on each individual piece of precast concrete .
The mark shall be in a location that will not be visible in the finished product .
l Production Site Handling .
Units shall not be lifted moved or otherwise disturbed until the curing period is complete and the concrete has reached the minimum compressive strength required for lifting per the approved lifting attachment design. . HANDLING STORAGE AND SHIPPING .
Each CFPC structure shall be handled stored and shipped in such a manner as to minimize chipping cracks fractures discoloration and excessive bending stresses .
A unit damaged by handling storage or shipping shall be replaced at the Contractors expense .
A CFPC structure shall not be installed until the respective unit has been inspected .
This inspection shall verify that the pieces are free from defects and that all Specification requirements including but not limited to those for compressive strength and tolerance requirements have been achieved .
In addition a CFPC structure will not be considered for shipment until the completion of the cure period and the required strength has been attained as demonstrated by field cured cylinder breaks .
Field cured test cylinders for production site handling and shipping strength verification purposes shall be tested either at the Agencys Materials Section Central Laboratory or at an independent Laboratory approved by the Engineer .
An Agency representative shall witness all tests .
If an independent Laboratory is proposed to be used to test the field cured cylinders the Contractor shall submit documentation providing verification for the following a Calibration of the compression machine in accordance with of ASTM C C M Section b Compression machine meets the requirements of ASTM C C M c Proficiency of the technician who will be performing the test methods The State at any time reserves the right to perform an independent proficiency of the technician for the test methods used and review of the testing facility . .
INSTALLATION METHODS EQUIPMENT AND ERECTION .
Cranes lifting devices and other equipment for CFPC structure erection shall be of adequate design and capacity to safely erect align and secure all members and components in their final positions without damage .
The Contractor is solely responsible for the methods and equipment employed for the erection of the CFPC structure components .
Construction Drawings for CFPC structure component erection shall be submitted in accordance with Section .
The erection plan shall include the necessary computations to indicate the magnitude of stress in the units during erection and to demonstrate that all of the erection equipment has adequate capacity for the work to be performed and provisions for all stages of construction including temporary stoppages .
Post tensioning shall comply with Subsection .. Submittal of the erection plan is for the Agencys documentation only and shall in no way be construed as approval of the proposed method of erection .
The Contractor shall follow the erection plan as accepted. . GROUT .
Grout shall be placed in accordance with the requirements of Subsection .. .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT .
The quantity of ContractorFabricated Precast Concrete Structure of the type and size specified to be measured for payment shall be on a lump sum basis .
The lump sum shall include all of the CFPC structure components in the complete and accepted work for each location specified in the Contract . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT .
The accepted quantity of ContractorFabricated Precast Concrete Structure of the type and size specified will be paid for at the Contract lump sum price .
Payment shall be full compensation for designing detailing fabricating repairing transporting handling and erecting the materials specified for furnishing and implementing the erection plan and for furnishing all labor tools equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
Any grouting work such as fairing out unevenness between adjacent precast concrete structure components and filling leveling screw holes shear keys transverse anchor recesses and dowel holes is considered incidental to the work for ContractorFabricated Precast Concrete Structure .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
ContractorFabricated Precast Concrete Structure Lump Sum SECTION PREFABRICATED BRIDGE UNIT SUPERSTRUCTURE .
DESCRIPTION .
This work shall consist of manufacturing transporting and erecting concretesteel composite Prefabricated Bridge Units PBUs as shown on the Plans .
The work under this Section shall be performed in accordance with these provisions the Plans and Section Section Section and Section . . MATERIALS .
Materials shall meet the material requirements specified in Subsection .
Subsection .
Subsection .
Subsection .
and the following Subsections Concrete Repair Material . . GENERAL FABRICATION REQUIREMENTS .
The structural steel furnished under this Section shall be fabricated in a plant meeting the requirements of Subsection .. After fabrication the structural steel shall be transported to a location approved by the Agency where the steel will be shop galvanizedmetallizedpainted or where the remainder of the composite superstructure unit shall be fabricated .
The fabricator or Contractor constructing the reinforced concrete portion of the PBUs shall have demonstrated experience in forming casting curing and finishing High Performance Concrete superstructure decks in accordance with Section . . SUBMITTALS .
As soon as practical after award of the Contract all required information shall be prepared and submitted .
Fabrication Drawings and erection plans shall be submitted as separate submittals .
Fabrication Drawings for the PBUs shall be submitted in accordance with Section .
In addition to the requirements for Fabrication Drawings in Section the following shall be included a Structural steel In accordance with Subsection .
b Concrete Dimensions and tolerances of the sections to be fabricated The location of reinforcing steel splices welded wire fabric mechanical bar connectors and inserts The type of surface finish and how the finish will be obtained The curing method detailing sequence and duration in accordance with the requirements of Subsection .
c Reinforcing steel Material lists material designations and bending details d Temporary assembly plan and procedure e Temporary support elevations f Method of supporting the screed g The design of the lifting attachments .
A Professional Engineer registered in the State of Vermont shall stamp calculations .
h Transportation handling and storage details along with calculations to substantiate that the PBUs will not be crackeddamaged by handling andor transport .
A Professional Engineer registered in the State of Vermont shall all stamp calculations . .
INSPECTION .
Structural steel shall be inspected by the Agency in accordance with Subsection .
and Section .
Concrete elements furnished and the work performed herein shall be inspected by the Agency .
The Inspector shall have the authority to reject any material or work that does not meet the requirements of these Specifications .
Advance notification of at least weeks must be provided by the Contractor to the Agencys Engineer and the Structural Concrete Engineer concerning the proposed intention to commence work .
A minimum notification of Working Days shall be provided by the Contractor to the Agencys Engineer and the Structural Concrete Engineer to confirm the fabrication start date .
Prior to placing any concrete elements produced under these Specifications all materials shall have all applicable certifications approved in accordance with Subsection .. .
FABRICATION .
a Forming Members .
Forms and formwork shall meet the requirements of Subsection ..
Relative bearing elevations shall be within .
feet of that shown on the Plans .
b Structural Steel .
Structural steel shall be fabricated in conformance with Section .
All diaphragms shown on the Plans shall be installed prior to placing any concrete formwork .
c Welding .
All welding shall conform to the requirements of Subsection .. d Reinforcing Steel .
Bar reinforcement shall be furnished and installed in conformance with Section .
e Concrete .
Concrete mix and proportioning shall meet the requirements of Subsection .
for High Performance Concrete Class PCD .
Concrete shall be produced and tested in accordance with Subsection .
through Subsection .. f PreProduction Meeting .
Unless the Engineer deems in writing that a preproduction meeting is unnecessary then a pre production meeting shall be held a minimum of Calendar Days prior to beginning concrete placement .
The preproduction meeting shall be attended by but not be limited to the Crew Supervisor Contractor Project Manager Concrete Producer Resident Engineer Construction Structures Engineer and Project Manager .
g Placing Concrete .
Concrete placement shall conform to the requirements of Subsection ..
Concrete shall not be deposited in the forms until the Agency representative has approved placement of the reinforcement and inserts .
The concrete shall be vibrated internally externally or a combination thereof to the required consolidation .
The vibrating shall be done with care and in such a manner that Concrete is uniformly consolidated Displacement of reinforcement and inserts is avoided Acceptable finish surfaces are produced h Curing .
Curing shall meet the requirements of Subsection .. i Removal of Forms .
Forms shall not be removed until the curing period has ended .
j Concrete Finishing .
Finishing shall conform to the requirements of Subsection .. k Dimensional Tolerances .
Geometry of PBU .
a .
Length each unit inch Adjacent unit lengths shall not vary by more than inch b. Width inch c. Deck thickness inch inch d. Deviation from diagonals inch horizontal e. Deviation from end squareness or skew inch horizontal f. Girder spacing inch within a unit g. Horizontal alignment inch Deviation from straight line parallel to the centerline of the unit h. Insert location inch Reinforcing .
a. Spacing inch noncumulative b .
Cover Top and bottom mat inch Field Installation .
a. Vertical deviation between units prior to closure pour concrete placement shall not exceed inch .
b. Deviation in joint width between units shall be inch .
l Acceptance of Units .
Individual precast units will not be accepted for any of the following reasons Fractures or cracks passing through the deck Camber that does not meet the requirements in the approved Fabrication Drawings Honeycombed open texture Dimensions not within the allowable tolerances as specified Separation of the concrete deck from the steel girders Defects that indicate proportioning mixing and molding not in compliance with the Specifications Damaged ends where such damage would prevent making a satisfactory joint Units with cracks within any part of the concrete that are greater than .
inches in width Significant damage to the units during transportation erection or construction as determined by the Engineer Units not fabricated in accordance with the Contract Documents m RepairingPatching .
Units that contain minor defects caused by manufacture or handling may be repaired at the manufacturing site .
Minor defects are defined as holes honeycombing or spalls which are inches or less in diameter and do not penetrate deeper than inch into the concrete .
Surface voids or bug holes that are less than inch in diameter and less than inch deep need not be repaired .
Repairs shall be made using an overhead and vertical concrete repair material satisfactory to the Engineer .
The repair material shall be cured as specified by the manufacturer .
Repairs shall be approved by the Engineer .
n Cracking .
Crack widths less than .
inch in width shall be sealed with a penetrating sealer using Agency approved materials and procedures .
Crack widths measuring .
inch to .
inch in width shall be epoxy injected using Agency approved materials and procedures .
At the Engineers discretion cracked members shall be repaired or replaced at the Contractors expense .
o Labeling .
Each unit shall be clearly and permanently labeled on the underside of the deck in the vicinity of the upstation end diaphragm with the following information Manufacturer Date of manufacture Mark number p Production Site Handling .
Units shall not be lifted moved or otherwise disturbed until the curing period is complete and the concrete has reached full design strength .
q PreAssembly .
The units shall be preassembled at the fabrication location to assure proper match between adjacent units before shipping to the Project site to the satisfaction of the Agency .
r Shipping .
Units shall not be shipped until the minimum day strength is attained and they have been stamped by the Agency .
A hour advance notice of the loading and shipping schedule shall be provided to the Engineer .
The units shall be secured on the vehicle in order that no fatigue cracking will occur during transport .
The Contractor shall secure the necessary hauling permits. . HANDLING .
PBUs shall be handled stored and shipped in such a manner as to minimize chipping cracks fractures discoloration and excessive bending stresses .
Units damaged by handling storage or shipping shall be replaced at the Contractors expense .
Field cured test cylinders for production site handling and shipping strength verification purposes shall be tested either at the Agencys Materials Section Central Laboratory or at an independent Laboratory approved by the Engineer .
An Agency representative shall witness all tests .
If an independent lab is proposed to be used to test the field cured cylinders the Contractor shall submit documentation providing verification for the following a Calibration of the compression machine in accordance with ASTM C C M Section b Compression machine meets the requirements of ASTM C C M c Proficiency of the technician who will be performing the test methods The State at any time reserves the right to perform an independent proficiency of the technician for the test methods used and review of the testing facility . .
INSTALLATION .
a General .
The PBUs shall be fabricated in accordance with the applicable Sections of the Specifications for each respective item .
Construction procedures and permissible variations other than those contained herein shall be submitted for approval .
b Erection Plan .
Cranes lifting devices and other equipment for erecting PBUs shall be of adequate design and capacity to safely erect align and secure all members and components in their final positions without damage .
The Contractor is solely responsible for the methods and equipment employed for the erection of the PBUs .
The Contractor shall submit Construction Drawings in accordance with Section for the methods and sequence of PBU erection the temporary bracing and the equipment to be used for the erection .
The erection plan shall include the necessary computations to indicate the magnitude of stress in the segments during erection and to demonstrate that all of the erection equipment has adequate capacity for the work to be performed .
The erection plan shall contain provisions for all stages of construction including temporary stoppages .
The PBUs may be used to support equipment prior to placement of the closure pour concrete only with written permission of the Engineer .
The proposed use of the PBUs for support of equipment shall be detailed in the erection plan .
Submittal of the erection plan is for the Agencys information only and shall in no way be construed as approval of the proposed method of erection .
Unless otherwise directed by the Engineer the Contractor shall follow the erection plan as submitted .
c Erection of Units .
Erection of units shall not proceed until substructure concrete has been cured for the minimum length of time specified in the Plans or appropriate Specifications .
Units shall be installed to the correct line and grade as shown on the approved drawings and as indicated in the approved erection procedure .
Prior to setting units and to avoid torsion stresses bearing elevations within a given PBU shall be adjusted to match relative elevations used during the deck casting operations .
After all the units are erected they shall be inspected to ensure the correctness of their location .
d Matching Elevation of Units During Erection .
Adjacent units shall match elevation within inch vertically along longitudinal edges and inch vertically at the end of units .
e Filling and Sealing Longitudinal Joints .
Prior to placement of closure pour concrete or grout material the surface of the joint shall be free of any material such as oil grease or dirt which may prevent bonding of the sealing materials .
f Sealing of Lifting Holes .
After the units are in their final locations a bonding agent shall be applied and the lifting holes filled with a Mortar Type IV .
A removable form shall be provided at the bottom surface of the deck to retain the grout .
g Loading .
Units may be loaded upon erection and before the joints are sealed only with written permission of the Engineer and in accordance with the approved erection procedure .
Once the joints are sealed no further loading or unloading of the units will be allowed until joint material has properly and finally cured and as approved by the Engineer .
h Final Repairs .
After the installation work is complete remaining concrete defects holes for inserts and lifting holes shall be repaired as indicated and approved by the Engineer .
i Grout .
Grout shall be placed in accordance with the requirements of Subsection .. .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT .
The quantity of Prefabricated Bridge Unit Superstructure to be measured for payment will be the number of linear feet installed in the complete and accepted work .
Measurement shall be the end to end length of the structural steel girder along centerline per unit . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT .
The accepted quantity of Prefabricated Bridge Unit Superstructure will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per linear foot .
Payment will be full compensation for detailing fabricating repairing quality control testing transporting handling and installing the materials specified including concrete reinforcing steel structural steel shear connectors mechanical connectors and shims for designing and installing lifting devices and any other material contained within or attached to the members for any grouting work required for furnishing and implementing the erection plan and for furnishing all labor tools equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Prefabricated Bridge Unit Superstructure Linear Foot SECTION THIS SECTION RESERVED SECTION PREEXCAVATION OF ABUTMENT PILES .
DESCRIPTION .
This work shall consist of drilling a hole to remove all subsurface material and backfilling in designated areas to provide suitable pile placement or driving conditions. . MATERIALS .
Materials shall meet the requirements of the following Subsections Sand Borrow and Cushion .
CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS .
The preexcavation of abutment piles shall consist of augering preboring or some other means of excavation to produce an excavation to the depth and diameter specified in the Contract Documents .
The excavation shall be maintained to allow for backfilling with sand in accordance with the Contract Documents .
Temporary casing is considered an acceptable option .
Unless otherwise specified in the Plans the entire preexcavation shall be filled with sand and the temporary casing shall be removed prior to installing piles. . DEFINITIONS .
a Earth .
In addition to the definition of earth in Subsection .
cobbles boulders and densely packed gravel will be considered excavation of earth .
b Rock .
All excavation of bedrock as determined by the Engineer . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT .
The quantities of PreExcavation of Abutment Piles Earth and PreExcavation of Abutment Piles Rock to be measured for payment will be the total number of linear feet of excavation to the depth specified in the Contract Documents or as ordered by the Engineer measured to the nearest linear foot .
a Earth .
Where Structure Excavation and Preexcavation of Abutment Piles Earth occur jointly or separately at the same location measurement for Preexcavation of Abutment Piles Earth will be made only below the lower limits of Structure Excavation .
b Rock .
The quantity of Preexcavation of Abutment Piles Rock to be measured for payment will be below the top surface of bedrock as determined by the Engineer . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT .
The accepted quantities of PreExcavation of Abutment Piles Earth and PreExcavation of Abutment Piles Rock will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per linear foot .
Payment will be full compensation for furnishing transporting storing and installing the materials specified including the sand for performing required excavation and for furnishing all labor tools equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
PreExcavation of Abutment Piles Earth Linear Foot .
PreExcavation of Abutment Piles Rock Linear Foot SECTION THIS SECTION RESERVED SECTION THIS SECTION RESERVED SECTION THIS SECTION RESERVED SECTION STRUCTURAL CONCRETE REPAIR .
DESCRIPTION .
This work shall consist of the removal and disposal of delaminated and unsound concrete from an existing superstructure or substructure and its replacement with new Portland cement concrete or an approved patching material .
This Section shall be used in conjunction with Section or Section whichever is applicable to other concrete items in the Contract .
Where both Specifications are used Section shall be used for this work .
Anything not specifically addressed in this Section relative to concrete shall be governed by Section or Section as applicable. . MATERIALS .
Materials shall meet the requirements of the following Subsections Overhead and Vertical Concrete Repair Material .
Rapid Setting Concrete Repair Material .
Rapid Setting Concrete Repair Material with Coarse Aggregate .
Polymer Concrete Repair Material .
Coarse Aggregate for Concrete shall meet the requirements of Table .A .
Concrete Repair Materials shall meet the requirements of Section .
High Performance Concrete shall meet the applicable requirements of Subsection .
through Subsection .
and Concrete Class AA Class A and Class B shall meet the applicable requirements of Subsection .
through Subsection .. Where further references in this Specification are made to Concrete they shall mean that class or corresponding class of concrete described in the governing concrete Specifications. . PROPORTIONING AND MIXING .
All concrete repair materials shall be mixed with a mechanical mixer at the Project site in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations on the Project packaging one bag unit at a time .
The product shall not be extended with sand or gravel except for Rapid Setting Concrete Repair Material with Coarse Aggregate and Polymer Concrete Repair Material when mixed with approved aggregates in conformance with the manufacturers recommendations .
At no time shall the recommended water content be exceeded nor shall any mixture be retempered by adding water andor remixing once the material has reached initial set .
Rapid Setting Concrete Repair Material with Coarse Aggregate shall be mixed with approved materials in the proportions designated by the manufacturer or by the Structural Concrete Engineer .
When Rapid Setting Concrete Repair Material with Coarse Aggregate is used on a Project the Contractor shall submit three inch diameter test cylinders to the Agencys Materials Section Structural Concrete Unit for information for the first quantity of bags units of material or less used on the Project .
Thereafter three more test cylinders shall be submitted for each increment of bags of material used on the Project . .
SURFACE PREPARATION FOR REPAIRS OVERLAYS AND MEMBRANES .
Surfaces to be repaired or overlaid shall be chipped back to sound concrete as directed by the Engineer using approved hand or mechanical methods .
When removing unsound portions of an existing structure in preparation for repair the edges of all areas to be repaired shall be saw cut in straight lines to a minimum depth of inch .
After complete removal of unsound concrete the entire area to be patched or overlaid and all exposed steel which will have concrete placed against or around it including metal plate expansion joints scuppers finger plate expansion joints reinforcing steel etc .
shall be abrasive blastcleaned to remove contaminants and laitance a maximum of hours prior to placing the new concrete .
The area shall be vacuumed or flushed using highpressure air or water to remove all loose particles dust and debris .
Air or water used for cleaning shall be free of oil and other contaminants .
After blastcleaning once the concrete is wet whether from flushing or rain the concrete must be kept wet until the placing of concrete materials .
If the concrete is allowed to dry out or the hour time limit has lapsed the entire area shall be blastcleaned and vacuumed or flushed again .
Following concrete removal additional surface preparation for the application of Overhead and Vertical Concrete Repair Material shall be as recommended on the product packaging by the manufacturer .
Where Rapid Setting Concrete Repair Material Rapid Setting Concrete Repair Material with Coarse Aggregate or Polymer Concrete Repair Material is to be used concrete surfaces shall be thoroughly blast cleaned and prepared as recommended by the manufacturer .
Concrete bridge decks or other surfaces designated by the Engineer to be prepared for application of a waterproofing membrane shall be ground to a smooth uniform surface by either a handheld grinder or a wheel mounted grinder unit specifically designed for the purpose .
Ridges or areas of unevenness designated by the Engineer shall be ground so that no surface deviation greater than inch remains. . FORMS .
The forms shall be constructed in such a manner that the final concrete surface has the same architectural score marks and exterior face appearance as the original surface .
For additional requirements for forms see either Subsection .
or Subsection .. .
PLACING CONCRETE .
The Contractor shall comply with the requirements of Subsection .
or Subsection .
as well as Subsection .
or Subsection .
for this work .
In addition the following is applicable to concrete repair a Portland Cement Concrete .
When Epoxy Bonding Compound is not specified on the Plans the prepared concrete surface shall be flooded with water for at least one hour prior to fresh concrete placement standing water shall be removed and a neat cement paste shall be brushed into the surface .
The cement shall meeting the requirements of AASHTO M Type II and water shall be mixed to a thick latex paint consistency .
The neat cement paste shall not be allowed to dry out before it is covered with fresh concrete .
b Concrete Repair Material .
The moisture condition of the prepared concrete surface the use of bonding agents and the placement of Overhead and Vertical Concrete Repair Material Rapid Setting Concrete Repair Material Rapid Setting Concrete Repair Material with Coarse Aggregate or Polymer Concrete Repair Material shall be as recommended by the manufacturer of the product being placed .
c Alternate Methods of Repair .
The Contractor may propose an alternate means of repairing vertical and overhead surfaces .
The alternate may include but is not limited to the use of pneumatically applied materials .
Should the Contractor choose an alternate method of repair the written approval of the Structures Engineer shall be obtained prior to beginning work utilizing the alternate method. . CURING CONCRETE .
In addition to the requirements of Subsection .
or Subsection .
the following requirements shall apply to concrete repair A membraneforming curing compound may be used to cure the repairs made with concrete provided the patched areas are covered with white polyethylene sheeting after the curing compound is applied .
White polyethylene sheeting shall conform to the requirements of Subsection .c .
The type of curing compound shall be approved by the Engineer prior to its use .
The curing period for patches made with concrete shall be seven days regardless of the curing method chosen .
Concrete patches may be cured in accordance with the requirements of Subsection .b or Subsection .b Parts and only .
If the method used does not produce the desired results alternate curing procedures may be required by the Engineer .
Evidence of improper cure could be a dry surface a cracked or cracking surface or a streaked or blotchy appearance of the surface .
Overlay concrete shall be cured in accordance with the requirements of Subsection .b or Subsection .b Parts and only .
Concrete repair materials shall be cured in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations on the product packaging or Specification sheet . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT .
The quantity to be measured for payment of Repair of Concrete Superstructure Surface Class I or Class II will be the number of square yards of repaired concrete surfaces .
Repair of Concrete Superstructure Surface Class I shall include the removal of concrete from the surface of existing concrete to a maximum depth as determined by the top of the top bars of the top mat of existing reinforcing steel .
Repair of Concrete Superstructure Surface Class II shall include removal of concrete from the surface of the existing concrete to a maximum depth as determined by the top of the top bars of the bottom mat of reinforcing steel .
The minimum depth removed under this item shall be of an inch inch below the bottom bars of the top mat of reinforcing steel .
The quantity to be measured for payment of Concrete Substructure Surfaces Class I or Class II will be the number of square yards of repaired substructure surfaces whether they are flat vertical or overhead .
Repair of Concrete Substructure Surface Class I shall include removal of concrete from the plane of the original concrete surface to a maximum depth as determined by the outside face of the first mat of reinforcing steel .
Repair of Concrete Substructure Surface Class II shall include removal of concrete from the plane of the original concrete surface to a maximum depth of inches measured from the plane of the original surface .
The minimum depth removed under this item shall be of an inch inch beyond the inside face of the first mat of reinforcing steel .
The quantity to be measured for payment of Repair of Concrete Superstructure Surface Class III will be the number of cubic yards of concrete removed .
Repair of Concrete Superstructure Surface Class III shall include removal from the top of the existing concrete surface to the bottom of the concrete deck i.e .
full depth removal .
The quantity to be measured for payment of Repair of Concrete Substructure Class III will be the number of cubic yards of concrete removed .
Repair of Concrete Substructure Surface Class III shall include removal from the face of the existing concrete surface to a depth greater than inches .
The quantity to be measured for payment for Surface Preparation for Membrane will be the number of square feet of prepared surface .
Payment will be made for surface preparation of existing surfaces with no deductions made for areas of new patches .
The quantity to be measured for Rapid Setting Concrete Repair Material Overhead and Vertical Concrete Repair Material Rapid Setting Concrete Repair Material with Coarse Aggregate and Polymer Concrete Repair Material will be the number of cubic feet of material mixed for use as approved by the Engineer .
The volume will be computed on the basis of the quantity identified as being contained in the product packaging .
The quantity to be measured for payment of Concrete Class AA Overlay will be the number of square yards of finished surface complete in place .
The limits of removal shall be as specified for Repair of Concrete Superstructure Surface Class II or Class III as determined by the Engineer . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT .
The accepted quantities will be paid for at the Contract Unit Prices for the Pay Items specified which price shall be full compensation for performing the work specified including surface preparation as specified satisfactory completion of curing and the furnishing of all forms materials including joint filler labor tools admixtures equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
The cost of heating or cooling materials and protecting the concrete against cold weather and any additional cost for cement shall be included in the Contract Unit Price for the applicable concrete repair item in the Contract .
The Unit Price bid for Repair of Concrete Superstructure Surface Class I Repair of Concrete Superstructure Surface Class II and Repair of Concrete Superstructure Surface Class III will be full compensation for the removal and replacement of concrete .
Replacement material shall be Concrete Class AA or an acceptable alternate as approved by the Engineer .
The Unit Price bid for Repair of Concrete Substructure Surface Class I and Repair of Concrete Substructure Surface Class II will be full compensation for the removal and replacement of concrete .
Replacement material shall be Concrete Class AA or an acceptable alternate as approved by the Engineer such as pneumatically applied concrete .
The Unit Price bid for Repair of Concrete Substructure Surface Class III will be full compensation for the removal and replacement of concrete .
Replacement material shall be Concrete Class AA Class A Class B or an acceptable alternate as approved by the Engineer .
The accepted quantity of Surface Preparation for Membrane will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per square foot which price shall be full compensation for the furnishing of all labor tools equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
The accepted quantity of Rapid Setting Concrete Repair Material Overhead and Vertical Concrete Repair Material Rapid Setting Concrete Repair Material with Coarse Aggregate and Polymer Concrete Repair Material will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price bid per cubic foot which price shall be full compensation for furnishing transporting storing handling and placing the materials specified and for furnishing all labor tools equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
The Unit Price bid for Concrete Class AA Overlay will be full compensation for the removal and replacement of concrete .
Replacement concrete shall be Concrete Class AA .
Duplicate payment will not be made for preparation of concrete surfaces in any area .
For example if an area is originally prepared as Class I and the Engineer orders a change to the Class II depth the area will be paid as Class II .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Repair of Concrete Superstructure Surface Class I Square Yard .
Repair of Concrete Superstructure Surface Class II Square Yard .
Repair of Concrete Superstructure Surface Class III Cubic Yard .
Repair of Concrete Substructure Surface Class I Square Yard .
Repair of Concrete Substructure Surface Class II Square Yard .
Repair of Concrete Substructure Surface Class III Cubic Yard .
Surface Preparation for Membrane Square Foot .
Rapid Setting Concrete Repair Material Cubic Foot .
Overhead and Vertical Concrete Repair Material Cubic Foot .
Concrete Class AA Overlay Square Yard .
Rapid Setting Concrete Repair Material with Coarse Aggregate Cubic Foot .
Polymer Concrete Repair Material Cubic Yard SECTION THIS SECTION RESERVED SECTION THIS SECTION RESERVED This Page Intentionally Left Blank DIVISION INCIDENTAL CONSTRUCTION SECTION CULVERTS AND STORM DRAINS .
DESCRIPTION .
This work shall consist of the construction cleaning and reconditioning or reconstruction of culverts and storm drains hereinafter referred to as pipe. . MATERIALS .
Materials shall meet the requirements of the following Subsections Mortar Type II .
Rubber Gaskets .
Reinforced Concrete Pipe .
Reinforced Concrete Pipe End Sections .
Corrugated Polyethylene Pipe .
Corrugated Polypropylene Pipe .
Corrugated Steel Pipe Pipe Arches and Underdrains .
Corrugated Aluminum Alloy Pipe Pipe Arches and Underdrains .
Polymeric Coated Corrugated Steel Pipe and Pipe Arches .
CoalTar Based Coating .
All units in each pipe or pipe arch installation including elbows end sections coupling bands and reducer units shall be of the same material except that corrugated steel pipe end sections shall be used with polymeric coated corrugated steel pipe and pipe arches .
When either corrugated steel pipe or pipe arches with inch inch corrugations are shown on the Plans the Contractor may substitute pipe or pipe arches of the same thickness with inch inch corrugations at no additional compensation. . GENERAL .
Care shall be exercised when unloading pipe from delivery trucks and moving pipe to its final position .
If the Engineer rejects damaged pipe new pipe shall be furnished by the Contractor at no additional cost to the Agency .
Unless otherwise directed by the Engineer the Contractor shall provide for the temporary diversion of water to permit the installation of the pipe in a reasonably dry trench .
The location of all pipe installations shall be approved by the Engineer .
Where existing pipe is to be retained or relaid and it becomes damaged due to the fault of the Contractor it shall be replaced with new pipe at the Contractors expense .
Aluminum aluminized or aluminumzinc alloy coated pipe that is to be in contact with concrete or mortar shall have the contact surfaces thoroughly coated with an approved barrier coating recommended by the pipe manufacturer or approved by the Agencys Materials Section .
Such coating be dry before installation .
Where the protective coating has been removed from the metal either by cutting burning welding placing or any other means it shall be repaired by thoroughly cleaning with a wire brush and treating the damaged areas as follows a In accordance with AASHTO M b In accordance with AASHTO M for damaged polymeric coating .
EXCAVATION .
Where pipe is to be laid below the existing ground line a trench shall be excavated to the required depth and to a width sufficient to allow for joining of the pipe and compaction of the bedding and backfill material under and around the pipe .
The completed trench bottom shall be firm for its full length and width .
If shown on the Plans or directed by the Engineer unsuitable foundation material encountered below the normal grade of the culvert bed shall be removed and replaced with Granular Backfill for Structures or other specified or approved material .
Ledge rock rocky or gravelly soil hard pan or other unyielding foundation material encountered at the normal grade of the culvert bed shall be removed and replaced with Granular Backfill for Structures to a width equal to the inside diameter of the pipe plus inches and to a minimum depth of inches below the pipe grade unless otherwise shown on the Plans or directed by the Engineer. . PLACEMENT .
No pipe shall be placed until the trench and the prepared foundation have been approved by the Engineer .
Placement shall begin at the outlet end .
The bottom of the pipe shall be in contact with the bedding throughout its full length .
Bell or grooved ends of rigid pipes and the outside circumferential laps of flexible pipe shall be placed facing upstream .
The longitudinal laps or seams of riveted pipe shall be at the sides .
The handling holes in concrete pipes shall be filled with a precast plug sealed and covered with mastic or mortar . .
JOINING PIPE .
a Concrete Pipe .
Concrete pipe shall be of bell and spigot or tongue and groove design or as specified .
Pipe sections shall be joined so that the ends are fully entered and the inner surfaces are reasonably flush and even .
Joints shall be made with Portland cement mortar Portland cement grout rubber gaskets or any one type as specified and approved by the Engineer .
Joints in concrete pipe should be thoroughly wetted before mortar or grout is applied .
Mortar joints shall be made with an excess of mortar to form a bead around the outside of the pipe and finished smooth on the inside .
For grouted joints molds or runners shall be used to retain the poured grout .
Rubber ring gaskets shall be installed so as to form a flexible watertight seal .
When Portland cement mixtures are used the completed joints shall be protected against rapid drying by suitable curing materials and protected from freezing until adequate set and strength have been reached as determined by the Engineer .
The first three sections at ends of culverts that are not restrained by drop inlets or catch basins shall be connected at the springline on each side of the pipe to restrain movement of the sections .
If an end section is used it shall be one of the three sections to be connected .
The connecting devices shall be at least feet in length when used with foot minimum length sections and at least feet in length when used with foot minimum length sections .
Each device shall be securely anchored to the pipe with minimum slack in the device and the joints .
The anchoring points shall be a minimum of inches from the end of the pipe sections and the flared end sections .
Each end of the device shall be anchored with a inch bolt with a nut and washer or its equivalent through the section wall .
Each device shall be a steel strap with an effective crosssectional area of .
square inches for all pipe inches in diameter or smaller .
For pipe larger than inches in diameter the required steel area for restraining devices shall be as shown on the Plans .
Alternate designs of restraining devices and anchoring hardware will be considered for approval if they provide equivalent restraining properties and durability .
Restraining devices shall be placed on the outside of the pipe .
Any bending of the device for proper installation shall be done by the cold bending method .
Holes in the pipe and end sections required for the anchor bolts may be drilled in the field .
b Metal Pipe .
Metal pipes shall be firmly joined by coupling bands .
Pipes with an effective diameter greater than inches shall be joined by coupling bands that fully engage the second full corrugation from the end of each pipe .
Pipes on steep grades greater than will be joined either by inch wide coupling bands or by bands additionally equipped with silo rods or cables for positive attachment .
In all cases ends of pipes joined by coupling bands shall be as close together as the corrugations will allow .
c Corrugated Polyethylene Pipe .
Corrugated polyethylene pipe shall be joined by a system designed and approved by the pipe manufacturer .
Couplings and fittings shall provide sufficient longitudinal strength to preserve pipe alignment and prevent separation at the joints .
d Corrugated Polypropylene Pipe .
Corrugated polypropylene pipe shall be joined by a system designed and approved by the pipe manufacturer .
Couplings and fittings shall provide sufficient longitudinal strength to preserve pipe alignment and prevent separation at the joints. . BACKFILLING .
Installed pipe will be inspected and approved before any backfill is placed .
Any pipe found to be damaged or out of alignment shall be removed and replaced or relaid without additional compensation .
Unless otherwise shown on the Plans or directed by the Engineer the backfill material shall be fine selected compactable soil from excavation when available or Granular Backfill for Structures .
This material shall be placed to a height of inches over the pipe .
No stones more than inches in diameter shall be placed in contact with the pipe .
Rock fill or boulders shall not be placed within inches of the outside of the pipe .
The backfill material shall be placed in inchthick layers and compacted in accordance with Subsection .d using a mechanical tamper .
Care shall be exercised to thoroughly compact the material under the haunches of the pipe .
The backfill shall be placed evenly on both sides of the pipe for its full length .
In embankment sections the fill shall be compacted for a width on each side of the pipe equal to at least twice the horizontal inside diameter of the pipe or feet whichever is less .
Fill at the sides of the pipe may be compacted by operating compaction equipment longitudinally parallel with the pipe provided care is taken to avoid displacement or injury to the pipe .
All pipe shall be protected by a cover of fill feet thick before heavy equipment or traffic is permitted to cross during construction .
Whenever this cover extends above the subgrade the Contractor shall temporarily place Earth which shall be removed when necessary to complete the work in accordance with the details shown on the Plans or as directed by the Engineer .
Any deviation from this practice shall have prior approval by the Engineer .
However compliance with the foot protective cover requirement shall not relieve the Contractor of any responsibility concerning damage to the pipe . .
CLEANING OF CULVERTS .
Pipe culverts at the locations shown on the Plans or as directed by the Engineer shall have the silt debris and other material removed and disposed of by methods that do not damage the pipe .
With the approval of the Engineer all or part of a pipe designated to be cleaned in place may be removed cleaned and relaid in accordance with these Specifications .
In these cases the Contractor shall furnish all material required to replace damaged pipes and joints perform all excavation and backfill and relay the pipe all at the Contract Unit Price for the Contract Item Cleaning Culvert Pipe InPlace .
However if the Engineer determines that the pipe must be replaced through no fault of the Contractor replacement will be paid for under the appropriate Contract Items . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT .
The quantities of culverts and storm drains to be measured for payment will be the number of linear feet used in the complete and accepted work as shown on the Plans or ordered by the Engineer .
No allowance will be made for growth in length at joints when this increase exceeds the ordered length .
When it is necessary to cut pipe in the field the quantity of pipe to be measured for payment will be the length necessary rounded up to the next whole foot increment .
The quantity of ReLaying Pipe Culverts to be measured for payment will be the number of linear feet of re laid pipe in the complete and accepted work .
The quantities of pipe Elbows and End Sections to be measured for payment will be the number of each size and type of unit installed in the complete and accepted work .
The quantity of Cleaning Culvert Pipe InPlace to be measured for payment will be the total length of pipe for each pipe acceptably cleaned as determined along the flow line of the pipe .
The cost to clean material from pipes as the result of onProject construction activities shall be at the Contractors expense . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT .
The accepted quantities of culverts and storm drains of the type and size specified will be paid for at the respective Contract Unit Price per linear foot .
The accepted quantity of ReLaying Pipe Culverts will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per linear foot .
The accepted quantities of pipe Elbows and End Sections of the type and size specified will be paid for at the respective Contract Unit Price each .
Payment will be full compensation for fabricating furnishing transporting handling and placing the material specified to include bituminous or other coating coupling bands joint material cutting when necessary and for furnishing all labor tools equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
Excavation including backfill operations and the disposal of excavated material excess or unsuitable for backfill will be paid for separately and in accordance with Section .
Anchor bolts required in the construction of headwalls will not be paid for separately but will be considered incidental to the Contract Unit Price for the pipe on which they are required .
The accepted quantity of Cleaning Culvert Pipe InPlace will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per linear foot for the specified size of pipe .
Payment will be full compensation for cleaning the pipe for excavating backfilling and relaying the pipe if necessary and for furnishing all labor tools equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
to .
CSP Linear Foot .
to .
CAAP Linear Foot .
to .
PCCSP Linear Foot .
to .
PCCSPPI Linear Foot .
to .
RCP Linear Foot .
to .
CPEP Linear Foot .
to .
CSPSL Linear Foot .
to .
CAAPSL Linear Foot .
to .
PCCSPSL Linear Foot .
to .
CPEPSL Linear Foot .
to .
CPPPSL Linear Foot .
to .
CSPA Linear Foot .
to .
CAAPA Linear Foot .
to .
PCCSPA Linear Foot .
to .
PCCSPAPI Linear Foot .
to .
CSPASL Linear Foot .
to .
CAAPASL Linear Foot .
to .
PCCSPASL Linear Foot .
to .
CSP Elbow Each .
to .
CAAP Elbow Each .
to .
PCCSP Elbow Each .
to .
PCCSP Elbow PI Each .
to .
CPEP Elbow Each .
to .
CPPP Elbow Each .
to .
CSPES Each .
to .
CAAPES Each .
to .
RCPES Each .
to .
CPEPES Each .
to .
CPPPES Each .
to .
CSPAES Each .
to .
CAAPAES Each .
ReLaying Pipe Culverts Linear Foot .
Cleaning Culv .
Pipe InPlace to In .
Incl .
Linear Foot .
Cleaning Culv .
Pipe InPlace Greater than In .
Linear Foot SECTION MASONRY .
DESCRIPTION .
This work shall consist of furnishing materials and constructing walls and other masonry of the types and sizes specified or rebuilding repairing or repointing of existing masonry. . MATERIALS .
Materials shall meet the requirements of the following Subsections Stone for Masonry .
Stone for Masonry Facing .
Mortar Type II .
Mortar Type IV .
Bar Reinforcement .
Materials for Rebuilt and Repairing Stone Masonry shall be approved by the Engineer prior to use .
New stone as required shall match as closely as practical the existing stone masonry color texture and size .
If required to match the existing stone masonry chemical treatment processes to aid in providing stone of similar color shall be investigated by the Contractor .
Concrete for headwalls shall meet the requirements of Section for Concrete Class B. Dowels shall be in accordance with the requirements of Subsection .a unless otherwise specified on the Plans .
Backfill material shall meet the requirements of Section for Granular Backfill for Structures. . MIXING OF MORTAR .
The fine aggregate and cement shall be mixed in a clean tight container until a mixture of uniform color is produced after which clean water shall be added in such quantity as to form a mortar with the consistency of stiff paste .
If desired the Contractor will be permitted to use a batch mixer of an approved size and type .
Mortar which has been mixed for more than minutes shall not be used and retempering of mortar will not be permitted . .
PLACING OF STONE .
The placing and shaping of stone shall be the same for dry or cement masonry however dry masonry shall be placed without the use of mortar .
The bed shall be clean and well moistened just prior to the placement of the stone .
The stone shall be thoroughly saturated with water well bedded into the mortar and carefully settled in place before the mortar has set .
No spalls will be permitted in the bed .
Joints and beds shall not average over inch in thickness .
The masonry shall be laid in full mortar beds to the lines shown on the Plans and in approximately level courses .
The bottom or foundation courses shall be composed of large selected stones .
All courses shall be laid with bearing beds parallel to the natural bed of the materials .
The larger stone shall be used near the bottom and the smaller stone near the top of the masonry the latter corresponding as nearly as possible to the minimum thickness of the masonry at its top .
The construction of stone masonry will not be permitted in freezing weather or when frost is in the stone except by written permission of the Engineer and subject to conditions as the Engineer may require .
In walls where the thickness is over feet the stones used as headers for holding in the heart of the wall shall extend not less than feet into the core and shall occupy not less than of the front and back surface area of the wall .
In walls where the thickness is feet or less the stones used as headers shall extend entirely through the wall .
The break in joints of the stone shall be at least inches on the exposed faces of the wall and the backing stones shall be laid so that the joints are broken .
The rear face of the wall shall present an approximately plane surface .
The stone shall be roughly squared on joints beds and faces and shall be pitched to line at all angles and ends of walls .
All shaping or dressing of stones shall be done before the stone is laid in the wall and no dressing or hammering that would tend to loosen the stones already set will be permitted after their placement .
Any stone around which the bond has become broken shall be removed the mortar shall be thoroughly cleaned from the bed and joints and the stone shall be reset in fresh mortar. . WEEP HOLES .
Weep holes shall be constructed as shown on the Plans or as ordered by the Engineer . .
REBUILT STONE MASONRY AND REPAIRING STONE MASONRY .
a General .
Rebuilt Stone Masonry .
The stone masonry of the existing substructure and wingwalls shall be mapped removed and rebuilt as indicated and specified in the Contract Documents .
Following backfill excavation the existing stones tree stumps roots and other foreign matter shall be removed in the areas shown on the Plans or where directed by the Engineer .
The existing stones shall be reset in their original locations removing any gaps that occurred due to previous damage to the walls .
Rebuilt Stone Masonry shall match securely into adjacent masonry .
Repairing Stone Masonry .
Earth minor vegetation and other foreign matter shall be removed and cavities in the stone substructure and wingwalls filled as indicated and specified in the Contract Documents .
b Construction Requirements .
Rebuilt Stone Masonry .
The work shall be performed by a stone mason who is highly knowledgeable and experienced in the construction of dry stone masonry walls and fascia .
The Contractors stone mason performing the work must demonstrate at least five years of experience in the construction of dry stone masonry walls .
Documentation of experience including a list of previous Projects and references shall be submitted to the Engineer prior to commencement of the work .
The existing stone masonry in the areas of reconstruction shall be mapped out and documented .
Each stone size and location shall be noted .
The Contractor prior to stone removal shall submit documentation to the Engineer for approval .
Special care and precautions shall be taken during removal and storage of the existing stone masonry to ensure that the stone is not damaged .
All stones shall be carefully removed in the areas shown on the Plans .
The Contractor shall shore the remaining portions of the walls to ensure that they do not shift during construction .
The existing stones shall be replaced in their original locations removing any gaps that occurred due to previous damage to the walls .
All joints in the reconstructed stone walls shall be no larger than inch between stones .
Any existing stones that are not suitable for replacement or missing shall be replaced by the Contractor with stones of similar size and appearance .
Repairing Stone Masonry .
a .
Examination .
The Contractor and Engineer shall jointly examine the abutments and wingwalls to field verify the extent of the work .
All work shall be performed by stonemasons with a minimum of three years of experience with similar work .
b .
Repair .
Gaps between horizontal faces of existing stones less than inch shall not be repaired .
The size of these gaps shall equal the approximate diameter of a inch steel dowel .
Gaps between horizontal faces of existing stones between inch and inches shall have small stone blocks added with the depth of the blocks as large as possible for good bearing .
The minimum width of said blocks shall be inches .
Gaps between horizontal faces of existing stones greater than inches shall have crushed gravel and stone blocks added .
The crushed gravel shall be placed at the back of the stone and compacted in place up to inches of the exposed wall face .
The crushed gravel shall be compacted by tamping rods or other methods acceptable to the Engineer .
Stone blocks shall then be added to achieve a tight fit .
New stone blocks shall not extend beyond the face of the stone wall . .
POINTING AND REPOINTING .
All joints shall be filled with mortar well driven in and finished with an approved pointing tool for a distance of inch back from the surface of the stone .
When joints are in old masonry they shall be cleaned of all loose mortar and dirt for a depth in from the face of the wall of at least twice the width of the joint and moistened .
All mortar shall be cleaned from the face of the stones after the pointing is completed and the work has cured for a period of three days. . DOWELS AND TIES .
Where required bonding of various portions of the work shall be accomplished with dowels and ties of the shapes and dimensions shown on the Plans or approved by the Engineer .
They shall be placed as shown or required in the stone so as to clear the bed of the succeeding course .
Dowel holes shall be drilled into each stone to match dowels already set before the stone is placed .
No drilled holes will be permitted in the exposed top surfaces. . BACKFILLING .
Spaces excavated for masonry structures but not occupied by these structures shall be backfilled .
The backfill shall be placed in horizontal layers of not more than inches in depth .
Each layer shall be thoroughly compacted by means of air or mechanical tampers in a manner approved by the Engineer . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT .
The quantities of Cement Masonry and Dry Masonry to be measured for payment will be the number of cubic yards used in the complete and accepted work measured in accordance with the dimensions shown on the Plans or ordered by the Engineer .
The quantities of Stone Masonry Facing and Repointing Masonry to be measured for payment will be the number of square yards performed in the complete and accepted work measured as follows a The quantity of Stone Masonry Facing will be the height of the front face plus the width of the capstones times the length of the stone masonry facing .
No deductions will be made for weep holes drain pipes or other openings with an area of less than square feet .
b The quantity of Repointing Masonry will be the total surface area of the masonry repointed .
The quantity of Rebuilt Stone Masonry to be measured for payment will be the number of cubic yards of stone masonry rebuilt in the complete and accepted work measured in accordance with the dimensions shown on the Plans or as determined by the Engineer .
The quantity of Repairing Stone Masonry to be measured for payment will be the number of square yards of stone masonry repaired in the complete and accepted work measured as the total surface area of the repaired masonry . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT .
The accepted quantities of Cement Masonry Dry Masonry Stone Masonry Facing and Repointing Masonry will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per cubic yard or square yard for the item specified .
Payment will be full compensation for furnishing transporting handling and placing the material specified and for furnishing all labor tools equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
The dowels and ties required for constructing stone masonry facing will not be paid for separately but will be considered incidental to the Contract Unit Price per square yard for Stone Masonry Facing .
Excavation will be paid for as Trench Excavation unless otherwise shown on the Plans .
The accepted quantity of Rebuilt Stone Masonry will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per cubic yard .
Payment will be full compensation for mapping documenting and removing existing stone masonry furnishing new stone as needed furnishing transporting handling and placing the materials specified backfilling when not paid under a separate Contract Item and for furnishing all labor tools equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
Excavation adjacent to Rebuilt Stone Masonry and disposal of excess or unsuitable excavated material will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per cubic yard for Structure Excavation .
Excavation shall be backfilled with material acceptable to the Engineer .
When Granular Backfill for Structures is required for backfill material it will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per cubic yard .
The accepted quantity of Repairing Stone Masonry will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per square yard .
Payment will be full compensation for removing material specified from the face of stone masonry filling cavities furnishing transporting handling and placing the materials specified and for furnishing all labor tools equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Cement Masonry Cubic Yard .
Dry Masonry Cubic Yard .
Stone Masonry Facing Square Yard .
Repointing Masonry Square Yard .
Rebuilt Stone Masonry Cubic Yard .
Repairing Stone Masonry Square Yard SECTION DROP INLETS CATCH BASINS AND MANHOLES .
DESCRIPTION .
This work shall consist of the construction rehabilitation adjustment or decommissioning of drop inlets catch basins and manholes and the furnishing and placing of cast iron or precast concrete covers. . MATERIALS .
Materials shall meet the requirements of the following Subsections Granular Backfill for Structures .
Clay or Shale Sewer Brick .c Concrete Masonry Blocks .
Precast Drop Inlets Catch Basins and Manholes .
Mortar Type II .
Mortar Type IV .
Reinforced Concrete Pipe .
Bar Reinforcement .
Welded Wire Reinforcement .
Structural Steel .
Gray Iron Castings .b Ductile Iron Castings .c Unless otherwise specified castinplace concrete shall conform to the requirements of Section for Concrete Class B .
Controlled Density Flowable Fill shall conform to the requirements of Section .
Pipe stubs for precast reinforced concrete curb drop inlets shall meet the requirements of Section .
The term cast iron as used in these Specifications or in various Contract Items when used in conjunction with covers and frames shall be understood to mean gray iron castings or ductile iron castings .
Covers and frames shall be gray iron castings or ductile iron castings .
Steps or ladder rungs in drop inlets catch basins or manholes shall be plastic complying with all applicable OSHA dimensional and structural requirements .
Unless otherwise shown on the Plans the rungs shall be cast into the fresh concrete except that for precast units the rungs may be grouted into preformed voids with a nonshrink grout approved by the Engineer after the concrete has cured. . GENERAL CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS .
The excavation shall be to the depth shown on the Plans or ordered by the Engineer and carefully shaped and graded .
The bases for drop inlets catch basins and manholes may be either precast or castinplace concrete .
For construction of drop inlets catch basins or manholes the bricks used on top of the concrete to adjust the top to the correct elevation shall meet the requirements of Subsection .c .
Unless directed otherwise by the Engineer when adjusting the elevation of the tops of existing drop inlets catch basins sewer manholes or manholes the Contractor shall remove all existing bricks and replace them with new bricks meeting the requirements of Subsection .c as part of the work and costs included in the Contract Item Changing Elevation of Drop Inlets Catch Basins or Manholes or the Contract Item Changing Elevation of Sewer Manholes .
Channels inverts and floor areas for sewer manholes shall be constructed of brick and mortar or Class C concrete conforming to Section .
Inverts shall have the exact shape of the sewer to which they are connected and any change in size or direction shall be gradual and even .
All construction of sewer manholes must be carried out to ensure watertight work .
Any leaks in manholes shall be repaired to the satisfaction of the Engineer or the entire structure shall be removed and rebuilt .
Leakage testing shall be performed in accordance with Subsection ..
Prior to rehabilitating or changing the elevation of any drop inlet catch basin or manhole the Contractor shall completely clean out the interior of the unit including cleaning at least inches but not more than inches into any openings in the walls for inspection to determine the extent of the work that will be required .
Except for components cast using the dry cast process precast concrete components shall not have the forms removed until a minimum compressive strength of psi has been achieved .
Precast components shall not be moved until two hours after they have been cast and until a minimum compressive strength of psi has been achieved .
Reinforced precast sections shall not be shipped from the manufacturing facility until the eighth Calendar Day from the date of manufacture except when the supplier provides test results demonstrating that the design strength has been achieved. . CONSTRUCTION OF DROP INLETS CATCH BASINS AND MANHOLES .
a Concrete Drop Inlet Catch Basin or Manhole .
The concrete walls shall be constructed on the approved base to the lines grades and dimensions shown on the Plans or directed by the Engineer .
The required courses of brick shall be placed on top of the concrete to the elevation shown on the Plans or directed by the Engineer .
After the bricks are laid the joints on the inside of the brick masonry shall be neatly pointed .
The top section may be precast or castinplace .
The cast iron frame shall be set in the concrete tops as shown on the Plans .
When tops are precast they shall be placed in a full mortar bed .
The grate or cover shall be properly placed in the frame .
b Precast Reinforced Drop Inlet Catch Basin or Manhole .
The precast reinforced concrete risers shall be set reasonably close to line and grade on the previously placed concrete base .
The top section shall be capped with courses of mortared brick .
The cast iron frame shall be placed in a full mortar bed on the brick masonry and the cast iron cover or grate shall be placed on top of the frame .
c Precast Reinforced Concrete Pipe Drop Inlet .
The precast reinforced concrete pipe sections shall be set on a concrete base as shown on the Plans or as directed by the Engineer .
A precast concrete cover or a cast iron grate shall be placed as shown on the Plans .
d Precast Reinforced Concrete Curb Drop Inlet .
The precast reinforced concrete curb drop inlet shall be set to the line and grade as shown on the Plans or as directed by the Engineer .
The brick masonry concrete top and grate shall conform to the requirements of Subsection .a .
e Changing Elevation of Drop Inlets Catch Basins or Manholes .
Existing drop inlets catch basins and manholes that are to be altered or adjusted in elevation of the existing top shall be reconstructed to the required grade using the existing grates frames covers or tops as specified .
If the existing grates frames covers andor tops are not suitable for reuse this Contract Item shall not be used .
Should any grate frame cover or top become broken through carelessness on the part of the Contractor it shall be replaced at the Contractors expense .
The existing structure shall be dismantled sufficiently to allow elevation adjustment as shown on the Plans or as directed by the Engineer .
The existing grates frames covers or tops to be reused shall be thoroughly cleaned of mortar before being reused .
Any deteriorated brick mortar or missing brick in the structure including any curb portions of the tops shall be repaired or replaced by the Contractor .
Granite or concrete curbs curb board and bituminous fillet disturbed for this work shall be replaced .
New treated timber curb board required shall meet the requirements of Subsection .. Bituminous fillet shall conform to the applicable requirements of Section for the type of mix specified by the Engineer and after installation shall be sealed in accordance with Subsection .d .
Concrete curb and granite curb shall conform to the applicable requirements of Section .
The cost of this curb replacement will not be paid for directly but will be considered incidental to Changing Elevation of Drop Inlets Catch Basins or Manholes .
Where the unit is to be raised and the change in elevation is less than inches concentric structural steel rings of nominally inch thick material properly welded to the frame may be used .
The Contract Unit Price bid for Changing Elevation of Drop Inlets Catch Basins or Manholes shall include all the work and costs involved in cutting pavements and excavating around the top of the unit and the bricks to provide room to accomplish the work and shall also include all costs of backfilling around the elevation reset unit up to the bottom of pavement or the upper surface of the unit top as appropriate to the individual location .
If excavating through paved surfaces is required the edges of the excavated area shall be saw cut to a minimum depth of inches .
f Cast Iron Cover with Frame .
The covers with frames shall be properly installed at the locations shown on the Plans or directed by the Engineer .
Covers for sanitary sewer manholes shall have the word SEWER cast into the top surface .
Covers for storm sewer manholes shall have the word STORM cast into the top surface .
g Grates .
The grates shall be properly installed at the locations shown on the Plans or directed by the Engineer .
h Sanitary Sewer Manhole .
Sanitary sewer manholes shall be precast sewer manholes of the type and diameter shown on the Plans and shall meet the requirements of Subsection .
except that all barrel joints shall contain an Oring seal .
Steps shall meet OSHA requirements for new construction .
The exterior of the entire manhole shall be coated with a bitumastic or other watertight sealant meeting the approval of the sewer line owner .
All joints between pipes and the manhole shall be made using an approved watertight boot .
i Changing Elevations of Sewer Manholes .
Existing sewer manholes that are to be altered or adjusted shall be reconstructed in accordance with Subsection .e except that all exterior surfaces disturbed by the necessary reconstruction shall be coated or recoated with a watertight sealant approved by the sewer line owner .
Necessary steps pipe joints and barrel joints shall conform to the requirements of Subsection .h .
The Contractor may be required to provide a specific step to match the existing steps as part of the work and costs included in this Contract Item .
j Rehabilitation of Drop Inlets Catch Basins or Manholes .
Existing drop inlets catch basins and manholes that are to be altered adjusted or reconstructed shall be constructed to the required grade using existing grates frames covers or tops if useable as specified .
This work shall belong to one of three classes .
Class I shall include all work down to a depth of feet .
Class II shall include all work greater than feet in depth down to a depth of feet .
Class III shall include all work greater than feet in depth .
If the existing grates frames covers or tops are suitable for reuse but the remainder of the top requires replacement the Contractor shall carefully remove the frame from the existing top and cast a new top utilizing the existing grate frame or cover .
If the existing grates frames covers or tops are unsuitable for reuse new ones shall be furnished as required .
Unless otherwise specified the replacement shall match the existing grate frame or cover in size and design .
Should any useable existing grate frame cover or top become broken through carelessness on the part of the Contractor it shall be replaced at the Contractors expense .
The existing structure shall be dismantled sufficiently to allow rehabilitation as shown on the Plans for completed drop inlets catch basins and manholes .
Any existing grate frame cover or top to be reused shall be thoroughly cleaned of mortar before being reused .
Any deteriorated brick concrete reinforcement steps mortar or missing brick in the structure including any curb portions of the tops shall be repaired or replaced by the Contractor as directed by the Engineer .
If the rehabilitation proceeds to a point where the culverts or other pipes entering andor exiting the unit are within the area of rehabilitation andor replacement the necessary pipe stubs and collars to connect the existing piping to the rehabilitated unit shall be provided and installed by the Contractor .
If the Contract includes a Contract Item for the pipe the pipe stubs will be paid for under the appropriate Section or Section Contract Item in the Contract .
If the Contract does not include a Contract Item for the pipe the pipe stubs and collar will not be paid for directly but will be considered incidental to Rehabilitating Drop Inlets Catch Basins or Manholes Class I II or III as appropriate .
Granite bituminous or concrete curbs curb board and bituminous fillet disturbed for this work shall be replaced .
New treated timber curb board shall meet the requirements of Subsection .. Bituminous fillet shall conform to the applicable requirements of Section for the type of mix specified by the Engineer and after installation shall be sealed in accordance with Subsection .d .
Concrete bituminous and granite curb shall conform to the applicable requirements of Section .
The costs of this curb replacement will not be paid for directly but will be considered incidental to Rehabilitating Drop Inlets Catch Basins or Manholes Class I Rehabilitating Drop Inlets Catch Basins or Manholes Class II or Rehabilitating Drop Inlets Catch Basins or Manholes Class III as appropriate .
Where the unit is to be raised and the change in elevation is less than inches concentric structural steel rings of nominally inch thick material properly welded to the frame may be used .
The Contract Unit Price bid for Rehabilitating Drop Inlets Catch Basins or Manholes Class I II or III shall include all the work and costs involved in cutting pavements and excavating around the top of the unit and the bricks to provide room to accomplish the work and shall also include all costs of backfilling around the rehabilitated unit up to the bottom of pavement or the upper surface of the unit top as appropriate to the individual location .
Unless otherwise directed by the Engineer the Contractor shall saw all pavements to a minimum depth of inches .
k Rehabilitation of Sewer Manholes .
Rehabilitation of sewer manholes shall consist of removing the existing top with cover with or without frame and rehabilitation of the existing unit to a safe and useful structure satisfactory to the Engineer .
If necessary this Contract Item shall include the complete reconstruction of the sewer manhole to current standards .
This work shall consist of replacing broken or deteriorated bricks mortar concrete reinforcement frames and covers with new materials .
New barrel sections shall be precast of the type and diameter existing or as shown on the Plans and shall meet all requirements of Subsection .
except that all barrel joints shall contain an Oring .
Steps if required shall meet OSHA requirements for new construction .
The exterior of the entire manhole shall be coated with a bitumastic or other watertight sealant meeting the approval of the sewer line owner .
All joints between pipes and the manholes shall be made using an approved watertight boot. . CURING AND PROTECTION .
After the masonry work is completed it shall be kept moist and protected from the elements in a satisfactory manner for a period of at least hours .
Concrete shall be cured in accordance with Subsection .. Precast concrete shall be cured using membrane curing compound .
The curing compound shall be applied to the concrete surface after finishing as soon as the free water on the surface has disappeared and no water sheen is visible but not so late that the liquid curing compound will be absorbed into the concrete .
When the curing compound can not be applied as specified herein the manufacturer shall instead immediately begin wet curing the unit until curing compound can be applied .
When this method is used in conjunction with the drycast process the curing room shall be kept at humidity until a minimum compressive strength of psi has been obtained .
When the forms are removed prior to seven days the exposed concrete surfaces shall be wet with water within onehalf hour of form removal and shall be kept wet until the curing compound is applied .
Before application the concrete shall be allowed to reach a uniformly damp appearance with no free water on the surface and then the compound shall be applied immediately .
Precast concrete drainage components shall not be subjected to freezing temperatures prior to attaining the specified day compressive strength .
Components which are exposed to freezing before reaching the required day compressive strength shall be rejected without further cause .
Any additional testing on the rejected components as determined by the Engineer to gain acceptance will be at the expense of the manufacturer. . BACKFILLING .
Backfilling shall not begin until the end of the curing period .
Backfill material shall be approved by the Engineer and placed in layers not exceeding inches in depth .
Each layer shall be thoroughly tamped using mechanical tampers .
Special care shall be taken to ensure adequate compaction around the inlet and outlet pipes. . DECOMMISSION DROP INLETS .
Drop inlets shall be decommissioned as detailed and at the locations shown on the Plans .
Decommissioning shall include sawcutting existing pavement as necessary excavating to the required depth to remove the cover removal and disposal of covers and grates filling the drop inlet with Controlled Density Flowable Fill and backfilling as necessary .
Pavement shall be sawcut to minimize damage to the adjacent pavement and shall be kept to the minimum required to decommission the drop inlet .
Inlets and outlets of culverts within the drop inlets to be decommissioned shall be covered in such a manner to prevent the Controlled Density Flowable Fill from entering the culverts .
Controlled Density Flowable Fill shall completely fill all voids within the drop inlet .
The drop inlet shall be backfilled with Granular Backfill for Structures in accordance with Section . . CAP DROP INLET .
Drop inlets shall be capped as detailed and at the locations shown on the Plans .
Capping shall include sawcutting existing pavement as necessary excavating to the required depth to remove the top portions of the drop inlet placing a steel plate and backfilling .
Pavement shall be sawcut to minimize damage to the adjacent pavement and shall be kept to the minimum required to cap the drop inlet .
The steel plate shall be securely placed to the satisfaction of the Engineer and shall be in accordance with Subsection ..
The drop inlet shall be backfilled with Granular Backfill for Structures and in accordance with Section . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT .
The quantities of new structures to be measured for payment will be the number of units of the respective types used in the complete and accepted work .
Cast Iron Grates or Cast Iron Cover with Frames and Cast Iron Grates when used and not included in a specific unit will be measured as the number of each type specified .
The quantity of Changing Elevation or Rehabilitating of Drop Inlets Catch Basins or Manholes Decommission Drop Inlet or Cap Drop Inlet to be measured for payment will be the number of units modified decommissioned or capped in the complete and accepted work . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT .
The accepted quantities of new Drop Inlets Catch Basins or Manholes will be paid at the Contract Unit Price per each for each of the specified types .
Payment will be full compensation for furnishing transporting handling and placing the materials specified including concrete concrete risers top sections reinforcing steel steps mortar brick frames grates covers base sections coatings pipe stubs weep holes underdrain ends curb board and bituminous fillets and for furnishing all labor tools equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
The accepted quantity of Changing Elevation of Drop Inlets Catch Basins or Manholes and Rehabilitating Drop Inlets Catch Basins or Manholes will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price each for the specified unit or class .
Payment will be full compensation for all necessary cleaning of the interior of the unit to determine the extent of the work for excavating cutting of pavement and backfilling for removing deteriorated materials and designated materials for furnishing all materials including backfill material concrete concrete risers top sections reinforcing steel steps concrete block brick mortar frames grates covers coatings pipe stubs weep holes and underdrain ends required for reconstructing the unit as shown on the Plans or directed by the Engineer and for furnishing all labor tools equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
The accepted quantity of Decommission Drop Inlet and Cap Drop Inlet will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price for each .
Payment will be full compensation for sawcutting the existing shoulder surfaces performing any required excavation protecting the remaining portions of the drop inlet and drainage components covering inlets and outlets of existing culverts furnishing and placing steel plates furnishing and placing Controlled Density Flowable Fill backfilling and for furnishing all labor tools equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
Excavation shall be paid for in accordance with Section .
Excavation associated with the rehabilitation or changing elevation of existing drop inlets catch basins and manholes will not be paid for separately but will be considered incidental to the appropriate Contract Items .
Backfill material for backfilling around elevation adjusted and rehabilitated drop inlets catch basins and manholes shall meet the requirements of Subsection .
unless otherwise directed by the Engineer .
The Contract Items Sanitary Sewer Manhole Changing Elevation of Drop Inlets Catch Basins or Manholes and Rehabilitating Drop Inlets Catch Basins or Manholes Class I Class II and Class III are mutually exclusive .
Only one of these Contract Items will be paid at any designated location .
The Contract Item Changing Elevation of Drop Inlets Catch Basins or Manholes will include adjusting the elevation of an existing top including replacement of deteriorated bricks and mortar only .
The Contract Item Rehabilitating Drop Inlets Catch Basins or Manholes Class I will include adjusting the elevation of the top and all rehabilitation or reconstruction work on an existing unit down to a maximum depth of feet below the elevation of the upper surface of the unit top .
The Contract Item Rehabilitating Drop Inlets Catch Basins or Manholes Class II will include adjusting the elevation of the top and all rehabilitation or reconstruction work on an existing unit extending below a depth of feet to a maximum depth of feet below the elevation of the upper surface of the unit top .
The Contract Item Rehabilitating Drop Inlets Catch Basins or Manholes Class III will include adjusting the elevation of the top and all rehabilitation or reconstruction work on an existing unit extending below a depth of feet below the elevation of the upper surface of the unit top .
The Contract Items Cast Iron Grate with Frames Cast Iron Cover with Frames and Cast Iron Grates when used and not included in a specific unit will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per each for each type installed in the complete and accepted work .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Concrete Catch Basin with Cast Iron Grate Each .
Concrete Manhole with Cast Iron Cover Each .
Precast Reinforced Concrete Drop Inlet with Cast Iron Grate Each .
Precast Reinforced Concrete Catch Basin with Cast Iron Grate Each .
Precast Reinforced Concrete Manhole with Cast Iron Cover Each .
Sanitary Sewer Manhole Each .
Precast Reinforced Concrete Pipe DI with Cast Iron Grate Each .
Precast Reinforced Concrete Pipe DI with Concrete Cover Each .
Precast Reinforced Concrete Curb DI with Cast Iron Grate Each .
Changing Elevation of Drop Inlets Catch Basins or Manholes Each .
Rehab .
Drop Inlets Catch Basins or Manholes Class I Each .
Rehab .
Drop Inlets Catch Basins or Manholes Class II Each .
Rehab .
Drop Inlets Catch Basins or Manholes Class III Each .
Changing Elevation of Sewer Manholes Each .
Cast Iron Grate with Frame Type A Each .
Cast Iron Grate with Frame Type B Each .
Cast Iron Grate with Frame Type D Each .
Cast Iron Grate with Frame Type E Each .
Cast Iron Grate Type C Each .
Cast Iron Cover with Frame Each .
Cast Iron Cover with Frame Sewer Each .
Cap Drop Inlet Each .
Decommission Drop Inlet Each SECTION UNDERDRAINS .
DESCRIPTION .
This work shall consist of constructing drainage systems using underdrains underdrain outlets flushing basins and risers. . MATERIALS .
Materials shall meet the requirements of the following Subsections Granular Backfill for Structures .
Drainage Aggregate .
Corrugated Polyethylene Pipe .
Polyvinyl Chloride PVC Plastic Pipe .
Corrugated Steel Pipe Pipe Arches and Underdrains .
Corrugated Aluminum Alloy Pipe Pipe Arches and Underdrains .
Gray Iron Castings .b Geotextile shall meet the requirements of Table .A for Geotextile for Underdrain Trench Lining .
If the Contract does not specify a particular type of underdrain or carrier pipe the Contractor may furnish underdrain and carrier pipe of the diameter indicated and in any one of the following materials a Perforated corrugated steel b Perforated corrugated aluminum alloy c Perforated corrugated polyethylene d Perforated PVC plastic Each system of underdrain carrier pipes and underdrain risers shall be constructed of the same material. . PROTECTION OF MATERIALS .
Corrugated polyethylene or PVC plastic pipe stored on the job site prior to use shall be protected from prolonged exposure to sunlight .
The Engineer may require impact or other strength tests of the pipe prior to installation when ultraviolet light degradation is suspected . .
INSTALLATION .
a Excavation .
Trenches for underdrain shall be excavated to the dimensions and grade shown on the Plans or as directed by the Engineer .
The surface of the trench shall be prepared to a smooth condition free of debris depressions or obstructions which may damage the geotextile .
Trenches for carrier pipe shall be excavated to a width inches greater than the inside diameter of the pipe .
Proper bedding material shall be provided where excavation is in solid rock or other unyielding material .
b Placing Geotextile .
The geotextile fabric shall be placed loosely with no wrinkles or folds .
Care shall be taken to ensure direct contact with the soil such that there are no voids between the geotextile and the trench .
The geotextile shall be overlapped a minimum of inches at the top of the trench .
Additional overlap or anchoring may be required as determined by the Engineer .
The upstream geotextile shall be overlapped over the downstream .
Drainage aggregate shall be placed to a depth of inches to provide a bed and uniform slope for underdrain pipe placement .
c Placing Underdrain .
The underdrain pipe shall be placed in the center of the trench and firmly embedded in the drainage aggregate .
Placing shall be started at the outlet end and proceed toward the inlet end .
The underdrain shall be placed with the perforations down unless otherwise directed by the Engineer .
The joints between sections shall be made by fitting the ends as tightly as practical .
Corrugated steel or aluminum alloy underdrain shall be joined with an approved coupling .
Polyethylene or PVC plastic underdrain shall be joined with approved fittings .
Inlet ends of all underdrain pipe installations shall be closed with suitable plugs to prevent entry of soil material .
Underdrain flushing basins consisting of corrugated steel or aluminum alloy pipe of the length and diameter shown on the Plans and cast iron cover shall be installed at locations shown on the Plans or as directed by the Engineer .
Underdrain risers shall be installed as shown on the Plans or as directed by the Engineer .
d Placing Carrier Pipes .
Carrier pipes used in an underdrain system shall be placed on a firm bed and joined in the same manner as underdrain nonperforated pipe shall be used .
e Backfill .
After an underdrain pipe installation has been inspected and approved material meeting the requirements of drainage aggregate shall be placed to a height of inches above the top of the underdrain and the layer compacted .
Care shall be taken not to displace the underdrain pipe .
The remainder of the backfill material shall be placed in uniform layers of not more than inches in thickness and thoroughly compacted by use of air or mechanical tampers .
After inspection and approval of a carrier pipe installation the trench shall be backfilled with suitable material placed in layers not more than inches in thickness and thoroughly compacted .
Unless otherwise specified this material shall be from trench excavation .
The backfill material shall not be placed directly in the trench by dumping from haul vehicles or by pushing material into trenches by bulldozers graders or other equipment .
Placing shall be limited to the use of hand shovels backhoes front end loaders or other similar types of equipment as approved by the Engineer .
f Flushing .
Prior to the acceptance of the Project each underdrain system shall be thoroughly flushed with water to remove any accumulation of silt sand or other debris .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT .
The quantity of the specified size of Underdrain or Carrier Pipe to be measured for payment will be the number of linear feet installed in the complete and accepted work .
When it is necessary to cut underdrain or carrier pipe in the field the quantity of underdrain or carrier pipe to be measured for payment will be the length necessary rounded up to the next largest foot increment .
The quantity of Underdrain Flushing Basin to be measured for payment will be the number of units installed in the complete and accepted work including the corrugated pipe and the cast iron cover . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT .
The accepted quantities of each type and size of Underdrain or Carrier Pipe will be paid at the respective Contract Unit Price per linear foot .
Underdrain Flushing Basins will be paid at the respective Contract Unit Price for each .
Underdrain used for vertical stand pipes at flushing basin locations or risers will be paid as Underdrain Carrier Pipe .
Payment will be full compensation for fabricating furnishing transporting handling and placing the material specified including coupling bands and fittings drainage aggregate geotextile fabric and the necessary backfill material to an elevation feet above the flowline and for furnishing of all labor tools equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
Excavation for all underdrain carrier pipe flushing basins vertical stand pipes and risers will be paid for as Trench Excavation .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Underdrain Pipe Inches Linear Foot .
Underdrain Pipe Inches Linear Foot .
Underdrain Pipe Inches Linear Foot .
Underdrain Carrier Pipe Inches Linear Foot .
Underdrain Carrier Pipe Inches Linear Foot .
Underdrain Carrier Pipe Inches Linear Foot .
Underdrain Flushing Basin Each SECTION ROADWAY PATROL MAINTENANCE .
DESCRIPTION .
This work shall consist of the maintenance of any section of roadway that is open to public travel and the maintenance of detours in a reasonably smooth and passable condition .
The work shall be limited to those roadways within the construction area and any detours shown on the Plans or as directed by the Engineer . .
SCOPE OF WORK .
Roadway patrol maintenance shall include only the leveling and smoothing of sections of the roadway or detours within the construction areas that are not subject to the influence of the Contractors operations .
This work shall be performed by means of a road grader or other approved equipment .
Snow shall be removed by use of an approved grader or other approved plowing equipment .
The material and equipment required to maintain the roadway and the furnishing and spreading of sand necessary for winter maintenance shall be included in the Contract Unit Price for Roadway Patrol Maintenance unless otherwise directed by the Engineer . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT .
The quantity of Roadway Patrol Maintenance to be measured for payment will be the number of hours actually worked in performing Roadway Patrol Maintenance . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT .
The accepted quantity of Roadway Patrol Maintenance will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per hour .
Payment will be full compensation for performing the work specified and for furnishing all labor materials tools equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Roadway Patrol Maintenance Hour SECTION EQUIPMENT RENTAL .
DESCRIPTION .
This work shall consist of furnishing operating and supervising the use of equipment for performance of work shown on the Plans in accordance with these Specifications or as directed by the Engineer. . GENERAL REQUIREMENTS .
Equipment shall be maintained in good mechanical condition and shall be operated by capable and experienced operators .
Equipment that is to operate on paved surfaces shall be equipped with rubber tires or smooth street plates .
Tracked equipment used to draw any other equipment shall be of a type that will not damage the work being done and has sufficient power to operate the drawn equipment effectively .
Equipment used under this Section shall meet the following specific requirements as to type size capacity power or dimensions In determining whether a particular piece of equipment is classified as Type I II or III in Subsection .a Subsection .c Subsection .d or Subsection .f the make and model number shall be referenced against an equipment guide book .
Whenever certain size equipment is requested by the Engineer and the Contractor supplies a larger size payment will be for the size requested .
a Bulldozer .
The tractor shall be a crawler type furnished with an angle type blade and power operated controls .
The machine shall be classified by size as follows Type I .
Type I bulldozers shall have a net engine or flywheel power rating of less than horsepower .
Type II .
Type II bulldozers shall have a net engine or flywheel power rating of not less than horsepower .
b Grader .
The power grader shall be selfpropelled with pneumatic tire wheels poweroperated controls and a wheel base of at least feet .
c All Purpose Excavator .
The machine shall be a hydraulic excavator and may be selfpropelled truck mounted or crawlermounted .
It shall include all attachments required by the Engineer to efficiently perform the work for which it is rented .
The machine shall be classified by size as follows Type I .
Type I allpurpose excavators shall have a rated bucket capacity of at least cubic yard but less than cubic yard .
Type II .
Type II allpurpose excavators shall have a rated bucket capacity of not less than cubic yard .
d Power Broom .
Power broom shall provide a sweeping path of not less than inches and be capable of maintaining a speed of miles per hour when sweeping .
Sweeping shall take place at locations and times directed by the Engineer .
The disposal of all sweepings shall meet with the approval of the Engineer .
All hand labor required in connection with sweeping operations shall be incidental .
Type I .
Type I power brooms shall be selfpropelled or a towed type including the tow vehicle .
Type II .
Type II power brooms shall consist of furnishing a pickup sweeper and accessory equipment and utilizing it for removal of Earth andor other dust producing materials from paved surfaces for allaying dust conditions .
This equipment shall include suitable provisions for the application of water ahead of the sweeping brooms to prevent dusting for the pickup internal storage and removal of sweepings and for the cleaning of areas of heavy accumulation beyond the capacity of the sweeper .
Type III .
Type III power broom shall be a regenerative type air sweeper capable of removing and containing all micronsized fine dust particles from the designated surface .
e Truck .
The truck may be the highway type or offhighway type with a minimum capacity of cubic yards .
The capacity of the truck shall be determined by threedimensional measurement of the body .
All offhighway type trucks are restricted unless otherwise approved by the Engineer .
f Loader .
The loader may be the wheel or crawler type straight or articulated and shall be furnished with a standard bucket .
The machine shall be classified by size as follows .
Type I .
Type I loaders shall have a rated bucket capacity of at least cubic yard but less than cubic yards .
g TruckMounted Attenuator .
Truckmounted attenuator TMA is a crash cushion designed to smoothly decelerate an impacting vehicle .
The TMA may be mounted on either trailers or trucks the unit on which the TMA is mounted must weigh at least pounds with a heavier unit being preferable .
The unit on which the TMA is mounted shall be used as a barrier vehicle as described in the MUTCD .
All such attenuators shall meet Test Level TL criteria as defined in NCHRP Report or the current AASHTO Manual for Assessing Safety Hardware MASH and its latest revisions .
The Contractor shall provide the type of TMA date of manufacture and the current FHWAs eligibility letter for the truckmounted attenuator to the Engineer for approval prior to installation .
The TMA shall be placed in accordance with the Contract Documents and as directed by the Engineer .
Prior to use the Contractor shall provide the type of attenuator date of manufacture and FHWAs eligibility letter for the truckmounted attenuator to the Engineer .
h TruckMounted Attenuator Advanced Warning VehicleProtection Vehicle AWVPV .
Truck mounted attenuator AWVPV shall consist of a truckmounted attenuator meeting the requirements of Subsection .g and be equipped with a changeable message sign in accordance with the MUTCD .
The changeable message sign shall be mounted to be clearly visible to the traveling public and shall be capable of being controlled from inside the cab of the vehicle with capable controls including but not limited to turning the sign on and off changing between preset messages and inserting new messages when approved by the Engineer . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT .
The Engineer will issue Written Orders to the Contractor for work to be performed by the specified equipment .
The quantity of equipment to be measured for payment will be the number of hours each piece of equipment actually worked including necessary travel time within the Project limits . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT .
The accepted quantity of the specified equipment will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per hour .
Payment will be full compensation for performing the work specified for furnishing operating and supervising the use of this equipment including fuel repairs attachments and transportation of the equipment to and from the Project and for furnishing all labor tools other equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
The Contract Unit Price for the items TruckMounted Attenuator and TruckMounted Attenuator AWVPV shall also include all costs of furnishing the unit on which the attenuator is mounted solely for the attenuator .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Bulldozer Rental Type I Hour .
Bulldozer Rental Type II Hour .
Power Grader Rental Hour .
All Purpose Excavator Rental Type I Hour .
All Purpose Excavator Rental Type II Hour .
Power Broom Rental Type I Hour .
Power Broom Rental Type II Hour .
Power Broom Rental Type III Hour .
Truck Rental Hour .
Loader Rental Type I Hour .
TruckMounted Attenuator Hour .
TruckMounted Attenuator AWVPV Hour SECTION DUST AND ICE CONTROL .
DESCRIPTION .
This work shall consist of treating traveled areas to control dust or reduce ice hazard on the Project. . MATERIALS .
Materials shall meet the requirements of the following Subsections Water .
Calcium Chloride . . DUST CONTROL WITH WATER .
Water shall be applied to traveled areas as the Engineer may designate .
The number of applications and the amount of water used shall be based upon field and weather conditions and as ordered in writing by the Engineer .
The equipment for water application shall be equipped with an adequate shutoff valve control in the cab and shall be approved by the Engineer .
The equipment shall be available at all times in readiness to perform the work at any time including Sundays and holidays upon Written Order of the Engineer. . DUST AND ICE CONTROL WITH CALCIUM CHLORIDE .
Calcium chloride shall be applied in such a manner and by such devices that uniform distribution is obtained over the entire area on which it is ordered by the Engineer .
Unless otherwise authorized in writing by the Engineer calcium chloride shall be applied at the rate of one half pound per square yard for dust and ice control .
It shall not be used on surfaces on which bituminous material will be applied unless directed by the Engineer .
When used on granular surfaces on which bituminous material will be applied the surface shall be reworked by grading or other means to ensure that the surface is sufficiently free of excess calcium chloride as determined by the Engineer . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT .
The quantity of Dust Control with Water to be measured for payment will be the number of thousands of gallons MGAL of water actually used in the complete and accepted work .
The Contractor shall provide equipment meeting the approval of the Engineer for measuring the quantity of water applied .
The quantity of Dust and Ice Control with Calcium Chloride to be measured for payment will be the number of tons of calcium chloride actually used in the complete and accepted work .
When calcium chloride is delivered in bulk the quantity will be determined from load tickets . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT .
The accepted quantity of Dust Control with Water will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per thousand gallons MGAL .
The accepted quantity of Dust and Ice Control with Calcium Chloride will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per ton .
Payment will be full compensation for furnishing measuring the load transporting handling and placing the material specified including any reworking of granular surfaces as specified and for furnishing all labor materials tools equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Dust Control with Water MGAL .
Dust and Ice Control with Calcium Chloride Ton SECTION THIS SECTION RESERVED SECTION STONE FILL AND RIPRAP .
DESCRIPTION .
This work shall consist of furnishing and placing protective materials. . MATERIALS .
Materials shall meet the requirements of the following Subsections Sand Borrow .
Gravel Filter for Slope Stabilization .
Stone for Riprap Heavy Type .a Stone for Riprap Light Type .b Stone for Stone Fill Type I .a Stone for Stone Fill Type II .b Stone for Stone Fill Type III .c Stone for Stone Fill Type IV .d Environmental Stone EStone .
Stone Fill Culvert Lining and Stone Fill Stream Bed Material shall consist of EStone fill of the type specified in the Plans supplemented with material excavated from the channel andor the tailings of a topsoil screening operation .
Bed material shall be approved by the Engineer and the Agency of Natural Resources prior to use .
Similar sized river sediment is an acceptable alternative as is a mixture of angular material and river sediment . .
PREPARATION .
The areas to be protected shall be constructed and graded to the lines shown on the Plans or as directed by the Engineer and if a fill area shall be compacted .
All slopes shall be maintained to the neat lines shown on the Plans prior to the placing of filter or bedding material stone fill or riprap . .
PLACING .
a Stone Fill .
The specified stone fill shall be placed as shown on the Plans in a manner that will result in a reasonably well graded surface .
Care shall be taken in the placing to avoid displacing the underlying material .
Stone Fill placed inside of a closed structure shall be placed such that the structure is not damaged .
The stones shall be so placed and distributed that there will be no segregation of either the larger or smaller sizes of stone .
Rearrangement of the stone fill by hand labor or mechanical equipment may be required to obtain the specified results .
When stone fill and gravel filter are to be placed as part of an embankment the protective materials shall be placed concurrently with the construction of the embankment unless otherwise directed by the Engineer .
Where stone fill is to be placed under water methods shall be used that will minimize segregation and ensure that the required thickness of protective material will be obtained .
Once all material has been placed the Contractor shall slowly wet the stream to minimize the effects of the initial sediment pulse .
Every attempt shall be made to minimize the movement of sediment downstream of the site .
Sand Borrow shall be added to seal the bed and prevent subsurface flow as directed by the Engineer .
There shall be no subsurface flow upon Final Inspection .
b Riprap .
The stones shall be placed on the prepared slope or gravel filter so that there will be a minimum of space between the stones .
The depth of each stone shall be equal to the thickness of the course shown on the Plans .
The voids between the stones shall be chinked with smaller stones to produce a relatively smooth and uniform surface . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT .
The quantities of Stone Fill and Riprap of the type specified to be measured for payment will be the number of cubic yards of the material specified installed in the complete and accepted work measured within the limits shown on the Plans or as directed by the Engineer . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT .
The accepted quantities of Stone Fill and Riprap of the type specified will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per cubic yard .
Payment will be full compensation for furnishing transporting mixing and placing the specified material and for furnishing all labor tools equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
Excavation required for placing stone fill riprap and the gravel filter or bedding material will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per cubic yard for the same type of excavation removed directly above the face of the protective materials except that when no other type of excavation has been removed excavation will be paid for under an appropriate excavation Contract Item .
Unless otherwise shown on the Plans the filter blanket will be paid for under the Contract Item Gravel Filter for Slope Stabilization .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Stone Fill Culvert Lining Cubic Yard .
Stone Fill Stream Bed Material Cubic Yard .
Stone Fill Type I Cubic Yard .
Stone Fill Type II Cubic Yard .
Stone Fill Type III Cubic Yard .
Stone Fill Type IV Cubic Yard .
Riprap Heavy Type Cubic Yard .
Riprap Light Type Cubic Yard SECTION THIS SECTION RESERVED SECTION CURBS AND GUTTERS .
DESCRIPTION .
This work shall consist of the construction resetting or removal of curbs and gutters. . MATERIALS .
Materials shall meet the requirements of the following Subsections PerformanceGraded Asphalt Binder Prepared from Petroleum .
Emulsified Asphalt .
Sand Borrow and Cushion .
Mortar Type I . Mortar Type IV .
Joint Sealer Hot Poured .a Preformed Joint Filler Cork and AsphaltTreated Felt .
Preformed Joint Filler Bituminous Type .a Timber Preservative .
Vertical Granite Curb .
Granite Slope Edging .
Precast Reinforced Concrete Curb .
Bituminous Concrete Curb .
Treated Timber Curb .
All castinplace concrete for curbing and gutters shall conform to the requirements of Section for Concrete Class B .
There shall be a mineral admixture substitution for Portland cement of fly ash or Ground Granulated BlastFurnace Slag GGBFS .
Bituminous material for curbs gutters and traffic islands of the type specified by the Engineer shall meet the requirements of Section . .
GRANITE CURBING AND SLOPE EDGING .
a Excavation .
Excavation shall be made to the required depth .
The base material on which the curb is to be set shall be compacted to a firm even surface .
All soft and unsuitable material shall be removed and replaced with suitable material that shall be thoroughly compacted .
b Installation .
Shall be installed in conformance with the line and grade shown on the Plans .
All space under the curbing shall be filled and thoroughly tamped with material meeting the requirements of the material for the bed course .
c Joints .
The curb and slope edging shall be laid and fitted so there will be no open joints exceeding inch between stones .
Joints between stones shall be carefully filled with Mortar Type I and neatly pointed on the top and exposed front portions .
After pointing the stone shall be satisfactorily cleaned of all excess mortar and the joints kept moist until the mortar has set .
d Backfilling .
After the joints have set any remaining excavated areas shall be filled and tamped with approved material placed in layers not exceeding inches in depth . .
THIS SUBSECTION RESERVED. . REPOINTING GRANITE BRIDGE CURB .
The existing mortar bed and vertical curb joints shall be repointed as shown on the Plans .
Mortar shall meet the requirements of Subsection .. . CASTINPLACE CONCRETE CURB .
a Excavation .
Excavation and bedding shall conform to the requirements of Subsection .a .
b Forms .
Forms shall be of wood or metal straight or curved as required free from warp and shall be in accordance with Subsection .. Form construction shall be such that there will be no interference to the inspection of grade or alignment .
All forms shall extend for the entire depth of the curb and shall be braced and secured sufficiently so that no deflection from alignment or grade will occur during the placing of the concrete .
c Mixing and Placing .
Compaction of concrete placed in the forms shall be by spading or other approved methods .
Forms shall be left in place for hours or until the concrete has set sufficiently so that they can be removed without injury to the curbing .
Upon removal of the forms the exposed curbing face shall be finished in accordance with Subsection .a .
d Sections .
Curbing shall be constructed in sections having a uniform length of feet unless otherwise specified .
Sections shall be separated by open joints inch wide except at expansion joints .
e Expansion Joints .
Expansion joints shall be formed at the intervals shown on the Plans using a preformed joint filler having a thickness of inch .
They shall be constructed at feet intervals or as directed by the Engineer .
f Curing .
Curbs shall be cured in accordance with Subsection .. g Backfilling .
After the concrete has set sufficiently the spaces in front and back of the curb shall be filled to the required elevation with layers of not more than inches of the same material as the bedding and thoroughly tamped .
h Curb Machine .
With the approval of the Engineer the curb may be constructed by a curbforming machine. . PRECAST CONCRETE CURB .
a Excavation .
Excavation and bedding shall conform to the requirements of Subsection .a .
b Installation .
Precast concrete curb shall be installed in accordance with Subsection .b .
c Joints .
Unless otherwise shown on the Plans or directed by the Engineer expansion joints shall be placed every feet .
The curb sections shall be placed and fitted so that there will be no open joints between them exceeding inch in width .
Expansion joints shall be filled with preformed joint filler having a thickness of inch .
Joints in the curb at concrete deck joints shall be treated as shown on the Plans .
The Contractor shall protect the curb against damage or discoloration of the exposed surfaces until completion of the Contract .
d Backfilling .
The space in front and back of the curb shall be filled and compacted in layers not exceeding inches with the same material as the bedding unless otherwise specified. . BITUMINOUS CONCRETE CURB .
a General .
The plant and equipment necessary for this work shall be in conformance with the requirements of Section .
b Preparation of Bed .
The bituminous concrete curb shall be placed on bituminous concrete pavement or another hard surface .
The surface shall be thoroughly cleaned of all dirt dust sand or other loose material and treated with a tack coat of emulsified asphalt applied at a rate of from to ounces per square yard prior to placing the curb .
All exposed surfaces not to be treated shall be protected against spattering of the bituminous material .
c Placing .
After the tack coat has cured and become tacky the mix for the curb shall be placed with an automatic bituminous concrete curb laying machine approved by the Engineer .
The machine shall form curbing that is uniform in texture shape and density .
The Engineer may permit the construction of curbing by means other than the automatic curber or machine when short sections or sections with short radii are required or for such other reasons as may be warranted .
The resulting curbing shall conform in all respects to the curbing produced using the machine .
d Sealing .
After the curb has been in place for Calendar Days the exposed surface shall be treated with two coats of emulsified asphalt or tar emulsion . .
TREATED TIMBER CURB .
The treated timber bituminous fillet and granular material behind the curb shall be installed as shown on the Plans .
The fillet will be sealed as specified in Subsection .d . .
REMOVING AND RESETTING CURB .
a Salvage of Curbing .
The Contractor shall carefully remove store and clean any curbing specified for resetting .
Any existing curbing to be reset that is lost damaged or destroyed as a result of the Contractors operations or failure to store and protect it in a manner that would prevent its loss or damage shall be replaced at the Contractors expense .
b Placing .
Excavation setting joints and backfilling shall be in accordance with Specifications for the type of curb being removed and reset .
c Cutting and Fitting .
Cutting fitting or dressing may be necessary to install the curbing at the locations directed .
d Joints .
All sections shall be placed so that the maximum opening between sections is not more than inch wide for the entire top and face .
Any dressing of the ends of the curbing necessary to meet this requirement shall be done by the Contractor .
Joints shall be filled completely with mortar and kept moist until the mortar has been set .
e Backfilling .
After the joints have set any remaining excavated areas shall be filled and tamped with approved material placed in layers not exceeding inches in depth . .
REMOVAL OF EXISTING CURB .
The Contractor shall remove existing curb at locations shown on the Plans or as directed by the Engineer .
When shown in the Contract Documents that the curb will remain the property of the State or municipality the Contractor shall exercise care to avoid damage to the curb during removal .
Salvaged curb shall be carefully and neatly stacked with wooden spacers at locations specified in the Contract or as directed by the Engineer. . BITUMINOUS CONCRETE GUTTERS AND TRAFFIC ISLANDS .
a General .
The plant and equipment necessary for this work shall conform to the requirements of Section .
b Preparation of Bed .
The bed upon which the bituminous concrete surface is to be placed shall be thoroughly compacted to the lines grades and shape shown on the Plans or directed by the Engineer .
In the case of gutters all soft yielding or unsuitable material below the bed shall be removed and replaced with suitable material and compacted to a firm smooth surface .
c Construction of Gutter .
The bituminous concrete shall be laid in two courses .
Each course shall be rolled with a roller weighing at least pounds .
The finished gutter shall be uniform in appearance free from irregularities and present a smooth surface .
All joints adjacent to pavements curbs and structures shall be coated with emulsified asphalt . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT .
The quantities of Granite Slope Edging Vertical Granite Curb Vertical Granite Curb Mountable Precast Reinforced Concrete Curb of the type specified CastinPlace Concrete Curb of the type specified Bituminous Concrete Curb of the type specified Treated Timber Curb and Removing and Resetting Curb to be measured for payment will be the number of linear feet installed in the complete and accepted work as determined along the face of the finished curb .
The quantity of Repointing Granite Bridge Curb to be measured for payment will be the number of gallons of mortar applied in the completed and accepted work measured to the nearest gallon .
The quantities of Bituminous Concrete Gutters and Traffic Islands to be measured for payment will be the number of tons installed in the complete and accepted work as determined from the load tickets .
The quantity of Removal of Existing Curb to be measured for payment will be the number of linear feet removed in the complete and accepted work measured along the face of the curb in its original position . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT .
The accepted quantities of Granite Slope Edging Vertical Granite Curb Vertical Granite Curb Mountable Precast Reinforced Concrete Curb of the type specified CastinPlace Concrete Curb of the type specified Bituminous Concrete Curb of the type specified Treated Timber Curb Removing and Resetting Curb and Removal of Existing Curb will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per linear foot of curb placed removed or removed and reset .
The accepted quantity of Repointing Granite Bridge Curb will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per gallon .
Payment will be full compensation for furnishing transporting handling and placing the material specified and for furnishing all labor tools equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
The accepted quantities of Bituminous Concrete Gutters and Traffic Islands will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per ton .
Payment will be full compensation for furnishing transporting handling and placing the specified materials including all excavation providing placing and compacting backfill material when not otherwise specified mortar for the bed and joints of curbs joint material for curbs and gutters anchors for bridge curbs cleaning cutting fitting dressing or stockpiling of curb and for furnishing all labor tools equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
Tack prime or seal coats of bituminous material required for the construction of Bituminous Concrete Curb of the type specified and Treated Timber Curb will not be paid for separately but will be considered incidental to the Contract Unit Price for the specific item .
The bituminous fillet shown on the Plans to be placed in front of timber curb will not be paid for separately but will be considered incidental to the Contract Unit Price for Treated Timber Curb .
The removal of treated timber curbing including the bituminous concrete fillet from installations where the existing guardrail is removed will not be paid for separately but will be considered incidental to the Contract Item Removing and Resetting Guardrail or Removal and Disposal of Guardrail as appropriate .
When shown on the Plans concrete radius curb installed in conjunction with vertical granite curb will be measured and paid for as Vertical Granite Curb .
Foundation materials for Bituminous Concrete Gutters and Traffic Islands will be paid for separately as specified in the Contract .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Granite Slope Edging Linear Foot .
Vertical Granite Curb Linear Foot .
Vertical Granite Curb Mountable Linear Foot .
Repointing Granite Bridge Curb Gallon .
Precast Reinforced Concrete Curb Type A Linear Foot .
Precast Reinforced Concrete Curb Type B Linear Foot .
CastinPlace Concrete Curb Type A Linear Foot .
CastinPlace Concrete Curb Type B Linear Foot .
Bituminous Concrete Curb Type A Linear Foot .
Bituminous Concrete Curb Type B Linear Foot .
Treated Timber Curb Linear Foot .
Removing and Resetting Curb Linear Foot .
Removal of Existing Curb Linear Foot .
Bituminous Concrete Gutters and Traffic Islands Ton SECTION MAILBOXES .
DESCRIPTION .
This work shall consist of the removal and relocation of existing mailboxes to permanent locations .
The work shall include the replacement of any nonconforming boxes supports or attachment hardware .
As used in this Section the term mailbox shall include the actual box post or other support and attachment hardware. . MATERIALS .
Materials shall meet the requirements of the following Subsections Timber Preservative Type IV .
Wood Posts .c Brackets and platforms shall be made of galvanized steel sheets .
Holes shall be neatly punched or drilled .
Fasteners shall be galvanized and meet the requirements of ASTM A .
New boxes must meet the approval of the U.S .
Postal Service. . GENERAL .
Mailboxes designated to be relocated shall be carefully removed and reinstalled as shown on the Plans .
Any materials in the existing mailbox installation which do not conform to the Plans or Subsection .
shall be replaced with new conforming materials .
Materials not reused shall remain the property of the owner .
It is the Contractors responsibility to ensure that each completed relocation has the approval of the mail carrier. . RELOCATION .
Posts may be set in holes or they may be driven if the posts or any attached anti twist devices are not damaged .
The installed posts shall be plumb and placed to the depth shown on the Plans .
The space around the posts set in holes shall be backfilled with suitable granular material in inch layers .
The backfill material shall be thoroughly tamped .
Mailboxes shall be attached to the posts using the mountings and hardware shown on the Plans .
All fasteners shall be drawn sufficiently tight to ensure that the mailboxes do not pivot or otherwise move .
Existing nameplates shall be attached to any new mailboxes .
Names and rural box numbers lettered on existing mailboxes shall be copied onto new mailboxes using good commercialquality stickon letters acceptable to the Engineer . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT .
The quantity of Remove and Reset Mailbox to be measured for payment will be the number of each type Single or Multiple Support relocated in the complete and accepted work as determined by the Engineer .
The quantity of Remove and Replace Mailbox to be measured for payment will be the number of each type Single or Multiple Support relocated in the complete and accepted work as determined by the Engineer . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT .
The accepted quantity of Remove and Reset Mailbox and Remove and Replace Mailbox of the type specified will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price each .
Payment will be full compensation for removing the existing mailbox installing the mailbox in its permanent location excavating as necessary backfill and furnishing all new materials including mailbox supports support hardware and lettering and for furnishing all labor tools equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
Any temporary relocation of mailboxes due to Project construction will not be paid under this Section .
The costs of this temporary work will be considered incidental to other Contract Items .
Pay Item Pay Unit .
Remove and Reset Mailbox Single Support Each .
Remove and Reset Mailbox Multiple Support Each .
Remove and Replace Mailbox Single Support Each .
Remove and Replace Mailbox Multiple Support Each SECTION SIDEWALKS .
DESCRIPTION .
This work shall consist of the construction of bituminous or Portland cement concrete sidewalks and curb ramps. . MATERIALS .
Materials shall meet the requirements of the following Subsections Emulsified Asphalt .
Preformed Joint Filler Cork and AsphaltTreated Felt .
Preformed Joint Filler Bituminous Type .
Detectable Warning Surface .
Concrete for sidewalks shall conform to the requirements of Section for Concrete Class B .
There shall be a mineral admixture substitution for Portland cement of fly ash or GGBFS .
The type of bituminous materials for sidewalks shall be as specified in the Plans or as directed by the Engineer .
The material shall meet the requirements of Section . . PORTLAND CEMENT CONCRETE SIDEWALK .
a Excavation and Foundation .
Excavation shall be made to the required depth and to a width that will permit placing of bed course material and the installation and bracing of the forms .
Bed course material shall be placed as shown on the Plans .
When the depth of bed course required exceeds inches two layers of approximately equal depth shall be placed and each layer thoroughly compacted so that it is hard and unyielding .
The wetting of bed course material may be necessary to obtain the required compaction .
b Forms .
Forms shall meet the applicable requirements of Subsection .. Forms shall be wood or metal and shall extend for the full depth of the concrete .
All forms shall be straight or curved as required and free from warp .
c Placing Concrete .
The forms and foundation shall be wetted immediately prior to the placing of the concrete .
The concrete shall be deposited within the forms to such a depth that after being consolidated and finished it is of the full thickness required .
The concrete shall be consolidated using a method approved by the Engineer .
d Finishing .
The surface shall be finished with a wooden float or mag .
No plastering will be permitted .
The edges shall be rounded with an edger having a radius of inch .
Before the concrete has taken its initial set it shall be tested for waves or irregularities with a straightedge at least feet long .
Deviations of inch or more either above or below the general contour of the surface shall be immediately remedied .
The surface of the sidewalk after the floating and screeding process is completed shall be finished with a broom of a type approved by the Engineer drawn over the surface parallel to the transverse joints .
e Joints .
Unless otherwise shown on the Plans or directed by the Engineer expansion joints shall be placed every feet .
Expansion joints shall be formed around all appurtenances such as manholes Utility poles and other obstructions extending into and through the sidewalk .
Preformed joint filler with a thickness of inch shall be installed in these joints .
Expansion joint filler of the thickness indicated shall be installed between concrete sidewalks and any fixed structure such as a building or bridge .
This expansion joint material shall extend for the full depth of the sidewalk .
Between the expansion joints the sidewalk shall be divided at intervals of feet by dummy joints formed by a jointing tool or other acceptable means to provide grooves approximately inch wide and at least of the total sidewalk depth .
When the sidewalk is constructed next to a concrete or granite curb asphalttreated felt shall be placed between the sidewalk and curb for the total depth of the sidewalk .
f Curing .
Concrete shall be cured in accordance with Subsection .. During the curing period all traffic both pedestrian and vehicular shall be excluded .
Vehicular traffic shall be excluded for such additional time until of the design strength has been attained as demonstrated by fieldcured cylinders .
g Backfilling .
After sidewalk construction has been completed the space on each side shall be backfilled to the required elevation with suitable material as shown on the Plans or as directed by the Engineer. . BITUMINOUS CONCRETE SIDEWALK .
a Excavation and Foundation .
Excavation and foundation shall conform to the requirements of Subsection .a .
b Forms .
Where no headers curbing or other suitable supports are provided grade control forms shall be installed when hand methods are utilized to assist in obtaining proper alignment and adequate compaction of the sidewalk course .
The alignment and grade of all forms set shall be approved by the Engineer immediately prior to placing any material against them .
The forms shall be cleaned thoroughly each time they are used .
String or wire lines staked to grade will not be accepted as a substitute for grade control forms .
When a suitable abutting curb or header is available and is approved by the Engineer as being in conformity with the intended grade it may be utilized as a grade control form .
c Placing Bituminous Sidewalk Material .
Bituminous sidewalk material shall be placed on the compacted bed course as directed by the Engineer by either mechanical or hand spreading methods in a manner that the required depth will result after rolling .
When placing over an existing surface the surface shall be cleaned and emulsified asphalt applied before the bituminous concrete is placed .
d Compaction .
Compaction shall be accomplished by means of a hand operated or power roller of a type and mass acceptable to the Engineer .
In areas inaccessible to the roller hand tamping will be permitted .
In any case the bituminous sidewalk material shall be uniformly compacted and shall present a smooth even surface. . DETECTABLE WARNING SURFACE .
Detectable Warning Surface shall be one of the Detectable Warning Surfaces on the Agencys Approved Products List .
a General .
Detectable Warning Surfaces shall be furnished and installed as indicated in the Contract and in conformance with ADA Accessibility Guidelines .
b Handling .
Detectable Warning Surface materials shall be suitably packaged or crated to prevent damage in shipment or handling .
Finished surfaces shall be protected by sturdy wrappings .
c Installation .
The Detectable Warning Surface shall be installed in accordance with all applicable supplier and manufacturer requirements and recommendations for environmental conditions surface preparation installation procedures curing procedures and materials compatibility .
The Contractor is responsible for removing any material spatters .
The Contractor shall repair any damage to the surface resulting from either installation or cleanup of surface materials .
This work shall be performed at no additional cost to the State . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT .
The quantity of Portland Cement Concrete Sidewalk to be measured for payment will be the number of square yards of the specified depth of sidewalk installed in the complete and accepted work .
The quantity of Bituminous Concrete Sidewalk to be measured for payment will be the number of tons of material installed in the complete and accepted work as determined from load tickets .
The quantity of Detectable Warning Surface to be measured for payment will be the number of square feet of approved material installed in the complete and accepted work . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT .
The accepted quantities of Portland Cement Concrete Sidewalk will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per square yard for the specified depth .
The accepted quantity of Bituminous Concrete Sidewalk will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per ton .
The accepted quantity of Detectable Warning Surface will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per square foot .
Payment will be full compensation for furnishing transporting handling and placing the materials specified including expansion joint material and for furnishing all labor tools equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
The cost of cleaning an existing surface before placing a Bituminous Concrete Sidewalk and the application of emulsified asphalt will not be paid for directly but will be considered incidental to the Contract Item Bituminous Concrete Sidewalk .
Bed course material will be paid for under the appropriate Section Contract Item .
Excavation unless otherwise specified will be paid for under the appropriate Section Contract Item .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Portland Cement Concrete Sidewalk Inch Square Yard .
Portland Cement Concrete Sidewalk Inch Square Yard .
Bituminous Concrete Sidewalk Ton .
Detectable Warning Surface Square Foot SECTION MARKERS .
DESCRIPTION .
This work shall consist of furnishing and placing boundary markers marker posts and bollards and removing and resetting of existing property markers. . MATERIALS .
Materials shall meet the requirements of the following Subsections Crushed Gravel for Subbase .
Mortar Type I .
Bar Reinforcement .
Wood Posts and Offset Blocks for Guardrail Barriers and Guide Posts .a Steel Posts and Anchors .a Paints Stains and Traffic Marking materials shall meet the requirements of Subsection ..
Concrete shall meet the requirements of Section for Concrete Class B. .
PLACING .
a General .
Boundary markers marker posts and bollards of the dimensions shown in the Contract shall be placed vertically in holes to the depths indicated and shall be backfilled with suitable material placed and compacted in layers not more than inches in depth .
Marker posts and bollards may be driven if suitable caps and driving equipment are used to prevent damage to the post .
Yielding marker posts shall be feet long and shall be embedded to a depth of feet in the ground .
b Boundary Markers .
When the marker point falls on ledge a steel rod marker shall be placed in a hole of the diameter and depth shown on the Plans or as directed by the Engineer .
The rod shall be securely wedged into the hole and cut off to the required elevation .
The space around the rod shall be filled with Type I mortar .
c Bollards .
Bollards shall be installed as shown on the Plans or as directed by the Engineer .
d Removing and Resetting Property Markers .
Prior to the removal of any property marker the Contractor shall verify that the Engineer has located and properly referenced the marker location .
The Contractor shall remove properly identify and store the property markers to be reset prior to beginning any other construction in the immediate vicinity .
If the property marker is to be installed at a new location the hole after removal shall be properly backfilled with suitable material .
Each property marker shall be reset at the location directed and shall be inches above the ground sidewalk or other surface unless otherwise directed by the Engineer .
When the marker point falls on ledge and the use of a steel rod marker is directed by the Engineer it shall be set in accordance with Subsection .b . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT .
The quantity to be measured for payment will be the number of inplace Markers Bollards or Posts and the number of Property Markers removed and reset in the complete and accepted work . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT .
The accepted quantity of each type of Marker Bollard or Post and Property Markers removed and reset will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price each .
Payment will be full compensation for furnishing transporting handling and placing the materials specified including object markers paint locking devices excavation backfill mortar concrete and subbase and for furnishing all labor tools materials equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
The Contract Unit Prices for the items of Wood Marker Posts Steel Marker Posts and Yielding Marker Posts will also include the costs of removing the remaining portion of the existing marker post when the designated new marker post is used as a replacement of an existing marker post .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Boundary Markers Each .
Bollards Each .
Wood Marker Posts Each .
Yielding Marker Posts Each .
Removing and Resetting Property Markers Each SECTION FENCES .
DESCRIPTION .
This work shall consist of the construction of fences and gates. . MATERIALS .
Materials shall meet the requirements of the following Subsections Mortar Type I . Woven Wire Fence .
ChainLink Fence .
Snow Barrier Fence .
Plank Rail .
Posts and Post Accessories .
Hardware for Cable Steel Beam and Thrie Beam Rail .a Grounding Electrodes .
When chainlink fence is specified in the Plans but the material is not the Contractor may elect to use galvanized vinyl coated or aluminum coated steel fabric for the fence as long as it conforms to the design shown on the Plans .
The materials for snow barrier shall conform to the requirements of this Subsection and the details shown on the Plans .
The Contractor may use preformed inch inch flat aluminum wire bands to attach the chainlink fabric to the galvanized pipe support framework .
The bands shall be made of H Alloy having a minimum tensile strength of ksi and an approved closure as an alternate to the stainless steel clips shown on the Plans .
Concrete shall meet the requirements of Section for Concrete Class B. . GENERAL .
All trees brush and other obstructions which interfere with proper grade alignment and construction of fences shall be removed and disposed of as specified in Section unless otherwise directed by the Engineer .
Modification of the alignment may be made as directed by the Engineer to preserve valuable trees or other features .
Posts shall be set plumb at the spacing and depth shown on the Plans and when used for property line fence shall be erected parallel to and inches inside the RightofWay line .
The wire shall be placed on the far side of the posts with respect to the transportation facility .
Existing fences shall be connected to new fences as shown on the Plans .
Corner posts with braces for every direction of strain shall be placed at the junction with existing fences and the wire in both fences shall be properly fastened to the posts .
In no case shall the fence be connected to a structure. . ERECTION OF WOVEN WIRE FENCE .
Where the ground is too soft to hold the post firmly and in depressions where stresses will tend to pull posts from the ground a second post shall be installed to such depth as necessary and the two posts tied together securely as shown on the Plans .
Wood posts shall be set with the large end down in previously dug holes and backfilled with approved material .
When tops of treated posts are cut as shown on the Plans or directed by the Engineer the cut end shall be treated with two coats of copper napthenate solution .
Steel posts shall be set with anchor plates down except that when set in rock the anchor plates shall be omitted .
When driving posts the tops shall be protected by driving caps .
When bedrock is encountered steel posts shall be used instead of wood posts .
The posts shall be set in drilled holes to the depth shown on the Plans and grouted with Mortar Type I so that they are firmly held in position .
When boulders are encountered they shall be removed the hole backfilled with suitable materials thoroughly compacted and the holes redrilled before installing the posts in the usual manner .
The fence shall be braced as shown on the Plans or directed by the Engineer with one brace at each end post including end posts at gates and two braces at each intermediate post or pull post and at corner posts where the change in horizontal alignment is in excess of .
The posts and braces for steel corner end and pull posts shall be set in concrete as shown on the Plans .
The concrete may be mixed by hand .
The woven wire fence shall be stretched taut and attached to the posts so that the bottom wire is approximately inches above the ground .
When wood posts are used each horizontal wire shall be fastened to the posts with No .
gauge galvanized or aluminumcoated staples inches long .
When steel posts are used each horizontal wire shall be fastened to the posts with aluminum bars galvanized steel bars or No .
gauge rustresistant spring wire clips .
Instead of the fasteners posts equipped with fastening studs approximately inch high and inches apart may be used. . ERECTION OF CHAINLINK FENCE .
Posts shall be set in concrete bases of the dimensions shown on the Plans .
Where the ground is too soft to firmly hold the line end corner pull or gate posts a post of sufficient length shall be used to obtain stability as directed by the Engineer .
Where rock is encountered the posts shall be set in drilled holes to the depth shown on the Plans and grouted with Mortar Type I so they are firmly held in position .
When boulders are encountered they shall be removed the hole backfilled with suitable materials thoroughly compacted and the hole redrilled before installing the posts in the usual manner .
The wire fabric shall be properly stretched without sags or buckles and attached to the posts as shown on the Plans .
Tension wires shall be installed top and bottom as indicated .
After erection any galvanized parts or fittings that have been abraded so that the base metal is exposed shall be painted with two coats of an approved coating .
Any abrasions on aluminumcoated steel chainlink fence and the contacting surface of aluminum alloy or aluminumcoated steel chainlink fence with concrete stone or masonry shall be thoroughly coated with an approved coating .
Abraded areas shall receive a second coat of aluminum paint .
The paint shall be allowed to dry thoroughly before installation of the fence .
Where chainlink fence is used in the areas of bicycle paths the top selvedge shall be knuckled. . PLANK RAIL FENCE .
Plank Rail Fence shall be install as shown on the Plans . .
SNOW BARRIER FENCE .
Snow Barrier shall be installed as detailed and at the locations shown on the Plans .
The wire fabric for the snow barrier shall be inch square mesh .
The bottom and top selvedges shall be knuckled .
The snow barrier mesh shall be installed on the traffic side of the snow barrier framework . .
REMOVING AND RESETTING FENCE .
Existing fence and posts shall be carefully removed at locations shown on the Plans .
Any material damaged while being removed hauled or stored and during the process of resetting due to carelessness on the part of the Contractor as determined by the Engineer shall be replaced with new materials at the Contractors expense .
The posts shall be reset in the same manner as posts for new fence and to the same depth and spacing of the fence before removal .
The material used for fencing between posts shall be securely fastened to the posts in their new locations as shown on the Plans for the type of fence being installed . .
REMOVAL OF EXISTING FENCE .
Existing fence and posts shall be removed at locations shown on the Plans .
When fence is to be salvaged for future use the Contractor will exercise care during removal to prevent damage and will stockpile the fence at locations indicated in the Contract or as directed by the Engineer .
When fence is not to be salvaged it shall become the property of the Contractor and will be removed from the Project area in a manner acceptable to the Engineer. . GATES .
The gates shall be of the design shown on the Plans and shall be completed in a neat and professional manner .
The gate hold backs and center stops shall be set in concrete similar to the design and Specifications for chainlink fence line posts .
The top rail of the gates shall be level along the entire top of the gates . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT .
The quantity of Fence of the type and size specified to be measured for payment will be the number of linear feet installed in the complete and accepted work .
Measurement will be along the top of the fence from outside to outside of end posts for each continuous run of fence .
Measurement will include fence at bracing assemblies but not at gates .
The quantity of Gate of the type and size specified to be measured for payment will be the number of linear feet of clear distance between gate posts in the complete and accepted work .
The quantity of Bracing Assembly for ChainLink Fence of the type and size specified to be measured for payment will be the number of bracing assemblies installed for end gate corner and pull posts in the complete and accepted work .
The quantity of Brace for Woven Wire Fence of the type specified to be measured for payment will be the number of braces installed in the complete and accepted work .
If double braces are installed on a post two units will be measured for payment .
The quantity of Removing and Resetting Fence and Removal of Existing Fence to be measured for payment will be the number of linear feet of fence in its original position measured outside of its end posts for each continuous run of fence including gates . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT .
The accepted quantities of Fence and Gate installed or removed and reset will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per linear foot of the type and size specified .
Bracing Assembly and Braces will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price for each type specified .
Removing and Resetting Fence will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per linear foot .
Removal of Existing Fence will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per linear foot .
Payment will include compensation for stockpiling or disposal as appropriate .
Payment will be full compensation for furnishing transporting handling assembling and placing the materials specified and for furnishing all labor tools equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
The costs of clearing and grubbing excavation backfilling concrete bases brace plates anchor plates electrical grounding drilling of rock grouting of holes extra length posts and countersunk posts will not be paid for directly but will be considered incidental to the Contract Items involved .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
ChainLink Fence Feet Linear Foot .
ChainLink Fence Feet Linear Foot .
ChainLink Fence Feet Linear Foot .
Gate for ChainLink Fence Feet Linear Foot .
Gate for ChainLink Fence Feet Linear Foot .
Gate for ChainLink Fence Feet Linear Foot .
Bracing Assembly for ChainLink Fence Feet Each .
Bracing Assembly for ChainLink Fence Feet Each .
Bracing Assembly for ChainLink Fence Feet Each .
Woven Wire Fence with Steel Posts Linear Foot .
Woven Wire Fence with Wood Posts Linear Foot .
Drive Gate for Woven Wire Fence Each .
Steel Brace for Woven Wire Fence Each .
Wood Brace for Woven Wire Fence Each .
Plank Rail Fence Linear Foot .
Removing and Resetting Fence Linear Foot .
Removal of Existing Fence Linear Foot .
Snow Barrier Fence Linear Foot SECTION TRAFFIC BARRIERS .
DESCRIPTION .
This work shall consist of the furnishing assembling removing repairing andor resetting of traffic barriers. . MATERIALS .
Materials shall meet the requirements of the following Subsections Emulsified Asphalt .
Grease Rustproofing Compound .
Coatings for Wood .
Wire Rope or Cable .
Galvanizing .
Posts and Post Accessories .
Rail Elements .
Hardware .
Concrete Anchors .
Flat Sheet Aluminum .
Retroreflective Sheeting .
Reinforcing steel shall meet the requirements of Section .
Materials for Removing and Resetting Guardrail Replace Guardrail Post Assembly Replace Guardrail Beam Unit and Adjust Height of Guardrail shall consist of the acceptable rails posts offset blocks bolts and other hardware of the existing guardrail together with the necessary new replacement parts .
The new replacement parts shall match as close as possible the existing components they replace .
All welding shall conform to the requirements of Subsection .. .
FABRICATION DRAWINGS .
The Fabricator of guardrail approach sections furnished under this Section shall submit detailed Fabrication Drawings in accordance with Section . . POSTS AND OFFSET BLOCKS .
Posts may be set in holes or they may be driven if suitable caps and driving equipment are used to prevent damage to the posts .
The installed posts shall be plumb accurately aligned spaced as shown on the Plans and placed to the full depth indicated .
Round posts shall be set or driven with the larger post crosssection facing downward .
The space around the posts shall be backfilled with suitable material in inch layers and tamped thoroughly with air or mechanical tampers .
Posts for Steel Backed Timber Guardrail may be driven or installed into predrilled holes .
The dimensions of the predrilled hole shall not exceed the dimensions of the post by more than inch .
If impenetrable material is encountered while placing the post the predrilled hole shall be enlarged to provide not less than inches of clearance on all sides and a minimum depth of feet and the post shall be set in concrete the type as approved by the Engineer to within inches of the top of the hole .
The remaining inches shall be backfilled with a suitable material and compacted to the satisfaction of the Engineer .
The guardrail designated to be removed and reset shall be carefully removed temporarily stored when necessary and reinstalled at the new location .
Materials damaged or lost shall be replaced with new material by the Contractor without compensation .
The new materials shall be equal to or better than the material of the existing guardrail .
Guardrail posts and anchors shall be installed prior to placing the adjacent top course of pavement unless otherwise directed by the Engineer. . RAIL ELEMENTS .
a Beam Rail .
Rail elements shall be erected in a manner resulting in a smooth continuous installation .
All bolts except adjustment bolts shall be drawn tight .
Bolts shall be of sufficient length to extend beyond the nuts .
b Cable Rail .
Cable guardrail shall be installed as shown on the Plans .
Splicing of cable will be permitted when necessary but no single piece of cable shall be less than feet in length .
c SteelBacked Timber Rail .
Timber rails shall be cut to produce a close fit at all joints .
Field cuts shall be treated with an approved material as determined by the Engineer. . ENERGY ABSORPTION ATTENUATOR .
Energy Absorption Attenuators permanent or temporary shall be installed at the locations shown in the Plans or as approved by the Engineer and per the manufacturers recommendations .
Installation of any traffic barrier requiring protection with an Energy Absorption Attenuator shall not begin until the complete Energy Absorption Attenuator is on the Project site and ready to be installed .
Attenuators shall be a minimum of Test Level for posted speed limits greater than mph and a minimum of Test Level for posted speed limits of mph and less in accordance with NCHRP Report or the current AASHTO Manual for Assessing Safety Hardware MASH and its latest revisions .
a Permanent .
Energy Absorption Attenuators Permanent shall be one of the energy absorption attenuators on the Agencys Approved Products List identified for permanent use .
b Temporary .
It shall be the Contractors responsibility to maintain all in service energy absorption attenuators Temporary in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
Any damage identified to affect the performance of the attenuator as determined by the Engineer shall be repaired immediately in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations or replaced with the spare Energy Absorption Attenuator Temporary as necessary .
A single spare Energy Absorption Attenuator Temporary of each type installed shall be on the Project site while any Energy Absorption Attenuator Temporary is in service and shall be ready to be installed in the case an Energy Absorption Attenuator Temporary needs to be replaced or repaired .
In the case a spare Energy Absorption Attenuator Temporary has been used completely or in part the Contractor shall replace all used components of the spare so that a fully functioning spare is available within hours of the use of any spare .
Energy Absorption Attenuators Temporary shall be removed from the Project upon determination by the Engineer it is no longer needed and shall remain the property of the Contractor .
Liquid andor sand filled Energy Absorption Attenuators Temporary shall not be used between December st and April th .
Any Energy Absorption Attenuator Temporary manufactured prior to January shall meet the applicable Test Level criteria as defined in NCHRP Report MASH or MASH .
Any Energy Absorption Attenuator Temporary manufactured on January or later shall meet the applicable Test Level criteria as defined in MASH .
The Contractor shall provide the type of Energy Absorption Attenuator Temporary date of manufacture and the current FHWA eligibility letter for the Energy Absorption Attenuator Temporary to the Engineer for approval prior to installation . .
TEMPORARY TRAFFIC BARRIER .
Temporary Traffic Barrier shall be installed at the locations shown in the Plans or as directed by the Engineer and per the manufacturers recommendations .
The barrier shall be one of the barriers included under FHWA Roadside Hardware Policy and Guidance for crashworthy longitudinal barriers at the Contractors discretion unless otherwise specified .
The type of temporary traffic barrier shall be provided to the Engineer prior to use .
All Temporary Traffic Barrier including corresponding connections shall meet Test Level TL criteria as defined in NCHRP Report or the AASHTO Manual for Assessing Safety Hardware MASH and its latest revisions .
The appropriate resource shall be determined as described in the MASH publication .
Temporary traffic barrier components shall be in a condition satisfactory to the Engineer prior to placement on the Project and maintained as such until removed from the Project .
Temporary Traffic Barrier shall be removed from the Project when no longer needed and shall remain the property of the Contractor .
The area from which the barrier was removed shall be restored to a satisfactory condition where and when no other construction activities are intended . .
REMOVE AND RESET TEMPORARY TRAFFIC BARRIER .
Temporary traffic barrier and required appurtenances shall be removed and reset as shown on the Plans or as ordered in writing by the Engineer. . TERMINALS .
Terminals shall be installed at the locations shown on the Plans and as detailed on the Plans or per the manufacturers recommendations .
New Traffic Barrier installations shall be protected by a terminal the same day the Traffic Barrier is installed and may be protected permanently as shown on the Plans or temporarily as approved by the Engineer .
Temporary Terminals shall not be in place more than hours and will be considered incidental to other Traffic Barrier items .
All new terminal installations shall include a permanent identification of the year of installation and model identified on the Agencys Approved Products List or the Standard Drawing used .
Payment will be incidental to the traffic barrier items .
a Manufactured Terminal Section Tangent .
Manufactured Terminal Sections Tangent shall be one of the Manufactured Terminal Sections on the Agencys Approved Products List .
b Manufactured Terminal Section Flared .
Manufactured Terminal Section Flared shall be one of the Manufactured Terminal Sections on the Agencys Approved Products List . .
ANCHORS .
Anchors shall be installed at the locations shown on the Plans .
Backfill material shall be placed in layers of not more than inches and shall be thoroughly compacted by use of a mechanical tamper to the satisfaction of the Engineer .
Cable when required shall be drawn taut and fastened securely to the anchor assemblies as shown on the Plans and adjusted to equalize the stresses. . DELINEATION .
Delineation devices shall consist of Flat Sheet Aluminum and Retroreflective Sheeting of the design shown on the Plans and shall be securely fastened to traffic barriers or guide posts as shown on the Plans or as directed by the Engineer. . FIELD PAINTING .
Galvanized components that have been cut abraded or damaged such that base metal is exposed shall be repaired with two coats in accordance with Subsection .
and paint when specified on the Plans .
Wherever guardrail panels are nested the surfaces on both panels that will be in contact with each other shall be coated with grease rustproofing compound .
Overlapping at splices shall not be considered nesting . .
REPLACEMENT ADJUSTMENT REMOVAL AND DISPOSAL OF GUARDRAIL OR GUIDE POSTS .
Guardrail installations which are to remain in place will be inspected by the Engineer for damage unsuitability and conformance to current guardrail standards .
The Engineer will mark guardrail components which are to be replaced .
The guardrail shall then be checked for height conformance .
Those sections in which height over an extensive portion of the section is greater than inches or less than inches shall be adjusted to a nominal height of inches inch .
Sections which in general conform for height but have many variations due to erosion or filling of the shoulder from normal mechanisms shall have the shoulder graded to the proper typical before being checked for height conformance .
After adjustment is complete the existing rail shall conform to current design standards for height as appropriate for the type of guardrail being adjusted .
Guardrail height adjustments shall be made to reflect guardrail height at final grade .
The Contractor shall repair or replace all damaged or missing components .
Components shall be repaired or replaced as determined by the Engineer and in accordance with the Plans or per current standards as applicable .
The finished appearance of the rehabilitated rail shall be a continuous smooth line without abrupt dips over the entire section to the satisfaction of the Engineer .
Offset blocks designated for replacement shall be replaced inkind .
Materials shall be in conformance with the applicable requirements of Subsection .
for either wood steel or alternative offset blocks .
Cable guardrail repair shall be performed in accordance with the Plans or as directed by the Engineer .
Unless otherwise specified in the Contract Documents material to be removed shall become the property of the Contractor .
Materials removed from service shall be removed from the State RightofWay limits at the end of each work day unless otherwise approved by the Engineer .
Materials removed shall be disposed of in accordance with applicable local State and Federal regulations .
Unless otherwise indicated anchors which are designated for removal and disposal not removal and salvage may have the anchor or anchor block abandoned in place with the anchor rod cut in such a manner that no portion of the anchor assembly is within foot of the ground shoulder or roadway surface .
If posts or anchors are removed from an area where there is no other excavation or embankment work the resulting holes shall be backfilled with suitable material matching as closely as possible the surface subbase and other materials in both type and depth .
The backfill shall be placed in layers not more than inches in depth thoroughly compacted using a mechanical tamper and the area seeded in accordance with Section .
Existing materials to be salvaged shall be protected from damage andor loss by the Contractor during construction operations .
Materials lost or damaged shall be replaced with new materials by the Contractor without compensation .
New materials shall be equal to or better than the materials in the existing guardrail . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT .
The quantity of Cable Guardrail to be measured for payment will be the number of linear feet installed in the complete and accepted work measured from centertocenter of end posts .
The distance from end posts to the anchors will not be included for payment .
The measured quantity of Cable Guardrail will be multiplied by factors as specified in Table .A .
TABLE .A CABLE GUARDRAIL POST SPACING FACTORS Post Spacing Factor ft . ft . ft . ft .
The quantities of Cable Guardrail Hook Bolt Galvanized and Cable Guardrail Splice Unit to be measured for payment will be the number each unit installed in the complete and accepted work .
The quantity of Replacement of Guardrail Cable to be measured for payment will be the number of linear feet installed in the complete and accepted work .
The quantities of Traffic Barrier Delineator and Steel Beam Guardrail Offset Block to be measured for payment will be the number of each component replaced in the complete and accepted work .
The quantity of Steel Backed Timber Guardrail to be measured for payment will be the number of linear feet installed in the complete and accepted work measured from end to end along the face of rail including terminal sections .
The measured length will be multiplied by a pay factor of .
for a post spacing of feet .
The quantities of Steel Beam Guardrail Heavy Duty Steel Beam Guardrail and Thrie Beam Guardrail to be measured for payment will be the number of linear feet of each kind specified installed in the complete and accepted work measured center to center of end posts to which rail is attached .
The measured quantity will not include those portions of the installation within the pay limits for Manufactured Terminal Section or Terminal Connector for Steel Beam Guardrail .
Where terminal end sections are installed an additional feet of guardrail will be included for each end section .
Wbeam to Thrie beam transition sections will be paid for as an equal length of Thrie beam guardrail .
The measured quantities of Steel Beam Guardrail Heavy Duty Steel Beam Guardrail and Thrie Beam Guardrail will be multiplied by factors as specified in the Table .B .
TABLE .B BEAM GUARDRAIL POST SPACING FACTORS Post Spacing Factor ft in. . ft in. . ft in . .
The quantity of Box Beam Guardrail to be measured for payment will be the number of linear feet installed in the complete and accepted work measured from center to center of end posts .
An additional foot of guardrail will be allowed for each overhang .
The quantities of Terminal Sections Terminal Connectors Terminals Anchors Approach Sections and Guide Posts to be measured for payment will be the number of units of each type specified installed in the complete and accepted work .
The quantities of Energy Absorption Attenuator Temporary and Energy Absorption Attenuator Permanent to be measured for payment will be the number of each unit installed in the complete and accepted work .
The spare Energy Absorption Attenuator Temporary will not be measured for payment since supplying a spare on the Project will be considered incidental to the Energy Absorption Attenuator Temporary item .
The quantity of Remove and Reset Guardrail to be measured for payment will be the number of linear feet reset in the complete and accepted work measured in accordance with the type of guardrail specified .
The quantity of Replace Guardrail Post to be measured for payment will be the number of individual posts replaced in the complete and accepted work .
The quantity of Replace Guardrail Beam Unit to be measured for payment will be the number of .foot rail panels replaced .
Those rail panels that are longer or shorter than .
feet in length shall be converted to an equivalent number of .foot rail panels .
The quantity of Replace Guardrail Beam Unit will not be factored for post spacing .
Minor repairs and replacement of parts for anchorage devices such as tightening nuts adjusting turn buckles replacing nuts andor bolts rethreading rod ends etc .
will be considered incidental to the other Section Pay Items in the Contract .
The quantity of Adjust Height of Guardrail to be measured for payment will be the number of linear feet of adjusted guardrail complete in place measured from center to center of the end posts to which the rail elements are attached .
Payment will not include measurement of any rail element or anchorage which extends beyond the last post to which the rail elements are attached nor will any factor based on post spacing distances be applied to the measured distance .
The quantity of Removal and Disposal of Guardrail to be measured for payment will be the number of linear feet removed in the complete and accepted work measured from end post to end post to which rail was attached .
The quantity of Removal and Disposal of Guide Posts to be measured for payment will be the number of posts removed in the complete and accepted work .
The quantity of Temporary Traffic Barrier to be measured for payment will be the number of linear feet installed and removed in the complete and accepted work measured from end to end of each installation including terminals .
The quantity of Remove and Reset Temporary Traffic Barrier to be measured for payment will be the number of linear feet removed and reset measured from endtoend of the allowable length including Energy Absorption Attenuators as needed as described herein as shown on the Plans or as directed by the Engineer .
Any barrier removed and not reset will not be measured for payment under this item but will be considered incidental to the original installation of the barrier .
No measurement for payment will be made for barrier that is removed and reset for the convenience of the Contractor for minor adjustments of feet or less in any direction or for any removal and resetting that was not approved by the Engineer . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT .
The accepted quantities of Guardrail new or reset permanent or temporary will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per linear foot .
The accepted quantities of Cable Guardrail Hook Bolt Galvanized and Cable Guardrail Splice Unit will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per each .
The accepted quantity of Replacement of Guardrail Cable will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per linear foot .
The accepted quantities of Traffic Barrier Delineator and Steel Beam Guardrail Offset Block will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price for each .
The accepted quantity of Manufactured Terminal Section Flared or Tangent will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price for each .
Payment will be full compensation for furnishing detailing transporting handling and installing the terminal sections used including but not limited to excavation backfill regrading the installation area as necessary delineation devices restraining devices hardware and preservative treatment and for furnishing all labor tools equipment and incidentals necessary for installing a complete and properly functioning unit .
The accepted quantities of Terminal Connectors Anchors Approach Sections and Guide Posts will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price for each for the Contract Item specified .
The accepted quantity of Removal and Disposal of Guardrail will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per linear foot .
Removed guardrail that is not reset will be paid for as Removal and Disposal of Guardrail .
The accepted quantity of Removal and Disposal of Guide Posts will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price for each .
Payment for Removal and Disposal of Guardrail and Removal and Disposal of Guide Posts will include full compensation for removing and disposing of materials and for restoration of the old site when required .
Payment will be full compensation for furnishing transporting handling and placing the materials specified removing and disposing of damaged guardrail components and for furnishing all labor tools equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
For Steel Backed Timber Guardrail enlarging holes as necessary for placement of posts furnishing and placing concrete fill and backfill material and compacting backfill to the satisfaction of the Engineer will not be paid for separately but will be considered incidental to the Unit Price bid for Steel Backed Timber Guardrail .
The accepted quantity of Energy Absorption Attenuator Permanent or Temporary will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price for each .
Payment will be full compensation for fabricating furnishing transporting handling and installing the materials required including all hardware any necessary manufacturers supervision the furnishing of all labor tools equipment and incidentals necessary for installing the attenuator complete and in place .
Payment for Energy Absorption Attenuator Temporary will further be full compensation for maintaining repairing or replacing the attenuator as necessary while it is in service and for removing and disposing of the attenuator when it is no longer needed .
a Payment for Energy Absorption Attenuator Temporary will be made as follows The initial of the Contract Unit Price will be paid when the attenuator is installed and functioning to the satisfaction of the Engineer .
The remaining of the Contract Unit Price will be paid when the Engineer has determined that the attenuator is no longer required for use at the original installed location .
Payment for Remove and Reset Guardrail will be full compensation for removing transporting storing reassembling all parts necessary cutting furnishing of new hardware when necessary reinstalling at the new locations furnishing and applying stain paint and preservative material and for furnishing all labor tools equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
Payment will also include removing and replacing anchors and terminal ends when required .
Replacing panels offset blocks and posts will not be paid for under this item but under the applicable Contract Item .
The removal of treated timber curbing including the bituminous concrete fillet from installations where the existing guardrail is removed will not be paid for directly but will be considered incidental to Remove and Reset Guardrail and Removal and Disposal of Guardrail .
The accepted quantity of Replace Guardrail Post whether for cable steel beam or box beam rail will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price for each .
Payment will be full compensation for removing and disposing of the designated post and hardware for any necessary excavation and backfill including proper compaction for furnishing transporting handling and installing the replacement post andor backup plate if required new bolts nuts andor washers and any other necessary hardware steel strapping as necessary stain paint and preservative and for furnishing all labor tools equipment and incidentals necessary for the work .
The accepted quantity of Replace Guardrail Beam Unit whether for steel beam or box beam rail will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price for each .
Payment will be full compensation for removing and disposing of the designated beam panel for furnishing transporting handling and installing the replacement components needed including new rail beam units of the required length replacement backer plates if required and not covered under another Contract Item new reflectors or other delineation if required and not part of the item Replace Guardrail Post Assembly and new bolts nuts andor washers and any other necessary hardware for drilling holes as required to complete the installation of the replacement panel and for furnishing all labor tools equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
The accepted quantity of Adjust Height of Guardrail will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per linear foot .
Payment will be full compensation for adjusting the height of the existing guardrail to conform to current standards for any necessary excavation and backfill including proper compaction for furnishing transporting handling and installing necessary cable terminal hardware turn buckles tension springs splicing units steel strapping stain paint preservatives and all other components which are necessary to make the adjusted guardrail a complete installation and which are not part of any other Pay Item in the Contract for disposing of removed components which are not reused and for furnishing the labor tools equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
Replacing panels offset blocks and posts will not be paid for under this item but under the applicable Contract Item .
The accepted quantity of Temporary Traffic Barrier will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per linear foot .
Payment will be full compensation for furnishing and installing barrier and any required terminals or protective end devices and for removal and site restoration where required .
b Payment for Temporary Traffic Barrier will be made as follows of the accepted quantity upon the satisfactory installation of the barrier .
of the accepted quantity upon the final removal of the barrier .
The accepted quantity of Remove and Reset Temporary Traffic Barrier will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per linear foot .
Payment will be full compensation for removing transporting storing reassembling all parts necessary cutting furnishing of new parts when necessary reinstalling at the new locations reinstalling required terminals or energy absorption attenuators and for furnishing all labor tools equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
Payment will also include removing and replacing anchors .
c Payment for Remove and Reset Temporary Traffic Barrier will be made as follows of the accepted quantity upon the removal of the originally installed barrier .
of the accepted quantity upon the satisfactory reinstallation of the barrier .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Cable Guardrail Linear Foot .
Cable Guardrail Hook Bolt Galvanized Each .
Cable Guardrail Splice Unit Each .
Replacement of Guardrail Cable Linear Foot .
Steel Backed Timber Guardrail Linear Foot .
Steel Beam Guardrail Galvanized Linear Foot .
Steel Beam Guardrail Galvanized w Feet Posts Linear Foot .
Steel Beam Guardrail GalvanizedNested Linear Foot .
Steel Beam Guardrail GalvanizedNested w Feet Posts Linear Foot .
Traffic Barrier Delineator Each .
Steel Beam Guardrail Offset Block Each .
HD Steel Beam Guardrail Galvanized Linear Foot .
HD Steel Beam Guardrail Galvanized w Feet Posts Linear Foot .
HD Steel Beam Guardrail GalvanizedNested Linear Foot .
HD Steel Beam Guardrail GalvanizedNested w Feet Posts Linear Foot .
Thrie Beam Guardrail Linear Foot .
Box Beam Guardrail Linear Foot .
Manufactured Terminal Section Flared Each .
Manufactured Terminal Section Tangent Each .
Terminal Connector for Steel Beam Guardrail Each .
Energy Absorption Attenuator Temporary Each .
Energy Absorption Attenuator Permanent Each .
Anchor for Steel Beam Rail Each .
Anchor for Steel to Box Beam Transition Each .
Anchor for Cable Rail Each .
Guardrail Approach Section Galvanized Type I Each .
Guardrail Approach Section Galvanized Type II Each .
Guardrail Approach Section Galvanized Rail Box Beam Each .
Guardrail Approach Section Galvanized Rail Box Beam Each .
Guardrail Approach Section Galvanized Rail Box Beam Each .
Guardrail Approach Section Galvanized HD Steel Beam Each .
Guardrail Approach Section Galv .
HD Steel Beam w Feet Posts Each .
Guardrail Approach Section to Concrete Bridge Railing TL Each .
Guardrail Approach Section to Concrete Bridge Railing TL Each .
Guardrail Approach Section to Conc .
Comb .
Bridge Railing TL Each .
Remove and Reset Guardrail Linear Foot .
Replace Guardrail Post Assembly Each .
Replace Guardrail Beam Unit Each .
Adjust Height of Guardrail Linear Foot Pay Item Pay Unit .
Removal and Disposal of Guardrail Linear Foot .
Removal and Disposal of Guide Posts Each .
Guide Posts Each .
Temporary Traffic Barrier Linear Foot .
Remove and Reset Temporary Traffic Barrier Linear Foot SECTION INSULATION BOARD .
DESCRIPTION .
This work shall consist of furnishing and installing extruded andor expanded polystyrene insulation board on a prepared surface. . MATERIALS .
Materials shall meet the requirements of the following Subsections Sand Borrow and Cushion .
Polystyrene Insulation Board .
Skewers shall conform to the requirements of the insulation manufacturer . .
PREPARATION OF SURFACE .
The surface shall be prepared as follows a The surface on which insulation board is to be placed shall be shaped as shown on the Plans .
Any unsuitable material shall be replaced with satisfactory material .
The surface shall be compacted to attain at least of the maximum dry density and the inplace moisture content shall be not more than above the optimum moisture content as determined by AASHTO T Method C. b When sand borrow is required it shall be spread and compacted to a minimum depth of inches just prior to the placement of the insulation board .
c Compaction shall be performed in accordance with Subsection .d. . PLACEMENT OF INSULATION .
The insulation board shall be placed and secured as follows a The boards shall be placed in such a manner that the transverse joints will be staggered .
If two layers of insulation are used the second shall be placed to cover the joints of the first layer .
b Means will be provided to ensure a straight alignment of the boards .
c A minimum of two skewers as approved by the Engineer shall be used to hold each insulation board in place .
The skewers shall be driven at an angle of less than from the horizontal until flush with the surface of the insulation boards .
Skewers shall be used for each layer when more than one layer of material is used. . PLACEMENT OF MATERIAL ON THE INSULATION BOARD .
Special care shall be taken that the equipment used in placing the material does not operate directly upon the installed insulation board .
The first layer of material shall be placed to a minimum depth of inches loose measurement by dumping in piles and then moving it forward onto the insulation board by approved equipment .
The first layer of material shall be compacted to the satisfaction of the Engineer .
The compaction of subsequent layers shall be made with the same construction procedures required for the type of material being placed .
Any insulation board that becomes displaced or damaged prior to or during placing of the material shall be repositioned or removed and replaced with new board at the Contractors expense . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT .
The quantity of Insulation Board to be measured for payment will be the number of thousand feet board measure MFBM installed in the complete and accepted work based on the nominal dimensions of material .
No allowance will be made for waste . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT .
The accepted quantity of Insulation Board will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per thousand feet board measure MFBM .
Payment will be full compensation for furnishing transporting handling and placing the material specified and for furnishing all labor tools equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work except that Sand will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per cubic yard for sand borrow under Contract Item Sand Borrow .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Insulation Board MFBM SECTION THIS SECTION RESERVED SECTION THIS SECTION RESERVED SECTION SLEEVES FOR UTILITIES .
DESCRIPTION .
This work shall consist of the furnishing and installation of sleeves for public or private utilities .
Sleeves are hereby defined as encasements for Utility lines and are also known as ducts casings and conduits. . MATERIALS .
Materials shall meet the requirements of the following Subsections Emulsified Asphalt .
Brick .
Mortar Type II .
Mortar Type IV .
Joint Sealer Hot Poured .a Preformed Joint Filler Cork and AsphaltTreated Felt .
Polyvinyl Chloride PVC Waterstop .
Asphaltic Plug Bridge Joint .
Reinforced Concrete Pipe .
AcrylonitrileButadieneStyrene ABS Plastic Pipe .
Polyvinyl Chloride PVC Plastic Pipe .
Corrugated Steel Pipe Pipe Arches and Underdrains .
Corrugated Aluminum Alloy Pipe Pipe Arches and Underdrains .
Plastic Pipe Flexible .
Well Casing .
Polyethylene Plastic Pipe and Fittings HDPE Electrical Conduit .b Bituminous concrete pavement shall conform to the requirements of Section .
Steel bar reinforcement shall conform to the requirements of Section .
Concrete shall conform to the requirements of Section for Concrete Class B .
All wood blocks used as skids shall be oak or maple Structural Lumber Grade or better .
All prefabricated casing spacers shall be designed for the intended application and be of the centered or restrained type .
Stainless steel strapping shall meet the requirements of ASTM A .
Sleeves for power and communication lines shall be nonmetallic .
Steel sleeves shall conform to ASTM A A M and wall thickness shall be compatible with the specified bury depth .
Carrier pipes shall have restrained joints to allow for future removal of the pipe without having to decouple the pipe joints .
Casing end seals shall be of masonry construction .
Modular wall and pipe seals shall be stainless steel hardware or prefabricated casing end seals with stainless steel bands . .
INSTALLATION .
Sleeves installed by the boring and jacking or directional drilling methods shall be installed as specified in the Contract in accordance with standard industry practices or as approved by the Engineer .
Sleeves installed by opencut methods shall be installed using the same methods specified for culverts as in Section as specified in the Contract or as directed by the Engineer .
All pipes shall be positively joined .
Unless otherwise specified any sleeve installed for future use is to be fitted with plugs or caps at both ends and shall contain a suitable pull wire or pull cord accessible from both ends .
Carrier pipe for water sewer and gas greater than inches in diameter shall be installed in a sleeve that is at least inches larger than the diameter of the carrier pipe .
Utility pipe for power cable and phone greater than inches in diameter shall be installed in a conduit that is at least inches larger than the diameter of the Utility pipe .
For utilities inches and smaller the inside diameter of sleeves shall be as specified in Table .A .
TABLE .A INSIDE SLEEVE DIAMETERS FOR CARRIER OR UTILITY PIPE Carrier or Utility Pipe Inside Sleeve Diameter inches Power lines Telephone lines Cable TV lines Water pipes Water service lines inch inch Sewer pipes Gas pipes Fiber optic cables .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT .
The quantity of Sleeves for Utilities to be measured for payment will be the number of linear feet installed in the complete and accepted work . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT .
The accepted quantity of Sleeves for Utilities will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per linear foot .
Payment will be full compensation for fabricating furnishing transporting handling sawcutting and placing all materials including pull wire and end caps and for furnishing all labor tools equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
Blocking skids casing spacers end seals stainless steel straps bituminous concrete pavement Portland cement concrete pavement reinforcing steel emulsion subbase materials brick end walls and other materials required in conjunction with sleeves will be considered incidental to the Contract Item Sleeves for Utilities .
Excavation and backfill of trenches and boring or jacking pits for the placement of sleeves for utilities will be considered incidental to the Contract Item Sleeves for Utilities .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Sleeves for Utilities Linear Foot SECTION THIS SECTION RESERVED SECTION THIS SECTION RESERVED SECTION SANITARY SEWER SYSTEMS .
DESCRIPTION .
This work shall consist of the construction or reconstruction of sanitary sewer lines and appurtenances. . MATERIALS .
Materials shall meet the requirements of the following Subsections Granular Backfill for Structures .
Rubber Gaskets .
Reinforced Concrete Pipe .
AcrylonitrileButadieneStyrene ABS Plastic Pipe .
PolyvinylChloride PVC Plastic Pipe .
Ductile Iron Pipe Cement Lined .
Concrete shall conform to the requirements of Section for Concrete Class B unless otherwise specified .
Sleeves shall conform to the requirements of Section . . GENERAL .
Care shall be exercised by the Contractor to avoid disrupting the operation of existing sanitary sewer facilities without prior written approval of the Engineer .
When existing underground utilities not scheduled for removal or abandonment are encountered in the excavation they shall be adequately supported and protected from damage .
Any damage to utilities shall be repaired promptly in accordance with Subsection .
at no additional cost to the Agency .
The Contractor shall be responsible for the unloading storing hauling and distribution of all materials .
All materials that are damaged destroyed or lost during and after unloading shall be replaced at the Contractors expense .
All pipe pipe fittings and accessories shall be handled to avoid shock .
Pipes having factoryapplied joint material shall be stacked and blocked to prevent damage to the joint material .
Material not needed for immediate use shall be safely stored in a safe manner at places provided by the Contractor and approved by the Engineer .
The Contractors attention is called to the fact that sewer pipe and fittings are comparatively brittle .
Care shall be taken in handling and laying to avoid damaging the pipe and fittings .
The locations of all pipes shall be approved by the Engineer. . EXCAVATION .
Where pipe is to be laid below the existing ground line a trench shall be excavated to the required depth and to a width sufficient to allow for joining of the pipe and compaction of the bedding and backfill material under and around the pipe .
Where feasible trench walls shall be vertical .
The completed trench bottom shall be firm for its full length and width .
If shown on the Plans or directed by the Engineer poor foundation material encountered below the normal grade of the pipe bed shall be removed and replaced with granular backfill for structures .
Where ledge rock rocky or gravelly soil hardpan or other unyielding foundation materials are encountered in the trench excavation at the normal grade of the pipe bed the trench shall be excavated to a width equal to the inside diameter of the pipe plus inches and to a depth of inches below the pipe grade .
This area shall be backfilled with granular backfill for structures .
The length of trench to be opened at one time shall be kept within reasonable limits unless otherwise permitted or directed by the Engineer .
No tunneling will be permitted except by written approval of the Engineer .
Permission to tunnel will be granted only in short sections where in the opinion of the Engineer the pipe can be safely and properly installed and the backfill properly compacted .
During construction the Contractor shall conduct operations to prevent at all times the accumulation of water ice and snow in excavations or near excavated areas and to prevent water from interfering with the progress or quality of the work .
Under no conditions shall water be allowed to rise in open trenches after pipe has been placed .
Accumulated water ice and snow shall be promptly removed and disposed of by pumping or other approved means .
Disposal shall be carried out in a manner which will not create a hazard to public health cause injury to public or private property work completed or in progress or public streets or cause any interference in the use of streets and roads by the public .
Pipes under construction shall not be used to Drain excavations .
Where pipes are to be placed in an embankment excavation for the pipe shall be made after the embankment has been completed to the specified height above the designed grade for those pipes shown on the Plans .
Sheeting and bracing required for trenches shall be removed to the elevation of the pipe but no sheeting will be allowed to be pulled removed or disturbed below the pipe. . BEDDING FOR PIPE .
The bed shall be prepared in accordance with Subsection .
unless otherwise specified .
Concrete cradle bedding shall be installed on approved subgrades when shown on the Plans or directed by the Engineer . .
LAYING PIPE .
No pipe shall be placed until the trench and the prepared foundation have been approved by the Engineer .
The laying shall begin at the outlet end and the lower segment of the pipe shall be in contact with the shaped bedding throughout its full length .
Bell or grooved ends of rigid pipes and the circumferential laps of flexible pipe shall be placed facing upstream .
The longitudinal laps or seams of flexible pipe shall be at the sides .
All pipe and fittings shall be carefully examined for defects and no pipe or fittings shall be laid which are known to be defective .
If any defective piece is discovered after laying it shall be removed and replaced at the Contractors expense .
All pipes and fittings shall be cleaned before they are laid and shall be kept clean until accepted in the completed work .
The pipe shall be laid to conform to the lines and grades shown on the Plans or as directed by the Engineer .
Each pipe shall be so laid as to form a close joint with the next adjoining pipe and to bring the inverts continuously to the required grade .
Each length of pipe shall be shoved home against the pipe previously laid and held securely in position .
Joints shall not be pulled or cramped without approval of the Engineer .
Before any joint is made the pipe shall be checked to ensure that a closed joint with the next adjoining pipe has been maintained and that the inverts are matched and conform to the required grade .
The pipe shall not be driven down to grade by striking it .
The Contractor shall take all necessary precautions to prevent flotation of the pipe in the trench .
When pipe laying is not in progress the open ends of the pipe shall be closed with temporary watertight plugs .
If water is in the trench when work is resumed the plug shall not be removed until all danger of water entering the pipe is eliminated .
The sewers and manholes shall be made as nearly watertight as practicable and leakage measurements shall be made wherever possible .
For sewer force mains concrete reaction blocking shall be provided as detailed at all bends deflecting .
or more .
At the Contractors option retainer glands may be used at bends instead of concrete blocking .
Retainer glands shall also be provided at all joints within three pipe lengths each side of the bends . .
JOINING PIPE .
Sewer pipe shall be joined in accordance with the detailed instructions of the manufacturer .
Sewer pipe with premolded gaskets shall be driven completely home and the gasket checked for proper positioning .
Where poured joints are used the pipe shall be properly positioned and the joint completely filled with joint sealer in accordance with the accepted practice for that type of sewer joint .
The sealer shall be allowed to cool completely before the runner is removed .
Where recommended by the manufacturer the Contractor shall furnish coupling pullers for joining the pipe .
Gasket feeler gauges shall be available for use by the pipe layer and the Engineer for checking the position of the rubber gaskets in the completed joint if so directed by the Engineer .
Any fittings showing a crack and any fitting or pipe that has received a severe blow which may have caused a fracture even though no fracture can be seen shall be marked as rejected and removed at once from the work .
Sewer pipe shall be cut by means of a handsaw metalinserted abrasive wheels or by pipe cutters with blades not rollers doing the cutting .
All cut ends shall be examined for possible cracks caused by cutting . .
TESTING OF SYSTEM .
The Contractor shall provide all necessary equipment and instrumentation required for proper completion of the flushing and testing .
Quality of water testing procedures and method of disposal of water shall be approved by the Engineer .
Prior to testing the system shall be flushed with water to remove construction debris .
All tests shall be made in the presence of the Engineer .
Preliminary tests made by the Contractor without being observed by the Engineer will not be accepted .
The Engineer will be notified at least eight hours before any work is to be inspected or tested .
All defects in the system shall be corrected and retested until acceptable to the Engineer .
Repairs shall be made to achieve the standard of quality specified for the entire system .
Sections of the system may be tested separately but any defect that may develop in a section previously tested and accepted shall be promptly corrected and retested .
Test data shall be recorded on a form acceptable to the Engineer .
A copy of all test data shall be submitted to the Engineer at the completion of testing .
All piping shall be tested in accordance with the following test methods in addition to any test required by State and local codes or building authorities a Gravity Sewer Testing .
General .
The Contractor shall have the option of using the air test or water test for testing sewers .
Manholes must be tested by a water test .
The maximum sewer length to be tested at one time shall be that length between any two successive manholes .
Pipe trenches shall be backfilled prior to performing the test .
All service laterals stubs and fittings shall be plugged or capped and adequately braced to withstand thrust forces .
The depth of groundwater above the pipe section to be tested shall be determined .
Portions of sewer lines in conflict with water mains shall be tested as ordered by the Engineer .
Air Testing .
Low pressure air testing shall be conducted in accordance with the following procedures a .
Each end of the test section shall be plugged capped and braced .
Necessary safety precautions shall be taken to prevent blowouts and possible injury .
b .
An air hose shall be connected to a tapped plug used for an air inlet .
The hose shall be connected to the air control equipment which shall include valves and pressure gauges .
These shall allow air to enter the sewer test line monitor air pressure in the sewer shut off air and provide pressure reduction and to psi relief .
The monitoring pressure gauge shall have a range of to .
psi with divisions of .
psi and an accuracy of .
psi .
c. The air compressor and air supply shall be connected to the test line and the test section filled slowly until a constant pressure of .
psi is maintained .
d. A pressure above psi shall be maintained for at least five minutes to allow the temperature to stabilize .
A check for leaks shall be made and if any are found the pressure shall be released and the fitting replaced or repaired .
e. After the stabilization period the pressure shall be adjusted to .
psi and the air supply disconnected .
f. Measure and record the time interval for the test line pressure to drop from to .
psi .
g. If the groundwater table is above the pipe increase above test pressures .
psi for every foot the groundwater is above the invert of the pipe .
h. The minimum time required for a pressure drop of .
psi using the air test shall be seconds per inch of diameter of the main sewer being tested .
i .
Any line tested that does not hold the minimum specified pressure for the specified time will be considered to have failed the pressure test and shall be repaired and retested .
The Contractor may have the option of conducting a water test in accordance with these Specifications if the air test has failed .
Exfiltration Test .
An exfiltration test measures the amount of water leaking out of the sewer while maintaining a low pressure on the entire sewer being tested .
The exfiltration test procedure shall be as follows a .
A tapped plumbers plug should be inserted in the downstream manhole inlet sewer .
The water supply connection is made at this point but never directly from a public water supply system or hydrant .
b .
A stand pipe shall be tightly connected at the upstream end of the sewer .
The height of the stand pipe shall be as directed but in all cases it shall be inches higher than any point in the sewer or inches higher than the highest known groundwater table whichever is higher and shall be not higher than feet above the lowest point in the section being tested .
c. Water shall be added at the downstream connection to avoid air pockets .
The line shall be filled to the elevation designated in the stand pipe .
A manhole may be used as a stand pipe .
The Engineer may require the manholes to be tested independently in accordance with procedures specified in this Subsection .
d. The line shall be allowed to stand with water for at least four hours in order that air may escape and absorption may take place .
e. The lines shall be filled to the reference mark and the drop or loss that occurs during a minute period shall be measured .
The minimum head shall be maintained throughout the test adding any volume of water required and including that volume in the leakage measurements .
The test shall be repeated as directed .
f. The reading shall be recorded and the leakage shall be recorded as gallons per inch of pipe diameter per mile of sewer per hour day .
g. Allowable leakage shall be gallonsinchmile day .
Infiltration Test .
If the groundwater table is at least inches above the entire sewer section to be tested the Engineer may allow the Contractor to perform an infiltration test .
The infiltration test procedure shall be as follows a .
The upstream end of the section shall be plugged or taped .
b .
The measuring device shall be installed in the downstream end .
If a Vnotch weir is used it must be installed to maintain a watertight seal between the weir and the interior surface of the pipe .
The weir shall meet the approval of the Engineer .
c. Sufficient time shall be allowed for infiltrating water to develop a steady uniform flow .
d. The reading shall be recorded as gallons per inch of pipe diameter per mile of sewer per hour day .
e. Allowable leakage shall be gallonsinchmileday .
b Manhole Leakage Test .
Each manhole shall be tested by means of a water or vacuum test .
If the water test was used on the sewer line and the manhole was tested with the sewer and the line passed the Engineer may not require an independent manhole test .
In any case there shall be no visible leakage into the base or walls of a completed manhole .
All pipes and other openings into the manhole shall be suitably plugged and the plugs braced to prevent blowout .
The manhole shall then be filled with water to the top of the cone section .
With the approval of the Engineer a period of time may be permitted to allow for absorption .
At the end of this period the manhole shall be refilled to the top of the cone if necessary and the measuring time of at least four hours begun .
At the end of the test period the manhole shall be refilled to the top of the cone measuring the volume of water added .
This amount shall be recorded as gallons per vertical foot of depth per hour day .
Allowable leakage for each manhole shall not exceed gallonfootday .
If leakage exceeds the allowable rate repairs shall be made as approved by the Engineer and the manhole retested .
If the Contractor elects to backfill prior to testing the testing shall be at the Contractors own risk and it shall be incumbent upon the Contractor to determine the reason for any failure of the test .
No adjustment in the leakage allowance will be made for unknown causes such as leaking plugs absorption etc .
It will be assumed that all loss of water during the test is a result of leaks through the joints or through the concrete .
Furthermore the Contractor shall take any steps necessary to assure the Engineer that the groundwater table is below the bottom of the manhole throughout the test .
If the groundwater table is above the highest joint in the manhole and if there is no leakage into the manhole as determined by the Engineer this test can be used to evaluate the watertightness of the manhole .
However if the Engineer is not satisfied the Contractor shall lower the groundwater table and carry out the test as described above .
c Pressure Pipe Testing .
The following procedure shall be used General .
All force mains shall pass the hydrostatic pressure test and the leakage test described below .
Prior to testing all anchors and braces shall be installed .
All concrete thrust blocks and restraints shall be in place and cured for at least seven days .
All buried pipes shall be backfilled .
Suitable test plugs shall be installed and air release valves shall be installed at the high points .
Hydrostatic Pressure Test .
The following procedure shall be used a .
All air release valves shall be opened and the pipe shall be filled with water at a rate not to exceed the venting capacity of the air release valves .
b .
The water pressure shall be raised to of the designed operating pressure and adjusted to the lowest point of the section being tested .
c. The pressure shall be maintained for ten minutes and for an additional period as is required for the Engineer to complete inspection however the manufacturers suggested time duration at the test pressure should not be exceeded .
d. Any defects noted shall be repaired and the test repeated .
e. Upon successful completion of the hydrostatic test the leakage test will be performed .
Leakage Test .
The following procedure shall be used a .
The water pressure in the section shall be brought up to the designed operating pressure and adjusted to the lowest point of the section .
This pressure shall be maintained within a maximum variation of for the test duration of two hours minimum .
Testing shall be in conducted in accordance with AWWA C. b .
The amount of leakage shall be measured by means of a water meter installed on the supply side of the pump and the leakage recorded as gallons per hour .
c. The allowable leakage is as follows .
No leakage will be allowed for exposed piping buried piping with flanged threaded or welded joints or buried pipe in conflict with potable water lines . .
Leakage for buried pipe with sliptype or mechanical joints shall not exceed the rate determined by the following formula 𝐿 . 𝑁 𝐷 𝑃 where L Maximum allowable leakage gallonshour N Number of gasketed joints in the line under test D Nominal internal diameter of the pipe inches P The average test pressure on the line being tested psi gauge .
BACKFILLING .
a General .
Immediately prior to backfilling all debris forms and similar materials shall be removed from the excavation .
Backfilling shall not be done in freezing weather with frozen materials or when materials already placed are frozen .
b Pipe Bedding Area .
Prior to laying pipe bedding material shall be placed to the limits of the excavation and to a depth beneath the pipe as specified .
This material shall be sand gravel or crushed stone and shall not contain large lumps and stones over inch in diameter .
The Engineer may direct the use of material meeting the requirements for Granular Backfill for Structures .
As the pipe is laid bedding material shall be extended to the spring line of the pipe and leveled along the width of the trench .
The pipe installation is to be inspected and approved by the Engineer before being covered .
c Pipe Envelope Area .
The pipe envelope consists of selected suitable material placed from the spring line of the pipe to a depth of inches over the top of the pipe .
The material shall be carefully placed and spread over the width of the trench and compacted using an approved tamper .
The Contractor shall take all necessary precautions during placement and compaction of the bedding and pipe envelope materials to prevent either damage to or displacement of the pipe .
d Above Envelope Area .
Unless otherwise shown on the Plans material used for backfilling trenches above the envelope area shall be suitable material that was removed during excavation or obtained from borrow and when compacted shall make a dense stable fill .
The material shall not contain vegetation porous matter masses of roots individual roots more than inches long or inch thick or stones greater than pounds or larger than inches in the widest dimension .
If additional material is required it shall be furnished from approved sources .
Backfill material shall be evenly spread and compacted in lifts not more than inches thick or as approved by the Engineer .
Previously placed or new materials shall be moistened by sprinkling if required to ensure proper bond and compaction and shall conform to the requirements of Subsection .d .
Whatever method of compacting backfill is used care shall be taken that stones and lumps shall not become nested and that all voids between stones shall be completely filled with fine material .
No compacting shall be done when the material is too wet to be compacted properly .
If the material is too wet the work shall be suspended until the previously placed and new materials have dried out sufficiently to permit proper compaction or until other precautions are taken as necessary to obtain proper compaction .
Backfill material shall be compacted to maximum dry density percentages specified in Table .A and the inplace moisture content shall be not more than above the optimum moisture content as determined by AASHTO T Method C. TABLE .A MAXIMUM DRY DENSITY FOR BACKFILL Backfill Location Maximum Dry Density Around all structures under roadway paving shoulders and embankments All other areas .
HOUSE CONNECTIONS .
In general the Engineer will require new house connections for each existing residential and commercial structure .
The actual location of each new house connection shall be determined in the field by the Engineer .
Stubouts for future connections shall be a minimum of inches long and shall have ends closed with suitable approved plugs specially made for the purpose .
All joints and spaces shall be thoroughly filled with mortar .
Plugs shall be installed so as to be readily removable without damage to the pipe when future connections are made. . MANHOLES .
Manholes shall conform to the requirements of Section . .
TRANSFER OF EXISTING SYSTEM TO NEW SYSTEM .
The Contractor shall maintain existing sewage flows during construction of the new sanitary sewer systems and during connection of the new system to the existing system .
The Contractor shall submit and receive approval of a detailed construction schedule and procedure for transferring service from the existing system to the new system prior to beginning work on the system .
Prior to making the connection the Contractor shall notify the Owner and the Engineer in writing three Calendar Days in advance of the date when the Contractor will be ready to complete the work .
After this connection is made the Contractor shall divert the sewage flow to the new sewer transfer the house services from the existing system to the new sewer and abandon the existing system as shown on the Plans or directed by the Engineer .
Where existing manholes and other underground structures are to be abandoned the Contractor shall remove the frame and cover remove the top a minimum of inches below subgrade or final slope grade whichever is greater plug the pipes with Class C concrete and backfill with suitable material .
Frames and covers shall remain the property of the owner of the system .
material placed in the manholes and other structures shall be compacted to the requirements of the surrounding subgrade material. . WATER MAIN SEWER SEPARATION .
Where water mains and sewer lines are in the same area as a result of work under the Contract parallel installations or crossings of such installations shall conform to the requirements as specified in the latest revision of the States Standards Recommended Standards for Water Works and Recommended Standards for Wastewater Facilities as well as the standards of the Vermont Drinking Water and Groundwater Protection Division and as specified below .
In addition all reconstruction or relocation of existing water or sewer facilities shall be as approved by the Utility owner .
Such approval shall be obtained for scheduling materials and configuration of the reconstruction or relocation .
a Parallel Installation .
Under normal conditions water mains shall have a separation of at least feet horizontally from sewers storm drains or manholes whenever possible with the distance measured edgetoedge .
When local conditions prevent a horizontal separation of feet a water main and sewer may be laid closer to each other provided that Special written approval is obtained from the Agency of Natural Resources .
The bottom of the water main is at least inches above the top of the sewer main .
Where this vertical separation can not be obtained the sewer shall be constructed of materials and with joints that are equivalent to water main standards of construction and shall be pressure tested to ensure that it is watertight prior to backfilling .
b Crossings .
Under normal conditions water mains crossing house sewers storm sewers or sanitary sewers shall be laid above the sewer line with a separation of at least inches between the bottom of the water main and the top of the sewer pipe .
When local conditions prevent such a vertical separation the following construction shall be used Sewers passing over or under water mains shall be constructed of materials and joints that are equivalent to water main standards of construction such as cast or ductile iron pipe with push on or mechanical joints or approved equal .
Adequate structural support for the sewers to prevent excessive deflection of joints and settling on and breaking of the water mains .
The length of water pipe shall be centered at the point of crossing so that the joints will be equidistant and as far as possible from the sewer .
The Contractor shall assume the responsibility of identifying all crossings that may exist .
All crossings whether identified by the Engineer or the Contractor shall be constructed in accordance with these Specifications and as approved by the Engineer . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT .
The quantity of Sewer Pipe of the type and size specified to be measured for payment will be the number of linear feet of sewer line installed in the complete and accepted work as measured along the flow line of the pipe .
The quantity of ReLaying Sewer Pipe to be measured for payment will be the number of linear feet of sewer pipe relaid in the complete and accepted work as measured along the flow line of the pipe .
The quantity of Transfer to New System Sanitary Sewer to be measured for payment will be on a unit basis for each transfer performed in the complete and accepted work . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT .
The accepted quantity of Sewer Pipe of the type and size specified will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per linear foot .
Payment shall be full compensation for furnishing transporting handling installing and testing the materials specified for making all necessary connections and for furnishing all labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
The accepted quantity of ReLaying Sewer Pipe will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per linear foot .
Payment shall be full compensation for furnishing all labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary for relaying sewer pipe at the locations specified in the Contract and as directed by the Engineer .
Excavation including backfill and disposal of excavated material not suitable for backfill will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per cubic yard for Trench Excavation of Earth or Trench Excavation of Rock as specified in Section .
When material is required to replace poor foundation material below the normal grade of the pipe it will be paid for as Granular Backfill for Structures .
Concrete shown on the Plans or directed by the Engineer will be paid for as Concrete Class B unless otherwise specified .
Sheeting left in place will be paid for as incidental to the appropriate excavation Contract Item .
The accepted quantity of Transfer to New System Sanitary Sewer will be paid for at the Contract lump sum price bid .
Payment will be full compensation for furnishing all labor materials equipment tools and incidentals suitable for effecting the transfer of systems as specified .
Items for payment under this lump sum amount include but are not limited to maintenance of existing sewage flows excavation and location of the new connection point diversion of sewage flow from the connection point associated pumpingdewatering of connection area making the physical connection including all fittings and appurtenances transfer of sewage flow to the new system abandonment of existing system and furnishing all labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Ductile Iron Sewer Pipe CementLined Linear Foot .
ReLaying Sewer Pipe Linear Foot .
PVC Sewer Pipe Linear Foot .
Transfer to New System Sanitary Sewer Lump Sum SECTION WATER SYSTEMS .
DESCRIPTION .
This work shall consist of the construction or reconstruction of water lines and appurtenances. . MATERIALS .
Materials shall meet the requirements of the following Subsections Granular Backfill for Structures .
Plastic Pipe Flexible .
Plastic Pipe Rigid PVC .
Copper Tube Seamless .
Ductile Iron Pipe CementLined .
Chlorine Solution .
Crushed stone bedding shall meet the requirements of Subsection .
for Coarse Aggregate for Concrete .
Concrete shall be Class B unless otherwise specified and shall conform to the requirements of Section .
Sleeves shall conform to the requirements of Section .
Crushed stone used for pipe bedding shall meet the gradation requirements of Table .B .
Ductile iron fittings shall be socalled compact or shortbodied fittings .
The Engineer will approve corporation stops for use on a Project after consultation with the Utility owner but prior to the stops being ordered by the Contractor. . GENERAL .
Care shall be exercised by the Contractor to avoid disrupting the operation of existing water facilities without prior written approval of the Engineer .
When existing underground utilities which are not scheduled for removal or abandonment are encountered in the excavation they shall be adequately supported and protected from damage .
Any damage to utilities shall be repaired promptly in accordance with Subsection .
at no additional cost to the Agency .
Any work associated with existing water lines or appurtenances shown on the Plans to be removed or abandoned in place shall be performed as an incidental item of construction .
The Contractor shall be responsible for the unloading storing hauling and distribution of all materials .
All such material that is damaged destroyed or lost during and after unloading shall be replaced at the Contractors expense .
All pipe pipe fittings and accessories shall be handled to avoid shock .
Pipe having factoryapplied joint material shall be stacked and blocked to prevent damage to the joint material .
Material not needed for immediate use shall be stored in a safe manner at locations selected by the Contractor and approved by the Engineer .
The Engineer will approve the location of all pipes. . EXCAVATION .
Where the pipe is to be laid below the existing ground line a trench shall be excavated to the required depth and to a width sufficient to allow for joining of the pipe .
The bedding and backfill material under and around the pipe shall be compacted per the applicable material Specification .
Where feasible trench walls shall be vertical .
The completed trench bottom shall be firm for its full length and width .
Ledge rock rocky or gravelly soil hardpan or other unyielding foundation material encountered at the normal grade of the pipe bed shall be removed and replaced with Granular Backfill for Structures .
The width of the pipe bed shall be equal to the inside diameter of the pipe plus inches .
The minimum depth shall be inches below the pipe grade unless otherwise shown on the Plans or directed by the Engineer .
No tunneling will be permitted except by written approval of the Engineer .
Permission to tunnel will be granted only in short sections where in the opinion of the Engineer the pipe can be safely and properly installed and the backfill properly compacted .
The Contractor shall always conduct operations to prevent the accumulation of water ice and snow in excavations or near excavated areas and to prevent water from interfering with the progress or quality of the work .
Under no conditions shall water be allowed to rise in open trenches after pipe has been placed .
Accumulated water ice and snow shall be promptly removed and disposed of by pumping or other approved means .
Disposal shall be carried out in a manner which will not create a hazard to public health cause injury to public or private property work completed or in progress or public streets or cause any interference in the use of streets and roads by the public .
Pipes under construction shall not be used for drainage of excavations .
Where pipes are to be placed in embankment fill the excavation shall be made after the embankment has been completed to a height of feet plus one pipe diameter above the designed grade of the pipe .
Sheeting and bracing required for trenches shall be removed to the elevation of the pipe but no sheeting will be allowed to be pulled removed or disturbed below the pipe. . BEDDING FOR PIPE .
Ductile iron pipe shall be laid on suitable soil and backfilled and compacted to the centerline of the pipe with select material .
Select material shall be sand gravel or suitable material excavated from the trench and free from rocks foreign materials and frozen Earth .
Concrete cradle bedding shall be installed on approved subgrades when shown on the Plans or directed by the Engineer . .
LAYING PIPE .
Installation of all water lines shall be in accordance with latest revisions of ANSIAWWA C States Standards Recommended Standards for Water Works and Recommended Standards for Wastewater Facilities the standards of the Vermont Drinking Water and Ground Water Protection Division and as specified .
Pipe laying shall begin at the outlet end .
The lower segment of the pipe shall be in contact with the shaped bedding throughout its full length .
Bell or grooved ends of rigid pipes and the circumferential laps of flexible pipe shall be placed facing upstream .
The longitudinal laps or seams of flexible pipe shall be at the sides .
All pipe and fittings shall be carefully examined for defects and no pipe or fittings that are known to be defective shall be laid .
If any defective piece is discovered after laying it shall be removed and replaced at the Contractors expense .
All pipes and fittings shall be cleaned before they are laid and shall be kept clean until accepted in the completed work .
The pipe shall be laid to conform to the lines and grades indicated on the Plans or as directed by the Engineer .
Each pipe shall be so laid as to form a closed joint with the next adjoining pipe and to bring the inverts continuously to the required grade .
Each length of pipe shall be driven home against the pipe previously laid and held securely in position .
Joints shall not be pulled or cramped .
Before any joint is made the pipe shall be checked to ensure that a closed joint with the next adjoining pipe has been maintained and that the inverts are matched and conform to the required grade .
The pipe shall not be driven down to grade by striking it .
The Contractor shall take all necessary precautions to prevent flotation of the pipe in the trench .
When pipe laying is not in progress the open ends of the pipe shall be closed with temporary watertight plugs .
If water is in the trench when work is resumed the plug shall not be removed until all danger of water entering the pipe is eliminated .
The use of concrete reaction blocking shall be limited to caps tees hydrants and bends of .
and greater .
Blocking shall be placed only on the sides of each fitting in the direction of thrust and not underneath for use as a foundation or support .
All other bends less than .
shall be restrained by use of retainer glands at each bend and at all joints within three pipe lengths on each side of the bend .
Separation of water mains and sewers shall conform to the requirements of Subsection .. .
JOINING PIPE .
Water pipe shall be joined in accordance with the detailed instructions of the manufacturer .
Where recommended by the manufacturer the Contractor shall furnish coupling pullers for joining the pipe .
Gasket feeler gauges shall be available for use by the pipe layer and the Engineer for checking the position of the rubber gaskets in the completed joint if so directed by the Engineer .
The electrical conductivity of the pipeline and attached services shall be maintained at all joints couplings valves and fittings through the use of three brass wedges at each joint or with conduction straps .
No couplings shall be made at any point on the pipeline or attached services without incorporating provisions to maintain electrical conductivity .
Any fittings showing a crack and any fitting or pipe which has received a severe blow that may have caused a fracture even though no such fracture can be seen shall be marked as rejected and removed at once from the work .
Water pipe shall be cut by means of a handsaw metalinserted abrasive wheels or by pipe cutters with blades not rollers doing the cutting .
All cut ends shall be examined for possible cracks caused by cutting . .
SETTING OF VALVES AND FITTINGS .
Valves fittings plugs and caps shall be set and joined to pipe in the manner specified above for laying and joining pipe .
A valve box or masonry pit shall be provided for every valve .
A valve box shall be provided for every valve that has no gearing or operating mechanism or in which the gearing or operating mechanism is fully protected with a gear case .
The valve box shall not transmit shock or stress to the valve and shall be centered and plumb over the wrench nut of the valve with the box cover flush with the surface of the finished pavement or other such level as directed by the Engineer .
A masonry valve pit shall be provided for every valve that has exposed gearing or operating mechanisms .
The valve nut shall be readily accessible for operation through the opening in the manhole which shall be set flush with the surface of the finished pavement or such other level as specified by the Engineer .
Pits shall be constructed to permit minor valve repairs and afford protection to the valve and pipe from impact where they pass through the pit walls .
Mains shall be drained through drainage branches or blowoffs to dry wells from which the water can be pumped .
Drainage branches blowoffs air vents and appurtenances shall be provided with valves and shall be located and installed as shown on the Plans .
Drainage branches or blowoffs shall not be connected to any sewer submerged in any stream or be installed in any other manner that will permit back siphonage into the distribution system .
All dead ends of new mains shall be closed with plugs or caps such dead ends shall be equipped with suitable blowoff facilities .
Corporation stops shall in all instances be tapped into the main on the side in a horizontal position or in such a position as will provide a minimum of feet of cover over the connecting service line .
The main shall be tapped by skilled workers and the stop installed in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations at the locations shown on the Plans or as directed the Engineer .
The stops may be installed later at which time the main may be tapped under pressure .
All defective taps shall be repaired or replaced at the Contractors expense .
Prior to installation the Contractor shall thoroughly clean all exposed portions of any valves removing all labels and all traces of foreign substance using only a cleaning solution approved by the manufacturer of the valve and being careful to avoid all damage to surfaces and coatings . .
SETTING OF HYDRANTS .
Hydrants shall be located as shown on the Plans or as directed so as to provide complete accessibility and minimize the possibility of damage from vehicles or injury to pedestrians .
When placed behind the curb the hydrant barrel shall be set so that no portion of the pumper or hose nozzle cap is less than inches or more than inches from the gutter face of the curb .
When set in the lawn space between the curb and the sidewalk or between the sidewalk and the property line no portion of the hydrant or nozzle cap shall be within inches of the sidewalk .
All hydrants shall stand plumb and shall have their nozzles parallel with or at right angles to the curb with the pumper nozzle facing the curb except that hydrants having two hose nozzles apart shall be set with each nozzle facing the curb at an angle of .
Hydrants shall be set to the established grade with nozzles at least inches above the ground as shown or as directed by the Engineer .
Each hydrant shall be connected to the main with a inches or larger branch controlled by an independent gate valve unless otherwise specified .
If as determined by the Engineer the waste opening of any hydrant will be below the normal subsurface water elevation the waste opening shall be securely plugged and no drainage pit will be required .
Wherever a drybarrel hydrant is set in soil that is pervious drainage shall be provided at the base of the hydrant by placing coarse gravel or crushed stone mixed with coarse sand from the bottom of the trench to at least inches above the waste opening in the hydrant and inches around the elbow .
No drainage system shall be connected to a sewer .
Wherever a drybarrel hydrant is set in clay or other impervious soil a drainage pit inches wide inches long feet deep shall be excavated below each hydrant and backfilled with coarse gravel or crushed stone mixed with coarse sand and compacted under and around the elbow of the hydrant to a level of inches above the waste opening .
No drainage pit shall be connected to a sewer. . ANCHORAGE .
The bowl of each hydrant shall be well braced against unexcavated earth at the end of the trench with stone slabs or concrete backing or the hydrant shall be tied to the pipe with suitable metal tie rods clamps or retainer glands as shown on the Plans or directed by the Engineer .
All plugs caps tees and bends unless otherwise specified shall be provided with a reaction backing or movement shall be prevented by attaching suitable metal rods or clamps as shown or specified .
Concrete reaction backing shall be placed between solid ground and the fitting to be anchored the area of bearing on the pipe and on the ground in each instance shall be that shown on the Plans or directed by the Engineer .
The backing shall unless otherwise shown or directed be placed in such a manner as to contain the resultant thrust forces in such a way that the pipe and fitting joints will be accessible for repair .
A metal harness of tie rods clamps or retainer glands of adequate strength to prevent movement may be used instead of concrete backing as directed by the Engineer .
Steel rods or clamps shall be galvanized or otherwise rustproofed or shall be painted as shown or directed by the Engineer. . PRESSURE AND LEAKAGE TESTS .
Except as otherwise directed all pipelines shall be tested .
Pipelines laid in excavation or bedded in concrete shall be tested prior to field painting .
Pipe to be insulated shall be tested prior to installing insulation .
The Contractor shall furnish all gauges testing plugs caps and all other necessary equipment and labor to perform leakage and pressure tests in sections of an approved length .
Each valved section or a maximum length of feet of pipe shall be tested .
The Contractor shall provide and bear the costs of any additional taps to the waterline necessary to perform the pressure and leakage test between valves .
All water required for testing shall be potable .
All testing shall be conducted in the presence of the Engineer .
The Contractor shall make the necessary provisions to tap the pipe at the high point to release all air and shall plug the pipe after completing the test .
Hydrants or blowoffs located at high points may be used for air release instead of taps if approved by the Engineer .
For the pressure test the Contractor shall develop and maintain for two hours of the working pressure measured in pounds per square inch .
Failure to hold the designated pressure for the twohour period will constitute a failure of the section tested .
The leakage test shall be performed for a duration of two hours only after the pressure test has been satisfactorily completed .
During the leakage test the Contractor shall measure the quantity of water required to maintain the maximum operating pressure of the main .
Leakage shall not exceed allowable values for leakage presented in Table B of the latest revision of ANSIAWWA C . All testing shall be conducted in accordance with the latest revision of ANSIAWWA C . Should any section of pipe fail either the pressure or leakage test the Contractor shall do everything necessary to locate and repair or replace the defective pipe fittings or joints at no expense to the Agency .
If for any reason the Engineer should alter the foregoing procedure the Contractor shall remain responsible for the tightness of the line within the above requirements. . DISINFECTING .
Before being placed in service the pipeline valves hydrants etc .
shall be chlorinated in accordance with the latest revision of ANSIAWWA C . The entire procedure of chlorinating the pipes shall be approved by the Engineer two weeks prior to the time the work is to be done .
The methods to be employed shall be fully satisfactory to the Engineer before they are applied .
The location of chlorination and sampling points is to be determined by the Engineer in the field .
The general procedure for chlorination shall be to first flush out the lines until all dirty or discolored water has disappeared then to apply the chlorine in approved dosages through a tap at one end of the line while water is being drawn at the other extremity of the line until the entire line contains chlorine solution .
The chlorine solution shall remain in the pipeline for a period of hours .
Within hours following the chlorination period all treated water shall be flushed from the lines or portions thereof at their extremities and replaced with water from the distribution system .
Special disinfecting procedures shall be used as directed by the Engineer where the above outlined method is not practical and when making connections to existing mains .
The Contractor shall provide all necessary apparatus materials and labor for disinfecting the mains and shall make the required taps for this purpose .
Disinfection of the mains shall be under the immediate direction of the Engineer during all phases of the work .
Prior to being placed in operation for domestic use all new portions of the system shall be flushed pressure tested disinfected and flushed again .
Following this procedure at least two water samples shall be collected from representative sample points and sent to the Vermont Department of Health Laboratory or other testing laboratory approved by the Vermont Department of Health for bacteriological testing .
Passing sample results are required before the system may be placed on line for drinking .
Sample bottles shall be obtained from the same laboratory. . HOUSE CONNECTIONS .
Service lines disrupted within the construction limits shall be replaced as ordered by the Engineer .
The actual location of each ordered house connection shall be determined in the field by the Engineer .
All service lines shall be seamless copper water tube from the corporation stop to the curb stop .
The copper tubing shall be attached to the corporation stop and curb stop in a manner satisfactory to the Engineer .
Sufficient slack shall be left adjacent to the corporation stop and curb stop to prevent damage to the copper tubing by movement of the pipeline .
Care shall be exercised in the placing and laying of copper tubing to be sure that the pipe does not have kinks or lie directly on sharp stones or ledge which would cause damage to the pipe .
The Contractor shall place at least inches of selected material as approved by the Engineer adjacent to above and below the tubing .
In making cuts in copper service pipe a cutter or tool designed for tube cutting must be used .
The tubing shall be reamed and after placing the coupling nut on the pipe the pipe shall be flanged using a flanging tool designed particularly for this purpose and connected .
A compression fitting may also be used .
All services shall be tested for leakage and in all instances the corporation stops shall be left in the open position upon completion of the installation .
The Contractor shall install the curb stop and the curb box at the end of the service line usually at the approximate property line or as shown on the Plans and connect the stop to the water main with new copper tubing .
The curb box shall be installed vertically and centered over the operating key with the elevation of the top adjusted to conform to the finished grade .
The Contractor shall adequately support the box during backfilling to maintain its vertical alignment .
The Contractor shall also ensure that the curb box does not rest on the curb stop owners services and furnish any adapters andor special couplings needed for these connections .
Any necessary piping from the curb stop to the existing service shall match the existing service line unless otherwise directed by the Engineer .
If no service exists the Contractor shall furnish a curb stop for connection to a copper service line .
Iron pipe threads shall be supplied under the tube nuts of curb stops and corporation stops. . BACKFILLING .
a General .
Immediately prior to backfilling all debris forms and similar materials shall be removed from the excavation .
Backfilling shall not be done in freezing weather with frozen materials or when materials already placed are frozen .
b Pipe Bedding Area .
Prior to laying pipe bedding material shall be placed to the limits of the excavation and to a depth beneath the pipe as specified .
This material shall be sand gravel or crushed stone and shall not contain large lumps or stones over inch in diameter .
The Engineer may direct the use of material meeting the requirements for Granular Backfill for Structures .
As the pipe is laid bedding material shall be extended to the spring line of the pipe and leveled along the width of the trench .
The pipe installation is to be inspected and approved by the Engineer before being covered .
c Pipe Envelope Area .
The pipe envelope consists of selected suitable material placed from the spring line of the pipe to a depth of inches over the top of the pipe .
The material shall be carefully placed and spread over the width of the trench and compacted using an approved tamper .
The Contractor shall take necessary precautions during placement and compaction of the bedding and pipe envelope materials to prevent either damage to or displacement of the pipe .
d Above Envelope Area .
Unless otherwise shown on the Plans material used for backfilling trenches above the envelope area shall be suitable material that was removed during excavation or obtained from borrow and when compacted shall make a dense stable fill .
The material shall not contain vegetation porous matter or stones larger than inches in the widest dimension .
If additional material is required it shall be furnished from approved sources .
Backfill material shall be evenly spread and compacted in lifts not more than inches thick or as approved by the Engineer .
Previously placed or new material shall be moistened by sprinkling if required to ensure proper bond and compaction and shall conform to the requirements of Subsection .d .
Whatever method of compacting backfill is used care shall be taken that stones and lumps shall not become nested and that all voids between stones shall be completely filled with fine material .
No compacting shall be done when the material is too wet to be compacted properly .
If the material is too wet the work shall be suspended until the previously placed and new materials have dried out sufficiently to permit proper compaction or until other precautions are taken as necessary to obtain proper compaction .
Backfill material shall be compacted to the maximum dry density percentage specified in Table .A and the inplace moisture content shall be not more than above the optimum moisture content as determined by AASHTO T Method C. TABLE .A MAXIMUM DRY DENSITY FOR BACKFILL Backfill Location Maximum Dry Density Around all structures under roadway paving shoulders and embankments All other areas .
THIS SUBSECTION RESERVED. . WATER SYSTEM TRANSFER .
The Contractor shall maintain existing water service during construction of the new water distribution systems and during the connection of the new system to the existing system .
The Contractor shall submit to the system owner and where required to The State of Vermont Drinking Water and Ground Water Protection Division a detailed construction schedule and procedure for transferring service from the existing system to the new system and shall receive approvals of the submittal prior to beginning work on the system .
Prior to making the transfer the Contractor shall notify the owner and the Engineer Calendar Days in advance in writing that the system is ready to be transferred .
After the new connection is made the Contractor shall divert the water to the new water main disinfect the system transfer affected individual service lines to the new water main and abandon the existing system as shown on the Plans or directed by the Engineer . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT .
The quantity of Water Pipe to be measured for payment will be the number of linear feet of the size type and class specified installed in the complete and accepted work as measured along the flow line of the pipe .
The quantity of Extension Service Box and Curb Stop measured for payment will be the number of units of each installed in the complete and accepted work .
The quantity of Valves Hydrants and Tapping Sleeves to be measured for payment will be the number of units of each size and type specified installed in the complete and accepted work .
The quantity of Meter Pit measured for payment will be the number of units of each installed in the complete and accepted work including all interior piping and appurtenances .
The quantity of Corporation Stop to be measured for payment will be the number of units of each size and type specified installed in the complete and accepted work .
The quantity of Expansion Assembly to be measured for payment will be the number of units of each size and type specified installed in the complete and accepted work .
The quantity of Transfer to New System Water System to be measured for payment will be on a lump sum basis for each transfer in the complete and accepted work .
The quantity of Crushed Stone Bedding to be measured for payment will be the number of tons of material installed in the complete and accepted work as determined by load tickets . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT .
The accepted quantity of Adjust Elevation of Valve Box Relocate Hydrant or Remove Hydrant will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per each .
Payment will be full compensation for the furnishing of all labor tools equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
The accepted quantities of Water Pipe will be paid for at their Contract Unit Price per linear foot .
Payment will be full compensation for furnishing transporting handling installing testing and disinfecting the materials specified including fittings and clamps for making all necessary connections for furnishing and placing the concrete or other materials for reaction backing or furnishing and installing tie rods clamps and restrained joints and for furnishing all tools labor equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
The accepted quantities of Extension Service Box and Curb Stop units Valves Hydrants Tapping Sleeves and Expansion Assembly will be paid for at their respective Contract Unit Price each .
Payment will be full compensation for furnishing transporting handling installing and testing all materials including fittings and clamps for painting hydrants and constructing drainage pits for furnishing and placing concrete or stone slabs for reaction backing or furnishing and installing tie rods and clamps and for all other costs incidental to the work including any cost involved for shipping rental or royalty charges or for manufacturers supervision in conjunction with the special work of installing valves .
The accepted quantity of Meter Pit will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price for each .
Payment will be full compensation for furnishing all materials tools labor and equipment suitable for installing the meter pit .
The Unit Price includes but is not limited to reinforced concrete concrete fill wall sleeves and caulking insulation control system hatch and ladder interior piping and fittings pipe supports gate valves flow meter or other measuring device and all other costs incidental to the work including any manufacturers supervision in conjunction with the special work of installing valves and meters .
The accepted quantity of Corporation Stop will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price for each .
Payment will be full compensation for furnishing transporting handling installing and connecting the stops and for furnishing all labor tools equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
The accepted quantity of Transfer to New System Water System will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per lump sum .
Payment will be full compensation for performing all work items as directed by the Engineer to abandon existing mains including but not limited to cutting and capping existing mains and laterals closing existing valves and curb stops removing existing valve boxes and curb boxes and removal of any existing main which conflicts with the construction necessary to complete the transfer to the new system including disinfection for providing specialized labor materials tools and equipment for effecting the transfer of systems as specified and for furnishing all tools labor equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
The accepted quantity of Crushed Stone Bedding will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per ton .
Payment will be full compensation for furnishing transporting handling placing and grading the material as specified and for the furnishing of all labor tools equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
Excavation including backfill and disposal of excavated material not suitable for backfill will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per cubic yard as Trench Excavation of Earth or Trench Excavation of Rock under Section .
When material is required to replace poor foundation material below the normal grade of the pipe it will be paid for as Granular Backfill for Structures .
The Utility owner will provide the services of a Professional Engineer to oversee construction of the waterline to ensure that State requirements are met and to sign and stamp all paperwork required by the Water Supply Division of the Department of Environmental Conservation Agency of Natural Resources .
The Professional Engineer shall advise the Engineer and the Engineer will provide direction to the Contractor .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Adjust Elevation of Valve Box Each .
Seamless Copper Water Tube Linear Foot .
Ductile Iron Water Pipe CementLined Linear Foot .
Extension Service Box and Curb Stop Each .
Gate Valve Each .
Gate Valve with Valve Box Each .
Hydrant Each .
Relocate Hydrant Each .
Remove Hydrant Each .
Meter Pit Each .
Plastic Water Pipe Flexible Linear Foot .
Plastic Water Pipe Rigid Linear Foot .
Tapping Sleeve and Valve with Valve Box Each .
Corporation Stop Each .
Expansion Assembly Each .
Transfer to New System Water System Lump Sum .
Crushed Stone Bedding Ton SECTION UNIFORMED TRAFFIC OFFICERS AND FLAGGERS .
DESCRIPTION .
This work shall consist of furnishing uniformed traffic officers UTOs and flaggers for the handling of traffic in around and through work zones .
Wherever used in this Section the term flaggers shall mean highway flaggers .
UTOs and flaggers collectively are also referred to as traffic control personnel .
UTOs and flaggers shall be used to control and protect the traveling public and workers during construction operations as directed by the Engineer .
Flaggers and UTOs shall conform to the requirements of the Contract Documents and the current MUTCD and its latest revisions. . GENERAL .
a Standard Procedures .
The Contractor shall designate a person responsible for coordinating traffic control personnel in accordance with the Reviewed for Conformance traffic control plan and as directed by the Engineer .
Traffic Control Personnel determined by the Engineer to be ineffective in their duties as specified herein shall be removed by the Contractor from all traffic control on the Project .
The Contractor shall immediately comply with the directive from the Engineer and shall suspend operations as necessary until a replacement meeting the qualifications as specified herein can be provided .
Such a suspension of operations shall not be considered as a basis for a Claim or an extension of time .
b Safety Apparel .
Traffic control personnel shall wear safety apparel as specified herein and shall be labeled as such .
Safety apparel shall be maintained so as to have a clean appearance and provide visibility at a minimum distance of feet .
Traffic control personnel deemed to have unsuitable safety apparel by the Engineer shall be considered ineffective and shall be removed .
Daytime .
When operating during daytime hours between sunrise and sunset traffic control personnel shall wear safety apparel meeting or exceeding performance Class requirements of the latest revision of ANSIISEA American National Standard for HighVisibility Safety Apparel and Accessories .
Nighttime .
When operating during nighttime hours between sunset and sunrise traffic control personnel shall wear safety apparel meeting or exceeding performance Class requirements of the latest revision of ANSIISEA including Class E pants or gaiters .
When deemed necessary by the Engineer or when noted in the Plans the reflectorized vests worn by traffic control personnel shall have the words TRAFFIC CONTROL in inchhigh black letters on front and back reflective panels .
Unless the words and the reflective panels on which they are mounted were placed on the vest by the original manufacturer the layout dimensions proportions and spacing of the letters in the words shall conform to the requirements for Series B Upper Case Letters in the FHWA Standard Alphabets for Traffic Control Devices .
When not actually engaged in traffic control traffic control personnel shall not wear vests displaying the TRAFFIC CONTROL text .
c Communication .
The Contractor shall equip all traffic control personnel on the Project with twoway radios capable of maintaining all necessary communication within the work zone .
The traffic control personnel shall use these radios to maintain communication and coordination whenever distance noise intervening operations dust andor other conditions make it difficult or impossible to communicate on a lineofsight basis andor whenever the use of twoway radios is ordered by the Engineer .
The Contractor shall always keep sufficient spare batteries parts and complete units on the Project so that no individual performing traffic control is without a working twoway radio for a period longer than minutes .
Without exception when twoway radios are required and a person performing traffic control is without a working twoway radio for more than minutes that person will either be supplied with a working twoway radio or be considered ineffective removed in the manner set forth in Subsection .
and replaced with a person with a working twoway radio. . UNIFORMED TRAFFIC OFFICERS UTOs .
a Requirements .
A UTO shall be a law enforcement officer who has law enforcement authority at the location where the services are provided .
UTOs shall wear a uniform approved by their law enforcement department with an exposed badge that clearly identifies them as a law enforcement officer .
When operating outside the vehicle the UTO shall wear safety apparel in accordance with Subsection .. UTOs shall be accompanied by a law enforcement vehicle with operating blue or blue and white law enforcement signal lamps as permitted under V.S.A . .
The signal lamps on a UTOs law enforcement vehicle shall be in operation when and where required by the approved Traffic Control Plan or as directed by the Engineer .
Law enforcement vehicles shall not be parked within feet of the centerline of a railroad track .
b Equipment .
When operating on the Project during nighttime hours between sunset and sunrise UTOs shall be equipped with handheld lighted signals that display a red light suitable for directing traffic .
c Duties .
UTOs shall perform the following duties in accordance with the Contract Documents or as directed by the Engineer .
Promoting voluntary compliance by motorists with speed and other rules of the road through an obvious presence .
This may include the presence of marked law enforcement vehicles displaying law enforcement signal lamps the presence of a UTO in or near the highway andor signage indicating their presence .
This presence is generally stationary with a law enforcement vehicle serving as an advanced warning signal and the UTO usually positioned outside the vehicle to direct or control traffic as necessary .
Directing and controlling traffic including at intersections with nonfunctioning or malfunctioning signals .
Serving as a Flagger. . FLAGGERS .
a Requirements .
A Flagger shall be a person who has successfully completed the American Traffic Safety Services Association ATSSA approved Flagger training course or another course as approved by the Engineer .
Flaggers shall always carry their Flagger training course certification when on the Project site .
It shall be the Contractors responsibility to verify that Flaggers meets the requirements as specified herein .
b Equipment .
Flaggers shall be equipped with a STOPSLOW paddle signaling device as detailed in Part E. of the MUTCD .
c Duties .
Flaggers shall be used to stop and release traffic within a designated work zone or where the entrance or exit of construction equipment or other construction activity constitutes a hazard to the traveling public or as directed by the Engineer .
Flaggers shall not be used to direct traffic at intersections . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT .
The quantities of Uniformed Traffic Officers and Flaggers to be measured for payment will be the number of hours for each as authorized by the Engineer .
No additional allowance will be made for premium time overtime and no allowance or payment will be allowed for the required fourhour training . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT .
The accepted quantities of Uniformed Traffic Officers and Flaggers will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per hour .
Payment will be full compensation for hiring training transporting and supervising for furnishing clothing badges vehicles law enforcement signal lamps signs lighting devices reflectorized equipment for providing all taxes and insurance and for furnishing all radios and other equipment materials and incidentals necessary to perform this work .
When the Contract Items Uniformed Traffic Officers or Flaggers are not included in the Contract or when Uniformed Traffic Officers or Flaggers are employed by the Contractor without authorization by the Engineer the costs will not be paid for directly but will be considered incidental to all other Contract Items .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Uniformed Traffic Officers Hour .
Flaggers Hour SECTION FIELD OFFICE .
DESCRIPTION .
This work shall consist of furnishing erecting equipping and maintaining Field Offices and testing equipment .
The work shall include cleaning supplying Utility services office furniture equipment and supplies as required for the exclusive use of the Agency engineering staff at locations approved by the Engineer .
Upon completion of the Project the Field Offices furniture accessories and equipment provided shall remain the property of the Contractor .
The testing equipment and supplies are furnished for the use of the Agency during the term of the Contract and shall be subject to use by Agency personnel to conduct tests of any materials at any location as directed by the Engineer .
Equipment furnished for testing of protective coatings will be used by the Engineer as required by the Contract. . FIELD OFFICES .
a General .
Field Offices shall be available solely to the representatives of the State and the Federal Government throughout the duration of use for the respective type of Field Office and shall be removed when released by the Engineer .
Field Offices and equipment shall always be maintained in working condition to the satisfaction of the Engineer including adequate supplies .
Field Offices shall not be located within any Operating Railroad RightofWay .
All Field Offices shall meet the following requirements Foundation .
Field Offices shall be constructed on a firm foundation that will remain vibration free and that will not be adversely affected by frost action or water runoff .
Design .
Field Offices shall be a commercialtype Field Office trailer of standard commercial quality or a building in good condition as determined by the Engineer with a minimum width of feet .
They shall have a minimum of two means of egress equipped with dead bolt locks and a minimum foot foot deck with steps and railings in accordance with the VOSHA Safety and Health Standards for Construction .
The Contractor shall provide the Engineer with three sets of keys .
The Contractor shall not access the Field Office without approval of the Engineer .
For the commercialtype Field Office trailer Field Offices shall have a minimum of four side windows one front window and one rear window .
Standard buildings shall have sufficient windows to the satisfaction of the Engineer .
All windows shall be glassed and screened with provisions for opening and locking and equipped with adjustable louvered blinds .
Field Offices shall have a lighting system capable of providing a minimum of footcandles on all work surfaces and shall have a minimum W exterior security light .
Electrical Service .
Field Offices shall be equipped with a V AC Hz singlephase electrical system with service entrance equipment suitable for power company attachment and with at least twelve properly positioned interior electrical duplex outlets .
The materials and installation methods of all electrical wiring connections switches and grounds shall conform to the provisions of the National Electrical Code and shall be in accordance with all State and local electrical ordinances .
The Contractor shall be responsible for arranging the connection of the electrical service to the Field Office .
Communications Services .
Field Offices shall have independent telephone and internet services such that both can be used simultaneously without impacting functionality .
Internet service shall have a minimum download speed of Mbps and a minimum upload speed of Mbps .
Jacks for connection to internet and telephone services shall be located at each end of the Field Office for both services .
When telephone andor internet service is not practical as determined by the Engineer services may be omitted from the Field Office .
The Contractor shall be responsible for establishing all connections for communications services and maintaining communications services throughout the duration the Field Office is in use .
Temperature Control .
Field Offices shall have heating and cooling systems capable of maintaining a temperature of F at all times .
Field Offices shall have thermostats capable of controlling and displaying the interior temperature .
Sanitary Facilities .
Sanitary facilities consisting of a flush toilet chemical toilet or other approved type including a waterless hand sanitizer shall be furnished by the Contractor with proper sewage disposal as is necessary to comply with the requirements and regulations of the State and local Boards of Health and VOSHA .
Sanitary facilities shall have adequate facilities for washing hands .
A potable water system consisting of a sink with a faucet within the office with a continuous supply of pressurized clean potable water shall be supplied for the duration of the Project .
When clean potable water is not available a commercial bottled drinking water system shall be installed in the Field Office complete with necessary disposable drinking cups oz .
size or larger cup dispenser and continuous water supply furnished for the duration of the Project .
The system shall supply both hot and cold water .
The system and the bottled water shall be furnished by a commercial water service on a regular basis agreeable to the Engineer .
Office Equipment .
All Field Offices shall contain the following standard commercialquality office equipment with substitutions allowed upon approval of the Engineer Standard office desk a minimum of inches wide inches deep and with drawers locks and keys Ergonomic office chairs with adjustable lumbar support adjustable height and rolling casters Adjustable height drafting stools Secure fourdrawer legalsize file cabinet fireresistant rated to withstand a onehour fire with lock and two keys Telephone with touch tone dial compatible with the local telephone service available and capable of receiving and storing messages gallon trash cans with trash bags Electric clock having a dial face at least inches in diameter First aid kit conforming to the latest revision of ANSIISEA Z . Halon fire extinguisher equal in firefighting capacity to a pound carbon dioxide fire extinguisher or as needed in accordance with OSHA requirements Outdoor thermometer weatherproof easy to read and having a minimum scale range of F to F in graduations of F Field Offices shall be provided with ventilation and gas connections as required .
The Contractor shall furnish all labor and materials for winterizing Field Offices .
b Field Office Engineers .
Field Office Engineers shall be available for use Calendar Days prior to any work commencing including erection of construction approach signing until Calendar Days after final inspection of the Project unless otherwise directed by the Engineer .
In addition to Subsection .a Field Office Engineers shall meet the following requirements Size .
Field Office Engineers shall have a minimum floor space of square feet .
Office Equipment .
Field Office Engineers shall contain the following standard commercial quality office equipment with substitutions allowed upon approval of the Engineer Rain gauge Standard drafting table a minimum of inches wide inches deep Storage cabinet a minimum of inches wide inches deep inches high Storage locker or closet of sufficient size for secure storage of surveying equipment Printerscannercopier combination unit inkjet minimum and color when deemed necessary by the Engineer with a minimum tray capacity of sheets and a minimum print speed of sheets per minute .
The combination unit shall be capable of handling inch sheets .
The combination unit shall be compatible with Microsoft Windows and later versions and shall have wired and wireless network capabilities .
The printerscannercopier combination unit shall have an antistatic vinyl dust cover and a stand of sufficient size and strength to support the unit .
Supplies for the printerscannercopier shall include inch paper inch paper and ink or toner in black and color as applicable .
All furnished equipment shall be maintained in good working order .
Replacement equipment shall be provided within hours for all equipment that is damaged stolen or becomes inoperative in any way .
The Contractor shall provide training to the Engineer in the use of the furnished equipment .
c Field Office Soils and Materials .
Field Office Soils and Materials shall be available for use from the day the Contractor commences any work requiring the testing of soils and materials until Calendar Days after acceptance of the Project or upon release by the Engineer .
In addition to Subsection .a Field Office Soils and Materials shall meet the following requirements Size .
Field Office Soils and Materials shall have a minimum floor space of square feet .
Office Equipment .
Field Office Soils and Materials shall contain the following standard commercial quality office equipment with substitutions allowed upon approval of the Engineer .
Bench top cabinet approximately inches high and inches wide with a minimum bench area of square feet and a minimum storage area of square feet using a suitable combination of fullyenclosed shelf space and drawers Sink with gooseneck faucet located within the office with a continuous supply of pressurized clean potable water for the duration of the Project Testing Equipment and Supplies .
Field Office Soils and Materials shall contain the following testing equipment and supplies at a minimum with substitutions allowed upon approval of the Engineer .
Balance scale with a pound minimum capacity accurate to .
ounces Scale with a pound minimum capacity accurate to .
ounces Doubleburner electric hot plate with variable temperature controls Electric motorized sieve shaker with either rocking and tapping action or circular and tapping action with a capacity of at least six sieves cover and inch diameter pan confined in a dustretaining enclosure Set of U.S. Standard Sieves brass inch diameter full height woven wire meeting the requirements of ASTM E . The required sieves are as follows inch .
mm inch .
mm inch .
mm inch .
mm inch .
mm inch .
mm inch .
mm inch .
mm inch .
mm inch .
mm inch .
mm inch .
mm No. . mm No. . mm No. . mm No. . mm No. . mm No. . mm No. . mm No. . mm No. . mm inch sieve pans inch sieve covers Additional Equipment .
Additional equipment and supplies will include the following items Pairs of safety gloves inches in length and capable of withstanding temperatures up to F Brush brass wire bristle Broom standard floor type Shovel roundpointed with Dhandle Shovel squarepointed with Dhandle Heavy canvas sheets feet long feet wide for quartering samples Aluminum moisture cans inches in diameter inches deep Paint brushes soft bristle inch Table brushes inches inches Masons trowel pointed inch Plastic dish pans inches long inches wide inches deep Cake pans inches long inches wide inches deep Grain scoop inch Spatula with inch inch blade Mixing spoons heavyduty plated steel inches long Microwaveable pans a minimum of inches long inches wide inches deep Compaction mold inches in diameter and meeting the requirements of AASHTO T Rammer pounds in weight and meeting the requirements of AASHTO T Straightedge steel and meeting the requirements of AASHTO T Density apparatus consisting of a sand cone and baseplate and meeting the requirements of AASHTO T Onegallon mason jugs with standard G mason jar top threading with covers Carrying box cushioned for the two onegallon mason jugs Onegallon metal cans with moistureproof friction covers and handles similar to paint cans Twopound rubber mallet with inch handle Storage box to of adequate size to contain the compaction testing equipment Standard Ottawa Sand meeting the requirements of ASTM C Section .
shall be supplied in the amount of approximately pounds of sand for every cubic yards of embankment .
A microwave oven that meets the following requirements a .
A minimum rating of Watts b .
A digital display of power level and time c. A minimum internal volume of approximately .
cubic feet .
The interior dimensions shall be approximately inches long inches wide with by an acceptable height .
The interior dimensions shall be of adequate size to accept the microwaveable pans listed in this subsection .
d. A minimum of ten adjustable power levels When compaction testing in accordance with AASHTO T is required the following additional equipment shall be supplied by the Contractor Rammer pounds weight and meeting the requirements of AASHTO T All the foregoing testing equipment shall be in good condition and shall be replaced or repaired by the Contractor if during the duration of the Project it becomes unsuitable for testing purposes .
All calibration records shall be available to the Engineer .
Equipment provided for Testing Equipment Concrete Testing Equipment Bituminous or Testing Equipment Grout when such equipment is also in the Contract will not be considered common to the testing equipment for Field Office Soils and Materials and is not to be used as such . .
THIS SUBSECTION RESERVED . .
THIS SUBSECTION RESERVED . .
TESTING EQUIPMENT CONCRETE .
The following equipment shall be provided to perform concrete field tests Cylinder test set meeting the requirements of AASHTO T Slump test set meeting the requirements of AASHTO T MT Platform beam scale sensitive to .
pounds with a minimum capacity of pounds Wheelbarrow steel contractors grade Shovel squarepointed with Dhandle Pressure air meter meeting the requirements of AASHTO T and all accessory items required for use with the particular design of apparatus used .
Accessory items shall include a flat rectangular metal plate at least inch thick a glass or acrylic plate at least inch thick or a wire reinforced glass plate at least inch thick with a length and width at least inches greater than the diameter of the measuring bowl of the air meter with which it is to be used Concrete curing box of standard commercial quality and designed to maintain an internal water temperature of F F and humidity .
One or more curing boxes shall be supplied to meet specimen requirements for the Project .
Straightedge a minimum of feet long For testing Class LW concrete the following additional testing equipment shall be provided Volumetric air meter meeting the requirements of AASHTO T MT supplied with a wooden carrying case syringe tamping rod measuring vessel and baffle Oneunit weight measure meeting the requirements of AASHTO T MT supplied with a flat rectangular metal plate at least inch thick a glass or acrylic plate at least inch thick or a wire reinforced glass plate at least inch thick with a length and width at least inches greater than the diameter of the measuring bowl of the air meter with which it is to be used All the foregoing testing equipment shall be in good condition and shall be replaced or repaired by the Contractor if during the duration of the Project it becomes unsuitable for testing purposes .
All equipment and supplies furnished by the Contractor shall be available prior to the placing of any concrete .
When the Contractor places concrete at more than one location simultaneously the necessary testing equipment shall be furnished at each location .
When the equipment to be provided for concrete testing is required by the Contract it will not be considered common to the equipment for gradation testing compaction testing or bituminous concrete testing and is not to be used as such . .
TESTING EQUIPMENT BITUMINOUS .
The following equipment shall be provided Straightedge a minimum of feet long Straightedge feet in length Shovel roundpointed with Dhandle Thermometer electronic handheld with a digital display visible under all lighting conditions a temperature range of ºF to ºF in increments of ºF automatic zero adjustment and low battery indication with instruction manual .
The unit shall be completely selfcontained and shall not require any external probes or other attachments to perform the required functions .
Probe thermometer Micrometer with a capacity of to inch and calibrated in .
mils Building level with case The level shall be a inch electronic model with bubble indicators digital readout with a range of to degrees in .
increments percent slope from to in .
increments and pitch in inches of rise per foot of run .
The level shall have the capability of being recalibrated .
Mechanical measuring wheel with a minimum wheel circumference of feet and a sealed counter capable of measuring a minimum of feet Relative humidity pen Black duct tape and tar paper or asphalttreated felt shall be supplied in adequate amounts for the Engineer to perform necessary thickness and moisture testing .
All the foregoing testing equipment shall be in good condition and shall be replaced or repaired by the Contractor if during the duration of the Project it becomes unsuitable for testing purposes .
All equipment and supplies furnished by the Contractor shall be available prior to the placement of any bituminous concrete or pavement markings .
When the Contractor places bituminous concrete or pavement markings at more than one location simultaneously the necessary testing equipment shall be furnished at each location .
When the equipment to be provided for bituminous concrete testing is required by the Contract it will not be considered common to equipment for gradation testing compaction testing or concrete testing and is not to be used as such . .
TESTING EQUIPMENT PROTECTIVE COATINGS .
The following equipment shall be provided Psychrometer kit with wetbulb and drybulb thermometers for measuring dew point meeting the requirements of ASTM E Method B with a range from F to F and an accuracy of F. As a minimum the psychometer kit shall include matching thermometers with conversion charts and a thermometer for measuring the surface temperature of a steel object .
Thickness probe electronic dry film meeting the requirements of ASTM D . The probe shall be capable of measuring a range of to mils with an accuracy of .
Adhesion testing kit meeting the requirements of ASTM D Adhesion by Tape Test Method A .
As a minimum the adhesion testing kit shall include a cutting tool a cutting guide tape rubber eraser and an illuminated magnifier .
Surface profile kit meeting the requirements of ASTM D Method C. The surface profile kit shall include coarse and extra coarse tapes as specified in Section .
with a minimum of one roll pieces of tape for each range plus extras as required .
All the foregoing testing equipment shall be in good condition and shall be replaced or repaired by the Contractor if during the duration of the Project it becomes unsuitable for testing purposes .
The equipment furnished shall have been calibrated within one year or shall have appropriate means of being calibrated in the field . .
TESTING EQUIPMENT GROUT .
For testing mortar flowable fill and other combinations of sand and cement the following additional testing equipment shall be provided Set of specimen molds meeting the requirements of AASHTO T MT Trowel having a steel blade to inches in length with straight edges Tamper meeting the requirements of AASHTO T MT All of the foregoing testing equipment shall be in good condition and shall be replaced or repaired by the Contractor if during the duration of the Project it becomes unsuitable for testing purposes .
All equipment and supplies furnished by the Contractor shall be available prior to the placing of any grout .
When the Contractor places grout at more than one location simultaneously the necessary testing equipment shall be furnished at each location .
When the equipment to be provided for grout testing is required by the Contract it will not be considered common to the equipment for gradation testing compaction testing concrete testing or bituminous concrete testing and is not to be used as such . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT .
The quantity of each type of Field Office andor Testing Equipment to be measured for payment will be on a unit basis for each type specified and used on the Project .
The quantity of Field Office Communications to be measured for payment will be to the nearest hundredth of a dollar for all communication services supplied .
The Agency will include in the proposal a quantity of dollars for all communication services required .
However the Contractor will be reimbursed the actual costs of providing the communication services as evidenced by the paid bills submitted to the Engineer .
Upon entering the cost of the submitted bill into the next biweekly estimate the Engineer will forward the original paid bill to the Construction Office to be retained with the Project records and will place a copy of the paid bill into the field office records . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT .
The accepted quantity of each type of Field Office andor Testing Equipment will be paid for at the Contract lump sum price for the specified item type .
Payment will be full compensation for performing the work and furnishing all materials labor tools equipment and incidentals necessary to provide construct install maintain and remove the type of field office andor testing equipment specified including the installation removal and connection of communications lines and waste removal .
Replacement of equipment that becomes unsuitable and providing supplies that become exhausted will not be paid for directly but will be considered incidental to the Contract Item they are furnished under .
Payment for this work will be made as follows a The first will be paid after each specified office andor equipment unit has been installed on the Project in full working order .
b The second payment of will be paid when of the anticipated construction time has expired .
c The third payment of will be paid when of the anticipated construction time has expired .
d The fourth and final payment of the remaining will be paid upon completion and acceptance of the Project .
The quantity of Field Office Communications to be paid will be the total dollar value of all communications bills paid for by the Contractor for providing all telephone and internet services supplied to the field offices .
The total will be limited to the total of paid communications bills submitted to the Engineer .
The cost of furnishing separate telephone lines including installation and removal will not be paid for directly but will be considered incidental to the appropriate Field Office Item .
The monthly service charges will be paid under Field Office Communications .
Payment for this work will be made upon receipt of each paid communications bill submitted to the Engineer .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Field Office Engineers Lump Sum .
Field Office Soils and Materials Lump Sum .
Testing Equipment Concrete Lump Sum .
Testing Equipment Bituminous Lump Sum .
Testing Equipment Protective Coatings Lump Sum .
Testing Equipment Grout Lump Sum .
Field Office Communications N.A.B.I .
Dollar SECTION RAILROAD FLAGGERS .
DESCRIPTION .
This work shall consist of maintaining Operating Railroad traffic and coordinating with the Agency and the Operating Railroad for inspection and review of the Contractors work in conjunction with construction operations .
A Railroad Flagger shall be requested any time construction operations will be within feet of the nearest rail or within the Operating Railroad RightofWay whichever is furthest. . GENERAL REQUIREMENTS .
A Railroad Flagger shall be a person who is furnished employed and qualified by the Operating Railroad .
When as stipulated in the Contract Documents or in the opinion of the Engineer and the Operating Railroad the construction work would cause hazard to the safe operation of trains and other facilities in the Operating Railroad RightofWay including signal and communication lines the Operating Railroad will furnish the necessary qualified employees to protect their trains and other facilities .
The Contractor shall provide advanced notice to the Operating Railroad prior to the commencement of any work or any portion of the work over or adjacent to the Operating Railroad RightofWay so that necessary arrangements can be made by the Operating Railroad to protect Operating Railroad traffic .
Railroad Flaggers shall be required whenever the Contractor is performing work over under or adjacent to the Operating Railroad tracks or RightofWay such as excavation sheeting shoring erection or removal of forms handling material .
Railroad Flaggers shall be required whenever equipment is used which by swinging over or by failure could foul the track or when any other type of work is being performed that in the opinion of the Engineer or the Operating Railroad requires such service .
The Contractor shall be required to plan coordinate and organize the work effort in a way that shall absolutely minimize the use and number of Operating Railroad protective personnel required .
The Agency and the Operating Railroad will review and approve all Contractor work schedules prior to the commencement of work and prior to the assignment of protective personnel .
Misuse of these protective services by the Contractor due to inadequate work procedures will not be allowed and shall be sufficient cause for the Agency to require the Contractor to bear all inappropriate costs .
Operating Railroad train crews necessary for the operation of Contractorscheduled work trains or Contractor owned or leased locomotive equipment shall not be paid by the Agency under this Section as all such costs will be considered incidental to the Contractors work and therefore shall be entirely borne by the Contractor. . CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS .
The Contractor shall obtain verification of the time and schedule of track occupancy from the Operating Railroad before proceeding with any construction or demolition work over under within or adjacent to the Operating Railroad RightofWay .
All work to be done under upon or over the Operating Railroad RightofWay shall be performed by the Contractor in a manner satisfactorily to the Engineer and shall be performed at such times and in such manner as to not interfere with the movement of trains or traffic upon the tracks .
The Contractor shall use all necessary care and precaution to avoid accidents delay or interference with the trains or other property .
The Contractor shall conduct the work and handle equipment and materials so that no part of any equipment should foul an operated track or wire line without the written permission of the Operating Railroad .
When it is noted that the work will foul an operating track the Contractor shall give the Operating Railroad written notice Calendar Days in advance so that if approved arrangements can be made for proper protection of the railroad. . SUBMITTALS .
a At the preconstruction meeting the Contractor shall submit for approval by the Agency a detailed description of proposed methods for accomplishing the construction work required under the Contract to include methods for protecting Operating Railroad traffic .
Approval by the Agency shall not serve in any way to relieve the Contractor of complete responsibility for the adequacy and safety of the proposed methods .
b Prior to beginning work the Contractor shall submit for the approval of the Engineer a detailed description of the procedures for work to be performed over under within or adjacent to the Operating Railroad RightofWay .
Work shall not proceed until the proposed procedures have been approved by the Agency . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT .
The quantity of Railroad Flaggers to be measured for payment will be in a quantity of dollars for the specified flagging and protective services provided . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT .
A value in dollars has been included in the bid proposal for flagging and protective services .
Payment for Railroad Flaggers will be for reimbursing the Contractor for the actual invoice amounts paid to the Operating Railroad by the Contractor for flagging and protective services .
The Contractors overhead will not be reimbursed .
The dollar amount will be adjusted to the actual amount paid to the Operating Railroad for flagging and protective services after review and approval of paid invoices .
No additional payment will be made under this Contract Item .
All other costs for coordination and Railroad Flaggers in accordance with these provisions will be considered incidental .
If the Contract is not completed within the specified time limit for completion of the Contract or authorized extended time no payment will be made for any costs incurred beyond the specified time of completion .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Railroad Flaggers N.A.B.I Dollar SECTION CRITICAL PATH METHOD CPM SCHEDULE .
DESCRIPTION .
This work shall consist of developing and furnishing a Critical Path Method CPM Schedule including narratives updates and revisions for the duration of the Contract .
If Item .
CPM Schedule is included in the Contract the provisions of this Section shall supersede those of Subsection .a. . SUBMISSIONS .
a Scheduling Contract Work .
The Contractor is responsible for the scheduling of all Contract work which shall include but is not limited to subcontracted work complete and acceptable submissions work component fabrications and delivery of materials .
The schedule shall include allowance for time for all aspects of the work including sufficient time for VTrans to perform its functions as indicated in the Contract including but not limited to acceptance inspection andor testing and review and acceptanceapproval of any submittals required in the Contract Documents .
b Gannt Chart .
The schedule shall be a Gantt chart prepared with Microsoft Project .
Provide the following items with each schedule submission An electronic copy in Microsoft Project format with run date and version of the schedule .
A PDF illustrated in color depicting no more than activities on each inch inch sheet and with each sheet including title Project name and number match data for diagram correlation and a key .
A fourweek lookahead narrative to provide a more detailed plan of upcoming work highlighting the nearterm priorities .
Indicate the anticipated workdays per week number of shifts per day number of hours per shift crew sizes and assumed resources .
If the Project requires a closure identify any changes in anticipated resources or work schedule during the closure period .
c CPM Schedule .
The CPM schedule shall include the following items Activities that describe the essential features of the work activities that might delay Contract completion and which activities are on the Critical Path .
The planned start and completion dates for each activity and the duration of each activity stated in Working Days .
Field activities more than Working Days in duration shall be broken into two or more activities distinguished by location or some other logical feature .
This estimated figure shall include considerations for permit limitations seasonal limitations and any other anticipated delays .
When the Project contains a defined Closure Period of a minimum of hours and up to a maximum of Calendar Days the duration for work within the closure period shall be shown in hours instead of days .
Except for cure times the maximum duration of each activity within the closure period shall be limited to hours .
The FinishtoStart relationships among activities without leads or lags unless justified in the narrative and approved by the Engineer .
Distinct columns showing Predecessors Successors Duration Actual Start and Actual Finish for each Activity .
Project suspension or work inactivity that is Calendar Days or longer .
Dates related to the procurement of materials equipment and articles of special manufacture .
Any anticipated delays due to the procurement schedule shall be included .
Dates related to the submission of Working Drawings Plans and other data specified for review or approval by the Agency .
Key milestone dates specified in the Contract including but not limited to Notice to Proceed Interim Completion Permit Restriction Dates and Contract Completion Date .
These shall be the only constraints in the schedule logic unless others are justified in the logic and approved by the Engineer .
Activities related to Agency or thirdparty reviews and inspections .
d HighValue Contracts .
For Contracts with an original Contract amount in excess of .
the following additional information shall be shown on the CPM schedule Each Contract bid item identified with at least one activity except Lump Sum items Lump Unit items Contract Items paid by the Hour Contract Items paid by the Dollar Section Pay Items and Section Pay Items .
Each compensable activity shall identify the applicable Contract Items along with the total quantity intended to be placed during that activity. . BASELINE SCHEDULE .
The CPM Schedule submittal shall be received by the Engineer a minimum of Calendar Days prior to the preconstruction meeting .
The Engineer and Contractor may review the schedule at the preconstruction meeting .
Any requested information and a revised schedule shall be submitted within Calendar Days after receiving the Engineers request .
The Engineer shall be allowed Calendar Days to review the schedule and provide a response .
The Engineer will review the schedule by assessing the schedules compliance with these provisions and conformance with the Contract requirements .
By accepting the schedule the Engineer does not modify the Contract in any way .
The Baseline Schedule shall be accepted before the Notice to Proceed .
The accepted schedule will be used as the Baseline Schedule for the remainder of the Project .
The schedule shall define and sequence activities to accurately describe the Project and to meet Contract requirements for scope of work phasing accommodations for traffic and interim and Project completion dates .
Create the schedule beginning with the date of Contract execution . .
SCHEDULE UPDATES .
The schedule shall be updated during active construction at the end of every other biweekly estimate period update period and when directed by the Engineer .
Projects with short duration closures are of particular importance as the Project float will be limited .
The Contractor shall promptly inform the Engineer of any schedule delays or changes that occur during these periods .
The Engineer shall be allowed Calendar Days to review the update for compliance with these provisions and provide a response .
Include the following items with each update a The actual start dates of each activity started .
b The actual finish dates of each activity finished or remaining durations of activities started but not yet completed .
c A narrative report describing progress during the update period shifts in the critical activities from the previous update sources of delay potential problem areas work planned for the next update period and changes made to the schedule .
Changes include additions deletions or revisions to activities due to the issuance of a Contract revision changes to an activity duration changes to relationships between activities or changes to the planned sequence of work or the method and manner of its performance .
d The Original schedule shown as a Baseline . .
REVISIONS .
Schedule revisions shall be submitted within Calendar Days after occurrence of any of the following a A written request to revise the schedule from the Engineer .
b A delay actual or projected to scheduled milestones or Project completion dates .
c When actual progress falls behind the most recent schedule accepted by the Engineer either by falling more than two weeks behind schedule or by of the total Contract time the Contractor shall immediately inform the Engineer in writing .
The Engineer may require the Contractor to submit a revised schedule .
Neither the Engineers acceptance of such revised schedule nor any Agency feedback regarding the revised schedule shall be construed as an approval of the revised schedule nor should it be construed as the Agencys dictation of the Contractors means and methods .
e Issuance of Change OrdersSupplemental Agreements that by adding deleting or revising activities changes the planned sequence of work or the method and manner of its performance .
f Issuance of Change OrdersSupplemental Agreements that add time to the Contract .
g The Contractor shall participate in progress meetings at the request of the Engineer to review and discuss the updated schedule information including any activity delay coordination requirements Change Orders potential delays and other relevant issues .
h The Engineer shall review the revised schedule for compliance with these provisions and provide a response within Calendar Days . .
FLOAT .
Any float in the schedule is to be credited to the Project only. . FAILURE TO SUBMIT SCHEDULE .
Failure to submit a schedule i.e .
original baseline schedule required updates revisions and when requested by the Engineer in accordance with these provisions may be grounds for suspension of partial payments as identified in Subsection .
until a satisfactory schedule meeting the requirements of these provisions is received by the Engineer . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT .
The quantity of CPM Schedule to be measured for payment will be the number of each CPM Schedule i.e .
original baseline schedule required updates revisions and when requested by the Engineer accepted by the Engineer through the duration of the Contract . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT .
The accepted quantity of CPM Schedule will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price for each .
Payment will be full compensation for preparing and submitting a schedule as specified and for furnishing all labor tools equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
CPM Schedule Each SECTION EMPLOYEE TRAINEESHIP .
DESCRIPTION .
This work shall consist of providing onthejob training for qualified employees in accordance with applicable approved training programs. . GENERAL .
The training requirements specified herein supersede FHWA Required Contract Provisions FederalAid Construction Contracts Part II Subparagraph b and implements U.S.C a .
The Contractor shall provide onthejob training aimed at developing full journeyman qualifications in the type of trade craft or job classification involved .
The training program shall be carried out in accordance with a training schedule and curriculum devised to give the employee an understanding of the trade craft or skill together with instructions in safety operations and performance of the actual specialty covering all aspects of the work involved .
The training program shall be one approved by the Agency and the U.S. Department of Transportation .
The required number of employee traineeship hours to be provided by the Contractor is shown in the Contract .
If a Contractor subcontracts a portion of the work the Contractor shall determine how many if any of the trainees are to be trained by the Subcontractor .
However the Contractor shall retain the primary responsibility for meeting the training requirements specified herein. . PROCEDURE .
The procedures followed in carrying out the training shall be consistent with the approved training program for the particular trade craft or skill and the trainee shall be employed insofar as practical in a useful and constructive manner assisting in the work on the Project until such time as the Contractor deems the trainee as being qualified to operate independently in the field in which the trainee has been trained .
The Contractor shall then give the trainee a certificate of satisfactory completion of apprenticeship training specifying the field of accomplishment .
The Contractor shall maintain payroll records and training records in a manner acceptable to the Engineer as to provide all the information necessary to properly and adequately support progress and final payment for this Contract Item as well as to show the status of training accomplishment .
It is normally expected that a trainee will begin training on the Project as soon as feasible after start of work utilizing the skill involved and remain on the Project as long as training opportunities exist in the work classification or until the training program has been completed .
It is not required that all trainees be on board for the entire length of the Contract .
A Contractor will have fulfilled the requirements of this Contract Item if they have provided acceptable training to the number of trainees specified .
The number trained shall be determined based on the total number enrolled on the Project for a significant period . .
TRAINEES .
The number of trainees shall be distributed among the work classifications based on the Contractors needs and the availability of journeymen in the various classifications within a reasonable area of recruitment .
Where feasible of apprentices or trainees in each occupation shall be in their first year of apprenticeship or training .
Prior to commencing construction the Contractor shall submit to the Engineer for approval the number of trainees to be trained in each selected classification and training program to be used .
Furthermore the Contractor shall specify the starting time for training in each of the classifications .
The Contractor will be credited for each trainee employed on the Project that is currently enrolled or becomes enrolled in an approved program and will be reimbursed for such trainees as provided herein . .
RECRUITMENT .
Training and upgrading of minorities and women toward journeymen status is a primary objective of this Contract Item .
Accordingly the Contractor shall make every effort to enroll minority trainees and women e.g .
by conducting systematic and direct recruitment through public and private sources likely to yield minority and women trainees to the extent that such persons are available within a reasonable area of recruitment .
The Contractor will be responsible for demonstrating the steps taken in pursuance thereof prior to a determination as to whether the Contractor is in compliance with the requirements of this Contract Item .
This training commitment is not intended and shall not be used to discriminate against any applicant for training whether a member of a minority group or not. . TRAINING PROGRAM .
The minimum length and type of training for each classification will be as established in the training program selected by the Contractor and approved by the Engineer .
The Federal Highway Administration FHWA shall approve a program if it is reasonably calculated to meet the equal employment opportunity obligations of the Contractor and to qualify the average trainee for journeyman status in the classification concerned by the end of the training period .
Apprenticeship programs registered with the U.S. Department of Labor Bureau of Apprenticeship and Training shall also be considered acceptable provided they are being administered in a manner consistent with the equal employment obligations of FederalAid highway construction Contracts .
Approval or acceptance of a training program shall be obtained from the State prior to commencing work on the classification covered by the program .
It is the intent of these provisions that training is to be provided in the construction crafts rather than clerk typists or administrative positions .
Training is permissible in lower level management positions such as office engineers estimators timekeepers etc .
where the training is oriented toward construction applications .
Training in the laborer classification may be permitted provided that significant and meaningful training is provided and approved by the FHWA division office .
Some offsite training is permissible if the training is an integral part of an approved training program and does not comprise a significant part of the overall training .
The Contractor may be eligible for reimbursement for training persons more than the number of hours specified in the Contract .
This reimbursement will be made even though the Contractor receives additional training program funds from other sources provided such other sources do not specifically prohibit the Contractor from receiving other reimbursement .
Reimbursement for offsite training indicated above may only be made to the Contractor where the Contractor does one or more of the following and the trainees are concurrently employed on a FederalAid Project contributes to the cost of the training provides the instruction to the trainee or pays the trainees wages during the offsite training period .
The Contractor shall furnish the trainee a copy of the program the Contractor will follow in providing the training .
The Contractor shall provide each trainee with a certification showing the type and length of training satisfactorily completed .
Trainees will be paid at least of the appropriate minimum journeymans rate specified in the Contract for the first half of the training period for the third quarter of the training period and for the last quarter of the training period unless apprentices or trainees in an approved existing program are enrolled as trainees on the Project .
In that case the appropriate rates approved by the Department of Labor or Transportation about the existing program shall apply to all trainees being trained for the same classification who are covered by these provisions .
In no case will the Contractor pay trainees less than the prevailing rate for labor as shown in the Contract wage decision. . SANCTIONS FOR NONCOMPLIANCE .
If the Vermont Agency of Transportation finds the Contractor or Subcontractor in noncompliance with the terms of this Contract Item it shall do the following a Issue a Show Cause Notice and notify the Contractor in writing that within Calendar Days a written Plan outlining the steps that will be taken to bring the Contractor into compliance must be submitted to the Vermont Agency of Transportation by the Contractor .
In the event the Contractor fails or refuses to submit the Plan within the specified period or if the Contractor does not exercise the corrective actions outlined in the Plan the Agency will commence enforcement proceedings under Executive Order as amended .
Such actions could include The recovery by the Agency from the Contractor of of of the Contract award amount or .
whichever sum is greater as Liquidated Damages for each week the Contractor fails or refuses to comply .
If a Subcontractor is in noncompliance the recovery by the Agency from the Contractor to be assessed by the Contractor as a back charge against the Subcontractor of of of the subcontract price or .
whichever sum is greater in the nature of Liquidated Damages for each week that such party fails or refuses to comply andor The suspension of any payment or part thereof due under the Contract until the Contractor or Subcontractor can demonstrate compliance with the terms of the Contract andor The termination or cancellation of the Contract in whole or in part unless the Contractor or Subcontractor can demonstrate within a specified time compliance with terms of the Contract andor The denial to the Contractor or Subcontractor of the right to participate in any future Contracts awarded by the Agency for a period of up to three years .
b If at any time after the imposition of sanctions one and two above the Contractor can demonstrate compliance with the requirements of this Contract Item the Contractor may request the Agency to suspend the sanctions conditionally pending a final determination by the Agency as to whether the Contractor is in compliance .
Following the final determination the Agency will either lift the sanctions or impose them .
c The above sanctions for noncompliance will also apply to the Standard Federal Equal Employment Opportunity Construction Contract Specifications Executive Order . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT .
The quantity of Employee Traineeship to be measured for payment will be the number of hours completed in the complete and accepted work . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT .
The accepted quantity of Employee Traineeship will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per hour .
Payment will be full compensation for furnishing all tools equipment supervision and incidentals necessary to provide complete training for each trainee .
If in the judgment of the Contractor a trainee becomes proficient enough to qualify as a journeyman before the end of the prescribed training period and the Contractor so employs such trainee full credit and full payment to the Contractor will be made if the period of training given plus the length of employment as a journeyman in the classification for which trained are equal to or more than the training period specified in the approved training program .
If the period of training given plus the period employed as a journeyman does not equal or exceed the training period specified in the approved training program the Contractor will be paid the Contract amount for each hour the trainee was trained and employed as a journeyman by the Contractor .
In the event of partial employee traineeship the Contractor will be paid for each hour the trainee was trained and employed as a trainee by the Contractor .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Employee Traineeship Hour SECTION MOBILIZATIONDEMOBILIZATION .
DESCRIPTION .
This work shall consist of preparatory work and operations including but not limited to those necessary for the movement of personnel equipment supplies and incidentals to and from the Project site for the establishment and removal of all Contractors field offices buildings and other facilities necessary for work on the Project and for all other work and operations that must be performed or costs incurred prior to beginning work and upon completion of Contract Items .
It shall also include compensation for any costs associated with demobilization Project clean up establishment of vegetation and completion of all work that is not associated with acceptance of a specific Pay Item . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT .
The quantity of MobilizationDemobilization to be measured for payment will be on a lump sum basis . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT .
The accepted quantity of MobilizationDemobilization will be paid for at the Contract lump sum price .
Payment will be full compensation for performing the work specified and for furnishing all labor tools materials equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
For the purposes of computing payment under the Contract Item MobilizationDemobilization the adjusted Contract price will be a summation of all items bid excluding the amount bid specifically for the MobilizationDemobilization item .
Partial payments will be made as follows a The first payment of of the lump sum price for MobilizationDemobilization or of the adjusted Contract price whichever is less will be made with the first biweekly estimate as determined by work on other Contract Items .
b The second payment of of the lump sum price for MobilizationDemobilization or of the adjusted Contract price whichever is less will be made on the first estimate following the completion of percent of the Contract excluding MobilizationDemobilization .
c Payment of any remaining amount bid for MobilizationDemobilization will be made after the Acceptance Date .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
MobilizationDemobilization Lump Sum SECTION THIS SECTION RESERVED SECTION TRAFFIC CONTROL .
DESCRIPTION .
This work shall consist of establishing and maintaining traffic control measures to protect the traveling public including bicyclists and pedestrians and construction operations .
The requirements for Uniformed Traffic Officers UTOs and Flaggers used in conjunction with Traffic Control shall be as specified in Section . . GENERAL CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS .
The Contractor shall establish traffic controls to divert traffic from the area of construction operations during working hours in accordance with the Contract or as authorized by the Engineer .
Working hours shall be as specified in Subsection .. Should the Contractor desire to divert traffic after sunset or before sunrise a written request shall be submitted to the Engineer .
In the request the Contractor shall justify the request and detail the enhanced safety procedures the Contractor proposes to provide and pay for to protect the safety of the traveling public and Project personnel .
The request shall be submitted at least three weeks prior to the date the Contractor plans to divert traffic outside of normal working hours as defined in the Contract .
When work is in progress within an interchange area no more than one ramp at a time may be closed to traffic .
Traffic service that would be eliminated by the closing of a ramp shall be maintained elsewhere as specified in the Contract or authorized by the Engineer .
During hours other than working hours all highway facilities including sidewalks shall be open to the unrestricted flow of traffic unless otherwise specified .
Traffic control devices equipment and materials shall be removed from the traveled way auxiliary lanes ramps and shoulders .
Traffic signs related to traffic control for construction operations shall be removed covered or turned so they are not readable from the highway .
All equipment and materials shall be stored outside of the travel lanes shoulders and clear zone for the facility .
When the Plans contain an Agencydesigned traffic control plan that includes but is not limited to references to Standard Sheets the Contractor may implement that plan or submit an alternate traffic control plan for the Project .
When the Contractor will implement an Agencydesigned traffic control plan written certification shall be submitted to the Engineer indicating that traffic control will be performed in accordance with the Agency design .
An alternate plan may be for the entire traffic control plan of the Project or for revisions to various phases of the Agencys design in the Plans including the specific location of the lanes where the traffic will be maintained .
Any alternate plan submitted shall conform to the latest edition of the MUTCD .
For an alternate traffic control plan Construction Drawings shall be submitted in accordance with Section .
The submitted alternative plan shall include complete construction details including all aspects of traffic control to the same extent provided in the Agency design .
The Contractor shall allow the Agency Calendar Days to review for conformance the proposed alternative plan before it is to be implemented .
When the Contract Documents specify that a sitespecific traffic control plan is to be submitted by the Contractor Construction Drawings shall be submitted in accordance with Section .
The submitted site specific plan shall include for each phase of construction requiring a significant change in temporary traffic control a narrative description of the proposed temporary traffic control for each phase including pedestrian accommodations where appropriate and the major work activities to be completed in each phase .
The submitted sitespecific plan shall also include a layout for each phase of construction showing existing lane configurations existing traffic control devices signs signals and pavement markings driveways ramps and highway intersections and the location of all proposed temporary traffic control devices Flaggers and UTOs .
All pertinent dimensions such as taper lengths sign spacing temporary lane widths and distances from existing traffic control devices shall be labeled. . TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES .
All traffic control devices shall conform to the requirements of the Contract and the latest edition of the MUTCD .
Traffic control devices required in the performance of this work may include but are not limited to lane markings barricades signs with yielding posts or portable supports reflectorized drums traffic cones delineators Portable Arrow Boards Portable Changeable Message Signs traffic signal lights and street lighting .
In addition flashing warning lights may be required by the Engineer for use on signs and barricades to improve visibility .
All temporary construction signs shall meet the following requirements a Where sign installations are not protected by guardrail or other approved traffic barriers all sign stands and post installations shall meet the requirements of NCHRP Report or the AASHTO Manual for Assessing Safety Hardware MASH and its current revisions .
The appropriate resource shall be determined as described in the MASH publication .
b As a minimum rollup sign material shall have ASTM D Type VI fluorescent orange retroreflective sheeting .
c All postmounted signs and solid substrate portable signs shall have ASTM D Type VII Type VIII or Type IX fluorescent orange retroreflective sheeting .
d All retroreflective sheeting on traffic cones barricades and drums shall be at a minimum ASTM D Type III sheeting .
e All stationary signs shall be mounted on two lbfoot flanged channel posts or inch square steel inserted in inch galvanized square steel anchors .
No sign posts shall extend over the top edge of the sign installed on said posts .
f Construction signs shall be installed so as to not interfere with nor obstruct the view of existing traffic control devices stopping sight distance and corner sight distance from drives and town highways .
The location of traffic control devices shall be adjusted in the field as directed by the Engineer to provide for maximum visibility and usefulness .
Traffic control devices shall be kept clean so they are always clearly visible .
All signs of the same type rollup or postmounted shall be composed of the same retroreflective material .
The Contractor shall conduct inspections of both daytime and nighttime operations daily to ensure proper placement and operation of all traffic control devices .
When protected by guardrail these devices shall be placed outside the deflection distance of the particular guardrail in use .
Traffic cones shall be orange at least inches high and shall be spaced as shown on the Plans .
They shall be weighted or nailed for stabilization .
Tires may be used to stabilize the cones only if they have been circumferentially sliced to a minimum of of their original thickness .
Portable Changeable Message Signs PCMSs shall be used with a maximum of two phases each consisting of a maximum of three lines of eight characters .
Portable Arrow Boards PABs shall conform to Type C Portable Arrow Board requirements in the MUTCD .
The Contractor shall operate and maintain the PCMSs or PABs as recommended by the manufacturer .
The locations of the units and the messages to be used shall be as specified in the traffic control plan shown in the Plans or as directed by the Engineer .
The Contractor shall supply the Engineer with the name and telephone number of the Contractors responsible person in charge of the placement maintenance and repair of the PCMSs or PABs and their components for the duration of the Contract .
If Portable Changeable Message Sign andor Portable Arrow Board Pay Items are included in the Contract the Contractor shall maintain one spare PCMS unit or a PAB unit if no PCMS unit is being utilized on site to replace a nonoperational unit if necessary .
If any unit becomes nonoperational during use and a replacement unit is not available the Contractor shall provide Flaggers or other approved traffic control methods until the unit is repaired or replaced at no additional cost to the Agency .
Nonoperational units shall be repaired or replaced as soon as possible but no later than twentyfour hours after the Engineer determines that repairs or replacement are necessary .
Time lost due to failure to correct deficient traffic control devices will not be considered justifiable cause for granting an extension of time in accordance with Section . .
PERSONNEL .
Personnel involved with the placement and use of traffic control devices shall receive orientation and explanation of the requirements of the MUTCD and the special Project requirements prior to working on the Project .
The orientation and explanation are the Contractors responsibility . .
SPEED ZONE ENACTMENT .
If the traffic control plan included in the Plans is based on a recommended speed limit reduction or if a speed limit reduction is requested by the Contractor the Agency will obtain the necessary permit for this speed reduction .
In either case the Contractor shall provide the Agency with a written plan of work and a detailed sketch of the work zones that will be the basis for the permit application .
The Contractor shall allow three weeks for the permit to be processed .
The traffic control plan shall not be implemented until the permit is approved .
Speed zones if used should be a maximum of mph below existing posted speeds .
Temporary speed limit certificates must be approved by the Chief Engineer . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT .
The quantity of Traffic Control and Traffic Control All Inclusive to be measured for payment will be on a lump sum basis for providing traffic control in the complete and accepted work .
The quantities of Portable Changeable Message Sign and Portable Arrow Board to be measured for payment will be the number of each type of unit specified and used on the Project .
A unit shall consist of the designated sign panel or board complete with controller power supply fuel backup power supply and trailer installed maintained and removed as indicated on the Plans and directed by the Engineer .
The quantities of Portable Changeable Message Sign Rental and Portable Arrow Board Rental to be measured for payment will be the number of days of the type specified as authorized in writing by the Engineer . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT .
The accepted quantity of Traffic Control and Traffic Control All Inclusive will be paid for at the Contract lump sum price .
a Partial payments for Traffic Control and Traffic Control All Inclusive will be made as follows The first of the Contract lump sum price will be paid upon the complete installation of the traffic control devices and any lane markings associated with the traffic control plan .
The remaining of quantity payments will be paid on a prorated basis for the estimated duration of the Contract work remaining .
Payment will be full compensation for preparing implementing inspecting maintaining and removing the applicable traffic control plan and specified traffic control devices and for furnishing all labor including traffic patrol vehicle operators if used by the Contractor tools materials equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
Except as otherwise provided below all other items required to implement the applicable traffic control will not be paid for directly but will be considered incidental to Traffic Control .
Payment for temporary traffic barrier and temporary pavement markings will be made under their respective Contract Pay Items when included in the Contract .
The accepted quantities of Portable Changeable Message Sign and Portable Arrow Board will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price for each .
There will be no payment for any spare units as they shall be considered incidental to the units being utilized and paid for through the Contract .
b Partial payment for Portable Changeable Message Sign and Portable Arrow Board will be made as follows The first of quantity payments will be made upon the erection of complete Portable Changeable Message Signs and Portable Arrow Boards as specified in Subsection ..
The remaining of quantity payments will be paid on a prorated basis for the estimated duration of the Contract work remaining .
The accepted quantities of Portable Changeable Message Sign Rental and Portable Arrow Board Rental will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per day .
The minimum quantity for payment shall be five days .
Payment for the accepted quantities of Portable Changeable Message Sign Portable Arrow Board Portable Changeable Message Sign Rental and Portable Arrow Board Rental shall be full compensation for furnishing operating maintaining transporting and installing the unit specified for removing the unit when it is no longer needed and for furnishing all labor tools equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
When both Pay Items are in the Contract a Portable Changeable Message Sign used as a Portable Arrow Board will be paid for at the Contract price for a Portable Arrow Board .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Traffic Control Lump Sum .
Traffic Control AllInclusive Lump Sum .
Portable Changeable Message Sign Each .
Portable Arrow Board Each .
Portable Changeable Message Sign Rental Day .
Portable Arrow Board Rental Day SECTION THIS SECTION RESERVED SECTION RETROREFLECTIVE PAVEMENT MARKINGS .
DESCRIPTION .
This work shall consist of furnishing and placing retroreflective markings including temporary markings and necessary signing on roadway pavement and other surfaces. . MATERIALS .
Materials shall meet the requirements of the following Subsections Polyurea Pavement Markings .a Epoxy Paint .b Waterborne Traffic Paint .c Glass Beads .a Premium Optics .b Wet Recoverable and Wet Reflective Optics .
c Thermoplastic Pavement Markings Type A .a Thermoplastic Pavement Markings Type B .b Pavement Marking Tape Type A .a Pavement Marking Tape Type B .b Pavement Marking Tape Type C .c Pavement Marking Tape Type D .d Line Striping Targets .a Raised Pavement Markers Type II .b Temporary Pavement Marking Tape .c Pavement Marking Mask .d Pavement marking materials furnished shall be the ones shown on the Plans or listed in these Specifications as being acceptable for the Project .
The Contractor may submit alternate materials for approval in accordance with Subsection .. .
CLASSIFICATION .
Retroreflective pavement markings are hereby classified as Waterborne Paint Pavement Markings Durable Pavement Markings Temporary Pavement Markings and Other Related Markings . .
APPLICATION OF MARKINGS GENERAL .
a Placement of Markings .
Roadway surfaces shall be clean and dry at the time of application of pavement markings .
The Engineer will inspect the pavement to determine if conditions are suitable for the placement of markings .
The Engineer will check the pavement for cleanliness moisture content and temperature and will check ambient air conditions .
The Engineer will make the final determination as to the suitability of Project conditions for the application of pavement markings .
Where required the Contractor shall clean the surface to be marked to the satisfaction of the Engineer to provide for an acceptable bond between the marking and the pavement or surface .
Pavement markings shall be applied only during daylight hours unless otherwise specified in the Contract documents and in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
Weather conditions must be sufficient to allow the placement and curing of the pavement marking material without violating the manufacturers requirements .
All markings shall be applied in a neat and professional manner .
The lines shall be sharp and clear with no feathered edging or fogging and precautions shall be taken to prevent tracking by tires of the marking equipment .
Adequate quantities of the material shall be applied to assure constant thickness of marking material .
Glass beads shall be delivered at a velocity that is at least of ground speed for the application device .
Markings shall be applied parallel to the roadway centerline or as shown on the Plans with no unsightly deviations .
After application markings shall be protected from crossing vehicles for a time at least equivalent to the drying time of the marking material used .
Markings shall be protected from the moment of application until they are sufficiently dry to bear traffic without damage to the marking tracking or adhering to vehicle tires .
Any pavement marking materials spilled or tracked on the roadway surfaces shall be removed by the Contractor to the satisfaction of the Engineer and at no additional cost to the State .
The method of removal shall be acceptable to the Engineer and not injurious to the roadway or other surfaces .
All temporary pavement markings including line striping targets when used shall be applied so that at the end of each working day all centerlines edgeline island markings gore markings lane lines special markings etc .
are in place on all paved surfaces where traffic will be maintained .
During paving and cold planing work shall be scheduled so that the pavement markings are complete immediately after the paving and cold planing operations cease for the day .
All required markings shall be completely placed before dusk .
When line striping targets LSTs are not shown on the Plans but are used as a shortterm substitute for other temporary pavement markings they shall be placed as directed by the Engineer and will be paid for as the equivalent quantity of temporary pavement marking for which the LSTs are substituted .
However if it becomes necessary to replace those temporary LSTs with either more LSTs or the actual temporary pavement markings designated for that particular location no further payment for the temporary pavement markings at that particular location will be made .
At all times the Contractor shall have on hand on the Project all necessary materials equipment and labor to place any and all necessary interim pavement markings including temporary line striping targets required by the Plans or as directed by the Engineer .
The markings shall be paid for under the appropriate Contract items .
Failure on the part of the Contractor to comply with the provisions of this part of the Specifications may result in all progress payments being withheld until the required work is performed to the satisfaction of the Engineer .
b Equipment General .
The pavement marking equipment shall meet the approval of the Engineer and shall be maintained in working condition at all times .
The pavement marking equipment shall be of standard commercial manufacture of the type capable of satisfactorily applying the designated material at required application temperatures rates and manufacturers recommended application practices .
For long line markings each machine shall be capable of applying two separate stripes either solid or dash at the same time .
Each applicator shall be equipped with satisfactory cutoffs that will apply broken dashed or dotted lines automatically .
Each applicator shall have a mechanical bead dispenser that will operate simultaneously with the applicator and distribute the beads in a uniform pattern at the rate specified over the entire surface area of the marking .
The bead placement device shall maximize bead embedment in the marking material .
Each applicator shall also be equipped with suitable line guides .
Equipment for application shall be mobile and maneuverable to the extent that straight lines can be followed and normal curves can be made in a true arc .
Equipment shall include adequate process controls to regulate the application of marking materials and maintain required temperatures pressures and delivery speed of components in the pavement marking .
The pavement marking equipment shall be operated in accordance with recommendations of the equipment manufacturer unless otherwise directed by the Engineer .
Operating speeds shall be such as to provide uniformity and the specified wet or dry film thicknesses .
The application equipment shall be so constructed as to ensure continuous uniformity in the dimensions of stripes .
The applicator shall provide a means for cleanly cutting off stripe ends squarely and shall provide a method of applying dashed and dotted lines .
The equipment shall be capable of applying varying widths of traffic markings .
Pavement marking vehicles shall operate in the lane for traffic moving in the same direction they shall not encroach into the lane for opposing traffic flow .
Exceptions to this requirement shall be approved in writing by the Engineer .
Equipment to be used for determining temperature moisture and material thickness including but not limited to a thermometer and a micrometer are specified in Subsection .. c Weather Limitations .
At the time of application of painted markings the temperature of the surface to be painted shall be a minimum of F and the ambient air temperature shall be F and rising .
Ambient hygrometric conditions required for drying within a minute period shall exist or painting shall be suspended .
At the time of application of durable pavement markings the pavement surface and ambient air temperatures shall be as per the manufacturers published specified application temperatures and the dew point shall be ºF or more below the ambient air temperature .
If the manufacturers published recommendations are unavailable the pavement surface and ambient air temperatures shall be a minimum of ºF .
If weather conditions do not permit the application of durable markings prior to November th paint will be applied in accordance with this Section and Section .
When it is in the public interest the Engineer may authorize the application of pavement markings under conditions that vary from these limitations or the manufacturers published recommendations .
d Layout and Control .
Once the wearing course has been placed the Engineer will establish the layout for the permanent centerline traffic markings including passing zones breaks for town highways and side roads and any other items required for the centerline markings .
The Contractor shall be responsible for laying out all noncenterline markings .
The pattern of painted durable or temporary markings shall be as follows unless otherwise shown in the Contract Documents or directed by the Engineer .
Centerline Markings .
Centerline markings shall be positioned at the geometric center of the roads or as shown in the Plans .
Solid barrier lines and dash lines shall start and end at points shown on the Plans or as directed by the Engineer .
A dash line shall consist of foot inch line segments and foot inch spaces .
The spacing between a double barrier line and between a barrier line and a dash line shall be the same width as the lines .
The width of centerlines shall be as shown on the Plans inch .
Edge Line Markings .
Edge line markings shall be applied along both edges of the road as shown on the Plans or as directed by the Engineer .
Edge lines shall be discontinued through intersections of paved public side roads unless otherwise shown on the Plans .
The width of edge lines shall be as shown on the Plans inch .
Dotted Line .
Dotted lines shall be positioned as shown on the Plans or as directed by the Engineer .
A dotted line shall consist of inch inch line segments and inch inch spaces unless otherwise specified in the Contract documents .
The width of dotted lines shall be as shown on the Plans inch .
Control .
The Contractor shall provide the necessary horizontal and longitudinal control to keep all longitudinal lines within inches of their designated locations .
In addition on tangent the Contractor shall not allow longitudinal lines to vary from either side of a straight line by more than inch in feet. . ACCOMMODATION AND PROTECTION OF TRAFFIC .
Marking operations shall be conducted in a manner that minimizes traffic disruptions .
Adequate safety measures shall be provided for both the construction workers and the traveling public .
Details not shown on the Plans shall be in conformity with the MUTCD .
The Contractor shall provide adequate warning signs and traffic control measures for the accommodation and protection of traffic as shown on the Plans or as directed by the Engineer .
Placement of pavement markings may be suspended at the discretion of the Engineer during peak traffic hours or at any time when in the Engineers judgment traffic is being unduly hampered delayed by the work or when traffic interferes with the quality of work .
All equipment and devices necessary for the application of pavement markings and protection thereof and for the protection of the traveling public shall be as usually required for work of this type as shown on the Plans or as directed by the Engineer and shall be furnished by the Contractor. . WATERBORNE PAINT PAVEMENT MARKINGS .
Retroreflective waterborne paint pavement markings shall be applied by a method in which the liquid paint is applied to the road surface and the glass beads are immediately applied on the paint and firmly embedded therein .
The application procedure shall provide a retroreflective marking with a night visibility satisfactory to the Engineer .
The material shall be applied in a smooth uniform coat free from thin places or films of excessive thickness .
Liquid tanks on paint application equipment shall be equipped with mechanical agitators .
Beads shall be conditioned to provide a smooth uniform rate of release .
All materials shall be maintained in the condition recommended by the marking manufacturer prior to and at the time of marking .
The markings shall be applied at a rate to create a uniform wet film inplace minimum thickness as follows unless otherwise specified in the Contract Documents a mils for pavement constructed under the same Contract as the markings with a minimum application rate of square feet per gallon .
b mils for all other pavement surfaces with a minimum application rate of square feet per gallon .
Apply glass beads uniformly across the width of the line at a rate of .
pounds per gallon of paint .
The Contractor shall provide the Engineer and the Materials Section with the optic drop on rates of all optic materials and daily binder application rates .
Application shall be in accordance with the manufacturers requirements . .
DURABLE PAVEMENT MARKINGS .
Durable pavement markings shall be used at those locations shown on the Plans or directed by the Engineer .
Durable pavement markings are classified as pavement marking tape epoxy paint thermoplastic markings and polyurea paint .
Durable pavement markings shall be installed within two weeks of the placement of the wearing course .
Where possible and where applicable a inch gap should be maintained between thermoplastic pavement markings and parallel joints in bituminous concrete pavement .
This requirement is secondary to the alignment controls specified in Subsection .d .
The Contractor shall select a combination of optics that conform with Subsection .a Subsection .b andor Subsection .c that will meet the specified retroreflectivity requirement for the type of marking being applied .
The Contractor shall provide the Engineer and the Materials Section with the daily optic drop on rates of all optic materials and daily binder application rates .
The Contractor shall perform all quality control activities and provide to the Engineer daily all retroreflectivity measurements collected .
The Agency will perform all acceptance testing activities .
For long lines and dashed lines if the average retroreflectivity fails to meet the minimum retroreflectivity requirements or if of the individual tests fail to meet the minimum retroreflectivity requirements the entire length represented by the evaluation section shall be remarked and retested until in compliance at no additional cost to the Agency .
a Pavement Marking Tape Type A .
Type A Pavement Marking Tape when used as a final durable marking shall be applied only by being inlaid in the bituminous pavement during the rolling operation or in a recess as defined in Subsection .
and shall be applied in accordance with the manufacturers requirements .
Initial dry retroreflectivity minimums shall be millicandelas per square meter per lux mcdlmlx for yellow markings and millicandelas per square meter per lux for white markings .
b Pavement Marking Tape Type B .
Type B Pavement Marking Tape when used as a final durable marking shall be applied only by being inlaid in the bituminous pavement during the rolling operation or in a recess as defined in Subsection .
and shall be applied in accordance with the manufacturers requirements .
Initial dry retroreflectivity minimums shall be millicandelas per square meter per lux for yellow markings and millicandelas per square meter per lux for white markings .
c Pavement Marking Tape Type C. Type C Pavement Marking Tape when used as a final durable marking shall be applied only by being inlaid in the bituminous pavement during the rolling operation or in a recess as defined in Subsection .
and shall be applied in accordance with the manufacturers requirements .
d Pavement Marking Tape Type D. Type D Pavement Marking Tape when used as a final durable marking shall be applied only by being inlaid in the bituminous pavement during the rolling operation or in a recess as defined in Subsection .
and shall be applied in accordance with the manufacturers requirements .
Initial dry retroreflectivity minimums shall be millicandelas per square meter per lux for yellow markings and millicandelas per square meter per lux for white markings .
e Epoxy Paint .
Epoxy paint application shall be in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
Mixing of the epoxy reagents shall be complete prior to the placement of the marking .
Failure of the epoxy to set to a hard condition shall be grounds for rejection .
Epoxy paint shall be applied at a rate to create a uniform wet film in place minimum thickness as follows unless otherwise specified in the Contract Documents mils for paverplaced pavement constructed under the same Contract as the markings with a minimum application rate of square feet per gallon .
mils for all other pavement surfaces with a minimum application rate of square feet per gallon .
Initial dry retroreflectivity minimums shall be millicandelas per square meter per lux for yellow markings and millicandelas per square meter per lux for white markings .
f Extruded Thermoplastic .
The thermoplastic pavement marking compound shall be extruded onto the pavement surface in a molten state .
The temperature of the material shall not exceed the manufacturers recommended heating temperature or rate of temperature increase .
The surface shall be properly prepared for receipt of the marking material including surface roughness cleanliness and moisture levels .
The surface shall be primed when the manufacturers recommendations require priming .
Thermoplastic markings shall be applied at a rate to create a uniform hot film in place minimum thickness of mils unless otherwise specified in the Contract Documents with a minimum application rate of square feet per gallon .
Following an application of glass beads to the marking surface and upon cooling to normal pavement temperatures the resultant marking shall be an adherent retroreflective stripe of the specified thickness and width that is capable of resisting deformation by traffic .
Thermoplastic Application Equipment .
Thermoplastic application equipment shall be approved by the Engineer prior to the start of work .
Thermoplastic material shall be applied to the pavement surface by the extrusion method wherein the bottom of the extrusion shoe is the pavement and the top and other three sides are contained by or are part of suitable equipment for maintaining the temperature and controlling the flow of material .
The fourth side contains the extrusion opening .
The ribbon extrusion method will not be permitted for the application of thermoplastic material .
The equipment used for the placement of thermoplastic pavement markings shall be of two general types a .
Mobile Applicator Equipment .
The mobile applicator shall be defined as truck mounted equipment designed to apply thermoplastic by the extrusion method .
The unit shall be equipped to apply the thermoplastic material at temperatures exceeding F and at the widths and thicknesses specified herein .
The mobile unit shall be capable of operating continuously andor installing a minimum of .
miles of longitudinal markings in an eighthour day .
The mobile unit shall be equipped with extrusion shoes and shall be capable of simultaneously marking edge lines andor two centerline stripes .
The extrusion shoes shall be closed heatjacketed or suitably insulated units and shall hold the molten thermoplastic at a temperature between F and F. The mobile unit shall be capable of extruding a line from inches to inches wide with a uniform hot film inplace thickness of mils and of generally uniform crosssection .
Material temperature gauges shall be affixed adjacent to or incorporated in the extrusion shoe in such a manner as to be visible and capable of monitoring the composition temperature throughout the marking operation .
The mobile unit shall be equipped with an electronic and programmable line pattern control system or mechanical system to be capable of applying dashed dotted or solid lines in any sequence and through any extrusion shoe in any cycle length .
b .
Portable Applicator Equipment .
The portable applicator shall be defined as hand operated equipment specifically designed for placing thermoplastic installations such as crosswalks stop bars legends arrows and short lengths of lane lines edge lines and centerlines .
The portable applicator shall be capable of applying thermoplastic markings by the extrusion method .
It is intended that the portable applicator will be loaded with hot thermoplastic composition from the melting kettles or that the material will be melted by an integral melting stack when so equipped .
The portable applicator shall be equipped with all the necessary components including a material storage reservoir bead dispenser extrusion shoe and heating accessories .
The portable applicator shall be capable of holding the molten thermoplastic at a temperature between F and F and of extruding a line from inches to inches wide in inch increments with a uniform hot film inplace minimum thickness of mils and of generally uniform crosssection .
Material temperature gauges shall be affixed adjacent to or incorporated in the extrusion shoe in such a manner as to be visible and capable of monitoring the composition temperature throughout the marking operation .
If a machine as manufactured can not be equipped with gauges at the extrusion shoe the Engineer may approve an alternate method of monitoring the composition temperature at the point of deposition .
Application Requirements .
a. Primer .
Bituminous concrete primer shall be applied to pavements older than two years at the application rates and procedures recommended by the thermoplastic material manufacturer .
Primer shall be applied under such conditions at such rates and thicknesses and of a type as is recommended by the thermoplastic material manufacturer .
b .
Application Temperature .
Thermoplastic composition shall be applied at a temperature range between F and F or in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
c. Extruded Markings .
All extruded markings shall be applied at the specified width and at a uniform hot film inplace thickness between and mils exclusive of any dropon glass beads .
d. Optics. . Glass beads meeting the requirements of AASHTO M Type I shall be incorporated into the intermix of the thermoplastic composition at a rate of between and by weight of the combined material . .
Initial dry retroreflectivity minimums shall be millicandelas per square meter per lux for yellow markings and millicandelas per square meter per lux for white markings .
e. Gaps and Overlaps .
When applying durable diagonal pavement markings that are to be enclosed within durable long line borders the Contractor shall apply the diagonals in such a manner as to allow a maximum of a single overlap and no gaps between the diagonals and the long lines .
g Polyurea Paint .
Application of polyurea paint shall be in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
Polyurea paint shall be applied at a rate to create a uniform wet film inplace minimum thickness as follows unless otherwise specified in the Contract Documents mils for paverplaced pavement constructed under the same Contract as the markings with a minimum application rate of square feet per gallon .
mils for all other pavement surfaces with a minimum application rate of square feet per gallon .
Initial dry retroreflectivity minimums for surfaceapplied polyurea shall be millicandelas per square meter per lux for yellow markings and millicandelas per square meter per lux for white markings .
Initial dry retroreflectivity minimums for recessed polyurea shall be millicandelas per square meter per lux for yellow markings and millicandelas per square meter per lux for white markings . .
TEMPORARY PAVEMENT MARKINGS .
Temporary pavement markings are classified as temporary pavement marking tape removable pavement marking mask line striping targets LSTs and traffic paint with glass beads .
Unless otherwise indicated in the Contract the Contractor may choose any of the above as being acceptable for temporary pavement markings .
a Temporary Pavement Marking Tape .
This tape for pavement markings is classified as temporary and is removable and shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturers requirements .
b Pavement Marking Mask .
Black or other compatible pavement color pavement marking mask is classified as removable .
It shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturers requirements .
c Line Striping Targets .
Line striping targets are intended to be substitutes for pavement markings for not longer than Calendar Days .
Line striping targets shall be maintained and replaced as needed or as directed by the Engineer until replaced by a temporary or permanent pavement marking .
Line striping targets of the color shown on the Plans or directed by the Engineer shall be installed as described below or as directed by the Engineer .
For solid longitudinal pavement markings line striping targets shall be placed at foot intervals .
For double centerline markings line striping targets shall be paired .
For dashed pavement markings line striping targets shall be placed in groups of three spaced at feet with the groups separated by foot spaces or as determined by the Engineer .
Line striping targets shall not be used to delineate passing zones on twolane nondivided highways .
Line striping targets shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturers requirements .
Line striping targets shall not be nailed to the surface .
d Paint .
Temporary paint applied on the base or intermediate courses of pavement shall have a minimum thickness of mils .
Beads shall be applied at a rate of pounds per gallon of paint .
All paint used for temporary markings shall be held to the same alignment and horizontal control standards as specified in Subsection ..
Temporary markings on the wearing course of pavement that remain in place for fewer than Calendar Days shall be Temporary Pavement Marking Tape or Line Striping Targets .
Paint will not be permitted for use as a temporary marking which remains in place for fewer than Calendar Days on the wearing course of pavement. . OTHER RELATED MARKINGS .
a Pavement Marking Recess .
Recessed pavement markings shall be installed as specified for permanent markings .
The recess shall be a uniform depth across the width of the marking .
The recess shall be controlled such that the depth meets the requirements of Table .A .
The bottom of the recess shall have a smooth flat finished surface .
The use of gangstacked diamond cutting blades is required for asphalt pavement surfaces .
The spacers between blade cuts shall be such that there will be less than a mil rise in the finished groove between the blades .
Recesses shall be clean dry and free of laitance oil dirt grease paint or any other foreign contaminants prior to application of the pavement markings .
The Contractor shall reclean grooves as necessary prior to application of any primer or permanent markings .
Depth plates shall be provided by the Contractor to assure that desired groove depth is achieved .
TABLE .A PAVEMENT MARKING RECESS DEPTH Marking Material Premium Optic Recess Depth mils Thermoplastic Polyurea Epoxy Permanent tape As recommended by the manufacturer b Painted Curbs and Islands .
Where a painted curb or painted island is called for the existing curb or island shall be blast cleaned or wire brushed to remove scale dirt grass etc .
to the satisfaction of the Engineer prior to painting .
This cleaning work will not be paid for directly but will be considered incidental to the Contract Item Painted Curb or Painted Island .
Paint shall be applied at a rate of to square feet per gallon with glass beads applied at a rate of pounds per gallon .
All paint shall be applied within the manufacturers allowable application temperatures .
Retroreflective paint shall be applied by a method in which the liquid material is applied to the curb or island surface and the glass beads are immediately applied to the material and firmly embedded therein and which shall provide a retroreflective marking with a night visibility satisfactory to the Engineer .
The material shall have a minimum wet film thickness of mils unless otherwise specified and be applied in a smooth uniform coat free from thin areas or excessively thick films .
Beads shall be applied uniformly over the entire painted surface area at the specified rate . .
SUBSTITUTION OF MARKING MATERIALS .
If the durable markings can not be placed under suitable environmental conditions paint shall be applied as specified in Subsection .
at no cost to the Agency .
Where it can be determined that through no fault of the Contractor the durable markings can not be applied under suitable environmental conditions paint may be applied for durable marking of the types indicated on the Plans where appropriate and as directed by the Engineer .
Regardless of the circumstance under which paint is applied after an unsuitable environmental condition determination durable markings of the types indicated on the Plans shall be applied as soon as suitable environmental conditions permit during the following Spring .
These durable markings shall be measured and paid for in accordance with Subsection .
and Subsection .. . ALTERNATE MARKING MATERIALS .
If the Contractor wishes to use pavement markings or markers that are not specified in this Section the Contractor shall submit samples technical data installation instructions and if applicable removal instructions to the Engineer for approval at least Calendar Days before the date the markings or markers are to be placed .
The Engineer after consultation with the Materials Manager will approve or disapprove the use of the submitted products within the Calendar Day period .
The Contractor should be prepared to place approved markings on the proper date even if the submittal is disapproved . .
REMOVAL OF EXISTING PAVEMENT MARKINGS .
Existing markings shall be obliterated in such a manner and by such means that a minimum of pavement scars are left and all the existing markings are removed e.g .
by grinding a square or rectangle on the pavement to remove a letter or arrow or grinding a large rectangle to remove a word so that the outline of the letter symbol or word is not ground into the pavement and therefore still legible even though the marking has been removed .
Painting over existing markings is not an acceptable method of removal .
The work shall be completed to the satisfaction of the Engineer .
Masking of lines in intermediate duration activities shall be completed according to the Plans or as directed by the Engineer . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT .
The quantity of pavement marking edge lines and centerlines of the types and sizes specified to be measured for payment will be the number of linear feet applied in the complete and accepted work as measured along the centerline of the pavement stripe .
The number of linear feet of open spaces in a dashed or dotted line will not be measured for payment .
The quantity of Waterborne Paint Pavement Markings of the types and sizes specified per Subsection .
through no fault of the Contractor and applied on the Project to be measured for payment will be the quantity determined per the measure for the Durable Pavement Marking specified multiplied by a factor of .
to determine the accepted quantity for payment .
The quantity of Stop Bar of the type specified to be measured for payment will be the number of linear feet applied in the complete and accepted work as measured along the centerline of the pavement stripe .
The quantity of Letter or Symbol of the type specified to be measured for payment will be the number of each unit applied in the complete and accepted work .
A unit will consist of one letter or one symbol .
For example the sixletter word SCHOOL would be measured as six units and a handicapped symbol would be measured as one unit .
For arrow symbols each arrow symbol and associated stem shall be paid as one unit .
The quantity of Crosswalk Marking of the type specified to be measured for payment will be the number of linear feet applied from curbtocurb in the complete and accepted work as measured along the center of the crosswalk .
The quantity of Railroad Crossing Symbol of the type specified to be measured for payment will be the number of each unit applied in the complete and accepted work .
A unit will consist of three stop bars two Rs and one X for one traffic lane in one direction of travel .
The quantity of Raised Pavement Markers Type II to be measured for payment will be the number of individual markers installed in each phase of the traffic control plan and removed when no longer needed .
The quantity of Line Striping Targets to be measured for payment will be the number of individual targets installed on the pavement and removed when no longer needed .
The quantity of Painted Curb to be measured for payment will be the number of linear feet applied in the complete and accepted work as measured along the centerline of the pavement stripe .
The quantity of Painted Island to be measured for payment will be the number of square feet of the top of an island painted in the complete and accepted work .
The quantity of Removal of Existing Pavement Markings to be measured for payment will be the number of square feet of markings removed or total area in square feet of symbol or letter removed in the complete and accepted work as determined by the Engineer .
The quantity of Pavement Marking Mask to be measured for payment will be the number of square feet of existing marking masked in the complete and accepted work . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT .
The accepted quantity of Pavement Marking edge lines and centerlines of the types and sizes specified will be paid for at the Contract Unit Prices per linear foot .
The accepted quantity of Waterborne Paint Pavement Markings of the types and sizes specified per Subsection .
and measured for payment will be paid for at the corresponding Contract Unit Prices for Temporary Pavement Markings .
The accepted quantity of Stop Bar of the type specified will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per linear foot .
The accepted quantity of Letter or Symbol of the type specified will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per each unit .
The accepted quantity of Crosswalk Marking of the type specified will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per linear foot .
The accepted quantity of Railroad Crossing Symbol of the type specified will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per each unit .
The accepted quantity of Painted Curb will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per linear foot .
The accepted quantity of Painted Island will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per square foot .
Payment will be full compensation for furnishing transporting handling assembling and placing the material specified and for furnishing all labor tools equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
The Contract Unit Price for recessed pavement marking items will also include all labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary for the placement of the recess and any necessary cleaning drying or conditioning of the recess prior to placement of the marking .
The Contract Unit Price for pavement marking items that are used as temporary pavement markings including tape raised pavement markers paint and line striping targets as specified in Subsection .
will also include all costs of removal of those temporary markings if removal is required by construction procedures shown on the Plans or directed by the Engineer .
The costs of maintaining marking capability for interim pavement markings at all times will not be paid for directly but will be considered incidental to the pavement marking items in the Contract .
The accepted quantity of Raised Pavement Markers Type II will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price for each .
Payment will be full compensation for furnishing transporting handling and installing the markers as required for each phase of the traffic control plan and for maintaining the installed units during the phase and removing the markers if necessary when the phase has been completed .
Payment will be full compensation for furnishing all labor tools equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
Adjusting the markers as required by the Engineer during each phase of the traffic control plan including replacing or resetting improperly placed or poorly oriented markers will be considered incidental to the Contract Item Raised Pavement Markers Type II .
The accepted quantity of Line Striping Targets will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price for each .
Payment will be full compensation for furnishing transporting handling installing removing and disposing of the targets and the Do Not Pass signs posts and sleeves if used .
Payment will be full compensation for furnishing all labor tools equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
Line Striping Targets replaced at the direction of the Engineer within the first Calendar Days shall be paid for at the Contract Unit Price for each .
If Line Striping Targets remain in place on the roadway for longer than Calendar Days no payment will be made for the Contract Item Line Striping Targets .
The accepted quantity of Removal of Existing Pavement Markings will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per square foot .
Payment will be full compensation for removing the markings and for furnishing all labor tools equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
No payment will be made for removal of temporary paint markings installed and removed under the Contract .
The accepted quantity of Pavement Marking Mask will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per square foot .
Payment will be full compensation for obliterating existing markings with a masking material for removing the masking material when it is no longer required as directed by the Engineer and for furnishing all labor tools equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
Do Not Pass signs will not be paid for directly but will be considered incidental to the Contract Item Line Striping Targets .
The Contractor is responsible for supplying necessary materials and equipment recommended by the manufacturer to determine the surface moisture condition of the pavement .
The costs for supplying this material and equipment are paid for under the appropriate Contract Item specified in Section .
Payment will be made under Waterborne Paint Pavement Markings Pay Item Pay Unit .
to .
Inch White Line Linear Foot .
to .
Inch Yellow Line Linear Foot .
to .
Inch White Line Linear Foot .
to .
Inch Yellow Line Linear Foot .
to .
Inch White Line Linear Foot .
to .
Inch Yellow Line Linear Foot .
to .
Inch White Line Linear Foot .
to .
Inch Yellow Line Linear Foot .
to .
Inch Stop Bar Linear Foot .
to .
Letter or Symbol Each .
to .
Crosswalk Marking Linear Foot .
to .
Railroad Crossing Symbol Each Durable Pavement Markings Pay Item Pay Unit .
to .
Durable Inch White Line Linear Foot .
to .
Durable Inch Yellow Line Linear Foot .
to .
Durable Inch White Line Linear Foot .
to .
Durable Inch Yellow Line Linear Foot .
to .
Durable Inch White Line Linear Foot .
to .
Durable Inch Yellow Line Linear Foot .
to .
Durable Inch White Line Linear Foot .
to .
Durable Inch Yellow Line Linear Foot .
to .
Durable Inch Stop Bar Linear Foot .
to .
Durable Letter or Symbol Each .
to .
Durable Crosswalk Marking Linear Foot .
to .
Durable Railroad Crossing Symbol Each Temporary Pavement Markings Pay Item Pay Unit .
to .
Temporary Inch White Line Linear Foot .
to .
Temporary Inch Yellow Line Linear Foot .
to .
Temporary Inch White Line Linear Foot .
to .
Temporary Inch Yellow Line Linear Foot .
to .
Temporary Inch White Line Linear Foot .
to .
Temporary Inch Yellow Line Linear Foot .
to .
Temporary Inch White Line Linear Foot .
to .
Temporary Inch Yellow Line Linear Foot .
to .
Temporary Inch Stop Bar Linear Foot .
to .
Temporary Letter or Symbol Each .
to .
Temporary Crosswalk Marking Linear Foot .
to .
Temporary Railroad Crossing Symbol Each .
Raised Pavement Markers Type II Each .
Line Striping Targets Each Other Related Markings Pay Item Pay Unit .
Painted Curb Linear Foot .
Painted Island Square Foot Marking Removal Pay Item Pay Unit .
Removal of Existing Pavement Markings Square Foot .
Pavement Marking Mask Square Foot SECTION THIS SECTION RESERVED SECTION GEOTEXTILE FABRIC .
DESCRIPTION .
This work shall consist of furnishing and placing geotextiles in underdrain trenches under embankments for embankment reinforcement under riprap and stone fill behind retaining structures over roadbed subgrades between railbed and roadbed subgrades and beneath pavement overlays. . MATERIALS .
Geotextile terms are defined in Section .
Materials shall conform to the applicable requirements of Section and the following a Where sewn seams are used the Contractor shall furnish the manufacturers wide strip tensile test results as part of the certification .
The results must verify that the seam meets or exceeds the specified average minimum roll values for the grab tensile strength of the geotextiles or wide strip tensile strength for reinforcement applications .
b Field seams where used shall be in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
c Where woven wire reinforcement is used the woven wire shall be gauge minimum with inch maximum mesh openings. . GENERAL .
The rolls of geotextile shall be protected against damage and deterioration until incorporated into the Project .
The geotextile shall be dry at the time of installation .
The geotextile shall be rejected if at the time of installation it has defects deterioration or damage as determined by the Engineer . .
INSTALLATION .
a General .
The surface receiving the geotextile shall be prepared to a smooth condition free of obstructions depressions and debris unless otherwise directed by the Engineer .
The geotextile shall not be dragged on the ground or mishandled in any way .
The geotextile shall be placed loosely and without wrinkles so that placement of the overlying material will not tear the geotextile .
The geotextile shall be lapped as specified at the ends and sides of adjoining sheets .
In addition to the above general requirements the following specific requirements shall be followed for the specified application Geotextile Placement on Slopes .
The geotextile sheets shall be placed with the machine direction oriented perpendicular to the slope .
When the geotextile is placed on slopes steeper than VH the upper sheets shall lap over the top of the lower sheets .
The laps shall be securely anchored to the ground surface with pins or stakes as necessary to prevent slippage and tearing of the geotextile .
As specified by the geotextile manufacturer or as directed by the Engineer placement of fill material on the geotextile shall start at the toe of the slope and proceed upward .
Geotextile Placement for Stream Bank Protection .
Where geotextiles are placed under water or in an area where water will flow the geotextile shall be placed with its machine direction parallel to the direction of water flow .
Successive geotextile sheets shall be overlapped in such a manner that the upstream sheet is placed over the top of the downstream sheet .
The geotextile shall be adequately secured to prevent slippage .
As the geotextile is placed under water the backfill material shall be placed on it to the required thickness .
The geotextile placement shall not progress more than feet ahead of the backfill placement .
Underdrains .
When a geotextile is specified to line an underdrain trench the geotextile shall be placed to conform loosely to the shape of the trench .
Geotextiles Under Stone Fill .
Geotextiles under riprap or stone fill shall be constructed in accordance with the details shown on the Plans and the following requirements .
The Contractor shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Engineer that the combination of the stone fill drop height and the thickness of any sand cushion when specified or required are adequate so as not to puncture or damage the geotextile when placing the riprap or stone fill .
Where a sand cushion is used it shall be a minimum of inches thick unless otherwise directed by the Engineer .
In addition the stone fill drop height limits specified in Table .A apply .
TABLE .A MAXIMUM STONE FILL DROP HEIGHT Type of Stone Fill Maximum Drop Height inches Onto Geotextile Onto Sand Cushion Blanket Type I Type II III IV or Riprap After placement of the stone fill or riprap all voids in the stone face that allow the geotextile to be visible shall be satisfactorily backfilled so that the geotextile is completely covered .
Roadbed Subgrade and Railroad Ballast Separation .
The subgrade shall be prepared in accordance with Section .
Construction vehicles shall be limited in size and weight such that rutting of the initial lift placed above the geotextile is no greater than inches deep .
Ruts shall not be graded off but shall be filled with material specified by the Engineer such that a minimum inches of cover is kept over the geotextile .
Turning of vehicles on the first lift of cover material shall not be permitted .
The Contractor shall not use vibratory rollers on the first lift if pumping or distortion of the subgrade occurs as determined by the Engineer .
Filter Curtain .
When used to contain sediments or pollutants from a work area that is adjacent to or under water the fabric shall be installed to completely enclose the portion of the work area that will be under water .
The Contractor shall design and construct the curtain to deflect and withstand any existing current or wave action to be anchored continuously along the bottom to be effective at any anticipated water level and to prevent the escape of all sediments or pollutants into the main stream or body of water .
The design construction and maintenance plan for the filter curtain installation shall be approved by the Engineer before installation of the filter curtain begins .
The Contractor shall repair or replace damaged or otherwise ineffective filter curtains as ordered by the Engineer .
The Contractor shall remove material accumulated behind the filter curtain as directed by the Engineer .
The Contractor shall remove the filter curtain and all supporting and anchoring material prior to acceptance of the Project unless otherwise directed by the Engineer .
b Protection of Geotextile .
The Contractor shall not permit traffic or construction equipment to travel directly on the geotextile .
The geotextile shall always be protected during construction operations from contamination by surface runoff and construction activities .
The geotextile shall be covered with the specified cover material as soon as possible uncovered conditions shall not exceed Calendar Days .
Specified cover material shall be placed on the geotextile in such a manner that the geotextile is not torn punctured or shifted .
The minimum cover layer shall be inches thick or twice the maximum aggregate size whichever is thicker before construction equipment is allowed over the area of the geotextile .
The Contractor shall not permit enddumping of aggregates from trucks directly on the geotextile .
c Repair of Geotextile .
All geotextile that is torn punctured or contaminated during construction shall be repaired or replaced by the Contractor .
The repair shall consist of a patch of the same type of geotextile placed over the affected area .
The patch shall overlap the existing geotextile a minimum of inches from the edge of any part of the rupture .
Where geotextile seams are required to be sewn all damaged sheets shall be repaired as required by the manufacturers recommendations unless otherwise shown in the Contract Documents or as directed by the Engineer .
d Overlaps .
The minimum overlap requirements for geotextiles are as specified Table .B .
TABLE .B MINIMUM GEOTEXTILE OVERLAP DISTANCES Geotextile Location Minimum Overlap Distance inches Underdrain trench lining Under Type I and II Stone Fill Under Type III and IV Stone Fill or Riprap Roadbed subgrade stabilization Under railroad ballast In the event the Engineer determines that the specified overlap is not sufficient the overlap shall be increased to provide adequate coverage or the geotextile shall be sewn together in the field .
If field sewn the requirements in Subsection .e shall apply .
e Field Seams .
Field seams shall be sewn with polymeric thread consisting of polypropylene polyester or Kevlar and shall be as resistant to deterioration as the geotextile being sewn .
The thread shall be of a contrasting color with the geotextile being sewn and the seams shall be made such that the stitches are exposed for inspection when the geotextile is placed .
Stitching Equipment .
The stitching equipment shall be such that it will provide an acceptable locktype stitch as recommended by the geotextile manufacturer and approved by the Engineer .
Stitch Requirements .
Two rows of locktype stitching shall be used to make the seam .
The two rows of stitching shall be inch apart with a tolerance of inch and shall not cross except for restitching .
Minimum Seam Allowance .
The minimum required seam allowances i.e .
the minimum distances from the geotextile edge to the stitch line nearest to that edge are as specified in Table .C .
TABLE .C MINIMUM GEOTEXTILE SEAM ALLOWANCES Seam Type See Plans Minimum Seam Allowance inches Flat or prayer seam Type SSa JSeam Type SSa Butterfly folded seam Type SSd Seam Type .
The Contractor shall obtain the geotextile manufacturers recommendations for the type of seam and stitch to be used .
If the Contractor does not provide the foregoing technical information then the Contractor shall use a Jseam with two passes of a locktype stitch which places at least three stitches per inch of sewn seam .
This seam will be tested as required by these Specifications .
The prayer seam flat may be used for repair of damaged inplace geotextile . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT .
The quantity of Geotextile of the type specified to be measured for payment will be the number of square yards placed in the complete and accepted work .
Slope measurements will be used in computing the area .
Measurement will not be made for material used for repairs seams or overlaps .
Measurement will not be made for material used to replace an installation of fabric that has become damaged destroyed lost washed away or otherwise ineffective unless authorized by the Engineer . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT .
The accepted quantity of Geotextile of the type specified will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per square yard .
Payment will be full compensation for furnishing transporting storing handling placing repairing and removing the material specified and for furnishing all labor tools equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
Unless otherwise specified in the Contract payment for the maintenance of Geotextile of the type specified will not be paid for directly but will be considered incidental to the specific Contract Item .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Geotextile For Roadbed Separator Square Yard .
Geotextile Under Railroad Ballast Square Yard .
Geotextile Under Stone Fill Square Yard .
Geotextile For Underdrain Trench Lining Square Yard .
Geotextile For Filter Curtain Square Yard SECTION THIS SECTION RESERVED SECTION TURF ESTABLISHMENT .
DESCRIPTION .
This work shall consist of the preparation of the area and the application of topsoil grubbing material sod seed soil amendments and mulch. . MATERIALS .
Materials shall meet the requirements of the following Subsections Topsoil .
Sod .
Seed .
Compost .
Fertilizer .
Agricultural Limestone .
Liquid Lime .
Hay Mulch .a Fiber Mulch .d Hydraulic Matrix .e Tackifier .f Straw Mulch .g Rolled Erosion Control Product Type I .a Rolled Erosion Control Product Type II .b Stakes for holding sod shall be rounded or square wooden stakes at least inches long having a cross sectional area of approximately one square inch .
Stakes of other materials or designs may be used when authorized by the Engineer .
Grubbing material for use on stone fill along streams shall consist of grubbed or stripped earth material containing roots of native stream bank vegetation .
Material for use on rock fill slopes shall consist of grubbed or stripped earth material containing roots not necessarily from native stream bank vegetation which will promote the growth of vegetation .
Grubbing material from outside of the Project limits shall not contain any invasive plant material found on the State or Federal noxious weed lists on file with the Vermont Agency of Agriculture Food and Markets. . GENERAL .
Turf establishment shall occur from May st to September th inclusive unless otherwise authorized under applicable permits and as directed by the Engineer .
The Contractor shall place turf establishment items on all cuts and fills within hours of obtaining final grade unless otherwise directed by the Engineer .
All seeded areas shall be inspected by the Engineer for turf establishment within Calendar Days of application .
Areas not showing signs of sufficient growth shall have seed limestone fertilizer and mulch reapplied at the Contractors expense . .
PREPARATION OF AREA .
Preparation of areas for turf establishment shall not take place when the area is frozen excessively wet or otherwise in a condition detrimental to the work as determined by the Engineer .
Areas receiving topsoil andor sod shall have an allowance made for the depth of topsoil andor thickness of sod if not accounted for on the Plans .
Surfaces shall be prepared smooth with all breaks in grade wellrounded to the satisfaction of the Engineer .
All stones lumps roots or other objectionable materials shall be removed .
a Native Material .
For areas where native material is to be used for turf establishment existing soil shall be loosened to a depth of inches .
Native material shall meet the requirements of Subsection .
native material shall also be soil tested in accordance with Subsection ..
Native material shall be reworked as necessary to meet the requirements of Subsection .
and any amendments needed as determined by soil testing shall be added at the determined rates .
When native material is specified to be used for turf establishment and soil analysis identifies that soil amendments will not allow the soil to be suitable for vegetation the native material shall either be removed and the area prepared in accordance with Subsection .b or the area shall be prepared in accordance with Subsection .b to the discretion of the Engineer and covered with inches of Topsoil .
b Topsoil .
For areas to receive topsoil existing soil shall be loosened to a depth of inches .
c Sod .
For areas to receive sod existing soil shall be loosened to a depth of inches .
Compost shall be uniformly incorporated into the loosened soil such it comprises a minimum of by volume of the loosened soil .
Fertilizer and limestone shall be applied to the entire area to receive sod in accordance with Subsection ..
Fertilizer and limestone shall be applied the same day the area is sodded. . GROWTH MEDIUM .
The growth medium shall be uniformly spread at the locations shown on the Plans .
Spreading of growth medium shall not be done when the existing ground or growth medium is frozen excessively wet or otherwise in a condition detrimental to the work as determined by the Engineer .
All stockpiles of growth medium shall be properly drained and all excess or unsuitable material removed and disposed of .
When growth medium is stockpiled for seven or more Calendar Days it shall be protected in accordance Subsection ..
When growth medium is stockpiled for Calendar Days or more it shall be seeded in accordance Subsection .
and protected in accordance with Subsection .. Stockpiling shall be done in accordance will all relevant permits .
a Topsoil .
Topsoil shall be spread to a depth of inches inch unless otherwise shown on the Plans .
Topsoil shall be lightly compacted as heavy compaction will reduce the potential for seedsoil contact and germination success .
Whenever topsoil is stockpiled for more than one year the Contractor shall have the topsoil tested in accordance with Subsection .
to determine which amendments are needed .
The Contractor shall incorporate all amendments as determined necessary by soil testing .
b Grubbing Material .
The grubbing material shall be spread to a depth of inches inch unless otherwise shown on the Plans . .
SEED AND AMENDMENTS .
Seed and amendments shall be spread uniformly at the locations shown on the Plans and shall not be applied when the existing ground or growth medium is frozen excessively wet or otherwise untillable as determined by the Engineer .
Seed and amendments may be applied by hand mechanical or hydroseeding methods .
a Hand or Mechanical Seeding .
Seed .
Seed shall be spread at the rates shown on the Plans .
Seed shall be incorporated in to the top inch of the growth medium .
Fertilizer .
Fertilizer shall be spread at a rate of pounds per acre unless otherwise specified in the Contract Documents or determined by soil testing .
Limestone .
Limestone shall be spread at the rates specified in Table .A unless otherwise specified in the Contract Documents or determined by soil testing as applicable .
TABLE .A LIMESTONE SPREADING RATES FOR HAND OR MECHANICAL SEEDING Limestone Type Spreading Rate tons per acre Agricultural Pelletized Agricultural Limestone shall be applied with mechanical methods .
Hand application will not be allowed .
b HydroSeeding .
Hydroseeding shall consist of mixing and applying seed fertilizer limestone hydraulic matrix water and other materials as required .
Seed .
Seed shall be spread at a rate of times that shown on the Plans .
Fertilizer .
Fertilizer shall be spread at a rate of pounds per acre unless otherwise specified in the Contract Documents or determined by soil testing .
Limestone .
Limestone shall be spread at the rates specified in Table .B unless otherwise specified in the Contract Documents or determined by soil testing as applicable .
TABLE .B LIMESTONE SPREADING RATES FOR HYDROSEEDING Limestone Type Spreading Rate Agricultural tons per acre Liquid Lime .
gallons per acre Liquid Lime application rates may be adjusted to be in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
Hydraulic Matrix .
Hydraulic matrix shall be composed of tackifier and fiber mulch .
a. Tackifier .
Tackifier shall be applied in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
b .
Fiber Mulch .
Fiber mulch shall be applied in in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
Water .
Water shall be used in accordance with the recommendations of the hydraulic matrix manufacturer .
Hydroseeding shall not be applied when precipitation is forecast within hours after application or when temperatures are below F. . PROTECTION .
Areas where seed and amendments are applied shall be protected in accordance with Subsection .a or Subsection .b for Mulch or Rolled Erosion Control Product Type I respectively .
Protection of the type shown on the Plans shall be applied after and the same day seeding and amendments are applied and at the locations shown on the Plans .
The Contractor shall maintain all protection measures through acceptance of the work .
Rolled Erosion Control Product Type I may be substituted for Mulch at the Contractors discretion with no additional compensation. . SODDING .
a Cutting and Transporting .
Before cutting sod the area from which it is to be removed shall be mowed to a height of approximately inches and cleared of excess grass clippings and other foreign material .
The sod shall be cut into strips of uniform width having a minimum dimension of inches in width and inches in length and uniform thickness of approximately inches unless otherwise directed by the Engineer .
The sod shall contain most of the feeding roots of the grasses .
The sod shall be transported in an unbroken condition to the area to be sodded .
Unless otherwise directed by the Engineer the sod shall be placed in its final position within hours after cutting .
When conditions require the sod to be stored it shall be placed in stacks or piles for not more than five Calendar Days and shall be protected against drying from sun and wind .
b Placing .
The sod shall be moist when placed on the prepared surface with the edges in close contact and alternate courses staggered .
Any gaps shall be filled with sod plugs or topsoil .
Sod shall be staked at foot intervals on grades greater than VH and in drainage ditches unless otherwise directed by the Engineer .
In ditches the sod shall be placed with the longer dimension perpendicular to the flow of water .
On slopes starting at the bottom of the slope the sod shall be placed with the longer dimension approximately parallel to the bottom of the slope .
The stakes shall be driven center to center in each direction and driven through the sod perpendicular to the surface so that the tops of stakes are flush with the top of the sod .
After installation sod shall be rolled in order to form tight contact between the sod and the soil grubbings .
Sod shall be thoroughly watered within an hour of placing .
If any sections of sod turn brown or curl up these areas are to be carefully cut out and new sod applied and watered to create a uniform mat and appearance. . CARE DURING CONSTRUCTION .
The Contractor shall be responsible for protecting and caring for sodded seeded and mulched areas until acceptance of the work .
The Contractor shall repair and replace all areas where seed has failed to germinate or sod has failed to grow and any areas damaged by pedestrian or vehicular traffic or other causes at no cost to the Agency except for conditions covered in Subsection ..
The Contractor shall maintain seeded areas to a height of no more than foot in rural areas and between and inches in urban areas through acceptance of the work .
The Contractor shall be responsible for watering seeded andor sodded areas sufficiently to promote continuous growth as needed for an acceptable stand of grass . .
ACCEPTANCE .
An acceptable stand of grass shall show a reasonably thick uniform stand free from sizable areas of thin or bare spots with a uniform count of at least plants of the specified grass type per square foot . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT .
The quantities of Seed of the type specified and Fertilizer to be measured for payment will be the number of pounds used in the complete and accepted work as determined by application rates and area treated .
With written permission of the Engineer the weight of small quantities may be determined by alternate methods .
The Engineer will verify and document such weight determination .
The quantity of Agricultural Limestone to be measured for payment will be the number of tons used in the complete and accepted work as determined by application rates and area treated .
When seeding is done by the hydraulic method Liquid Lime will be measured for payment in equivalent units of Agricultural Limestone with .
gallons of Liquid Lime equivalent to ton of Agricultural Limestone .
The quantity of Sodding to be measured for payment will be the number of square yards of sod used in the complete and accepted work as determined using slope measurements .
The quantity of Topsoil to be measured for payment will be the number of cubic yards including any compost added used in the complete and accepted work as measured in its final position using slope measurements for determining area .
The quantity of Grubbing Material to be measured for payment will be the number of square yards of Grubbing Material used in the complete and accepted work as measured in its final position using slope measurements for determining area . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT .
The accepted quantities of Seed of the type specified and Fertilizer will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per pound for the item specified .
The accepted quantity of Agricultural Limestone will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per ton .
The accepted quantity of Sodding will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per square yard .
Incorporating compost and soil amendments will not be paid for separately but will be considered incidental to the Sodding item .
The accepted quantity of Topsoil will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per cubic yard .
Compost will not be paid for separately but will be considered incidental to the Topsoil item .
The accepted quantity of Grubbing Material will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per square yard .
Payment for these items will be full compensation for testing furnishing transporting handling and placing the material specified including Tackifier when used and for furnishing all labor tools equipment maintenance water necessary to promote growth and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
All work required for preparation of the area will not be paid for separately but will be considered incidental to other Contract Items .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Seed Pound .
Wildflower Seed Pound .
Seed Winter Rye Pound .
Fertilizer Pound .
Agricultural Limestone Ton .
Sodding Square Yard .
Topsoil Cubic Yard .
Grubbing Material Square Yard SECTION THIS SECTION RESERVED SECTION EROSION PREVENTION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL .
DESCRIPTION .
This work shall consist of the design and modification of the Erosion Prevention and Sediment Control Plan herein known as the EPSC Plan andor furnishing installing monitoring maintaining removing and disposing of erosion prevention and sediment control measures in accordance with these Specifications. . MATERIALS .
Materials shall meet the requirements of the following Subsections Coarse Aggregate for Concrete .
Dense Graded Crushed Stone for Subbase .
Aggregate for Erosion Prevention and Sediment Control .
Barrier Fence .
Project Demarcation Fence .
Hay Mulch .a Wood Chip Mulch .b Fiber Mulch .d Hydraulic Matrix .e Straw Mulch .g Rolled Erosion Control Product Type I .a Rolled Erosion Control Product Type II .b Erosion Logs .
Geotextile Under Stone Fill shall be in accordance with Section and Table .A .
Geotextile for Silt Fence shall be in accordance with Section and Table .A .
Woven wire reinforcement shall be a minimum of gauge mesh with a maximum mesh opening of inches .
Posts for silt fence shall be wood with minimum dimensions of inch by inch or steel .
Steel posts shall meet the requirements specified in AASHTO M or AASHTO M . Filtering aggregate shall meet the requirements of Subsection .
and Table .B or Subsection .. . EPSC PLAN .
The Contractor shall be responsible for development of an EPSC Plan and shall become a copermittee with the Agency on Projects with associated permits .
a Development .
The Contractor shall develop an EPSC Plan .
When an EPSC Plan is included in the Contract Documents the Contractor may use the included EPSC Plan as a basis for making modifications meeting the requirements of the VTrans Erosion Prevention and Sediment Control Plan Contractor Checklist for NonJurisdictional and Low Risk .
When construction activities occur in phases requiring successive phases of the EPSC Plan those phases shall be included in the EPSC Plan .
The preparer of the EPSC Plan shall be a licensed Professional Engineer registered in the State of Vermont a Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control CPESC certified by EnviroCert or an equivalent as determined by the Engineer .
The EPSC Plan shall be stamped if prepared by a Professional Engineer and signed if prepared by a CPESC or equivalent .
This shall occur even if the EPSC Plan included in the Contract Documents is used unmodified .
The current EPSC Plan and all manuals checklists forms and other supporting documentation necessary to maintain compliance with associated permits shall be available to the Engineer and maintained on site by the Contractor .
b Submittals .
The Contractor shall submit the EPSC Plan and an updated Risk Evaluation as required by the permit and preparer certification if necessary to the Engineer to determine conformance .
The EPSC Plan shall be submitted in accordance with Subsection .bb .
The Engineer will provide a conformance memo or comments to the Contractor within Working Days of the receipt of the EPSC Plan .
The Contractor shall submit a revised EPSC Plan addressing all comments within Working Days of receipt of comments .
This cycle shall continue until a conformance memo has been issued for the EPSC Plan .
The submittal process will not be considered as an acceptable delay of the work under Subsection ..
The EPSC Plan and each subsequent revision which have demonstrated conformance shall be forwarded to the ANR as appropriate .
Construction activities shall not commence prior to issuance of a conformance memo for the EPSC Plan by the Engineer .
For Projects where ANR authorization is required construction activities shall not commence until the conformance memo for the EPSC Plan has been issued by the Engineer and authorized by the ANR . .
MONITORING EROSION PREVENTION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN .
The Contractor shall be responsible for monitoring all EPSC Measures in accordance with the conforming EPSC Plan and Contract Documents from installation of the EPSC Measures through removal of the EPSC Measures or acceptance of the Project whichever applies .
a OnSite Plan Coordinator .
The Contractor shall designate an OnSite Plan Coordinator OSPC that is responsible for monitoring the implementation of the EPSC Plan on the Project .
The OSPC shall have demonstrated experience in construction practices as they relate to erosion prevention and sediment control as well as a general understanding of State and Federal environmental regulations and permits pertaining to the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System Construction Program .
The OSPC shall be proficient at reading and interpreting engineering and EPSC Plans .
The OSPC shall generally be onsite daily and shall have the authority to halt construction activities if necessary .
b Inspection .
For NonJurisdictional and Low Risk Projects inspections shall be conducted using the Agencys EPSC Plan Inspection Report NonJurisdictional and Low Risk Projects available on the Agencys website .
For all other Projects inspections shall be done in accordance with permit requirements .
Active Construction .
Inspection shall occur once every Calendar Days and within hours of the end of a storm event that results in a discharge of stormwater from the site .
During the winter season October th to April th inclusive inspections shall occur daily at all sites .
Inactive Construction .
Inspection shall occur at least once every Calendar Days and within hours of any storm or significant snow melt event that may cause stormwater runoff .
The Contractor shall contact the Engineer prior to conducting any inspection .
The Contractor shall provide within hours the necessary personnel equipment and materials to repair or correct any deficiencies identified during inspection .
All deficiencies and corrective measures taken shall be documented in the inspection reports . .
MAINTENANCE OF EROSION PREVENTION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN .
The Contractor shall provide all labor and equipment necessary for field maintenance of erosion prevention and sediment control items not included in the Contract and providing materials and labor necessary for installing monitoring maintaining and where necessary removing additional measures needed to correct deficiencies that develop during construction that lessen the performance of the EPSC Plan .
Erosion prevention and sediment control measures shall be maintained by the Contractor and removed when authorized by the Engineer .
The Contractor shall establish vegetation in all areas disturbed during installation maintenance and removal of the erosion prevention and sediment control measures .
Any maintenance required due to the failure of the Contractor to follow the conforming EPSC Plan shall be performed at no additional cost to the Agency. . DELINEATION MEASURES .
a Barrier Fence .
Barrier Fence shall be installed as a visible barrier beyond which there shall be no construction activity by the Contractor or Project personnel .
Barrier Fence shall be installed at the locations shown on the Plans in accordance with the Contract Documents and as directed by the Engineer .
Barrier Fence shall be installed on Wshape steel posts .
The fence shall have a minimum height of feet .
The posts shall be embedded a minimum of feet into the ground extend above the fabric and be installed at a foot spacing .
The Contractor shall install inspect and maintain Barrier Fence in accordance with the Contract Documents or as directed by the Engineer .
The Contractor shall remove Barrier Fence from the Project when deemed no longer necessary by the Engineer and the Barrier Fence shall remain the property of the Contractor .
b Project Demarcation Fence PDF .
PDF shall be installed as a visible barrier beyond which there shall be no construction activity by the Contractor or Project personnel .
PDF shall be installed at the locations shown on the Plans as per the Contract Documents and as directed by the Engineer .
PDF shall be installed on hardwood stakes and shall have a minimum width of inches .
The stakes shall be inch inch feet shall be embedded foot into the ground extend above the fabric and be installed at a foot spacing .
The Contractor shall install inspect and maintain PDF in accordance with the Contract Documents or as directed by the Engineer .
The Contractor shall remove the PDF from the Project when deemed no longer necessary by the Engineer and the PDF shall remain the property of the Contractor. . STABILIZATION MEASURES .
Stabilization measures shall be used to prevent erosion of disturbed soils in accordance with the Contract Documents .
a Mulch .
Mulch shall be applied uniformly maintained and in accordance with the application rates as specified herein .
Hay Mulch .
Hay mulch shall be applied at a minimum rate of tons per acre .
Hay mulch shall only be used on slopes less than VH .
Hydraulic Mulch .
Hydraulic mulch consists of applying a fiber mulch or hydraulic matrix with hydromulching equipment .
Fiber mulch shall be mixed in a hydraulic application machine and applied as a liquid slurry in accordance with the manufacturers specified procedures and rates .
Fiber mulch shall be applied from multiple directions and angles to ensure complete and proper coverage and only when rainfall is not predicted for at least hours .
The resulting coverage must be at least inch in thickness over the entire area .
Hydraulic matrix shall be hydraulically applied to the soil as a viscous mixture creating a continuous threedimensional blanket that adheres to the soil surface .
Upon drying the matrix shall form a highstrength porous and erosionresistant mat that shall not inhibit the germination and growth of plants in and beneath the layer .
The matrix shall retain its form despite rewetting .
Pedestrians or equipment shall not be permitted to enter areas where mixtures containing stabilizing emulsion have been applied until vigorous vegetation is established .
Straw Mulch .
Straw mulch shall be applied at a minimum rate of tons per acre .
Straw mulch shall only be used on slopes less than VH .
Wood Chip Mulch .
Wood Chip Mulch shall be applied to a depth of inch .
b Rolled Erosion Control Product .
Rolled Erosion Control Products of the type specified shall be installed at the locations shown on the Plans or as directed by the Engineer .
The ground surface shall be shaped to the lines and grades shown on the Plans and be free of any depressions or objectionable material that would allow water to collect and flow beneath the matting or prevent the matting from maintaining contact with ground .
Rolled Erosion Control Products shall not be stretched or allowed to bridge over surface inconsistencies .
For areas where Rolled Erosion Control Products are to be installed and seed and amendments are also to be applied all seed and amendments shall be applied prior to installation of the Rolled Erosion Control Products .
Rolled Erosion Control Product and ground fasteners shall be installed in accordance with the Contract Documents or the manufacturers recommendations whichever is more stringent .
Rolled Erosion Control Product Type I .
Rolled Erosion Control Product Type I shall be used to provide temporary erosion control while vegetation is established in those areas where vegetation will provide permanent erosion protection .
Rolled Erosion Control Product Type I shall meet the requirements of Table .A for the specific site properties as applicable .
Rolled Erosion Control Product Type I shall not be applied to grades steeper than VH .
The Contractor shall maintain Rolled Erosion Control Product Type I through turf establishment in accordance with Section .
Rolled Erosion Control Product Type II .
Rolled Erosion Control Product Type II shall be used to provide permanent erosion control where vegetation will not sustain expected flow conditions or provide sufficient longterm erosion protection .
Rolled Erosion Control Product Type II shall meet the requirements of Table .B for the specific site properties as applicable .
The Contractor shall maintain Rolled Erosion Control Product Type II through acceptance of the Project .
No vehicular traffic of any kind will be permitted over stabilization measures during or after placement .
Damage or displacement of stabilization measures through the fault of the Contractor shall be replaced or repaired at the Contractors expense . .
RUNOFF CONTROL MEASURES .
Runoff control measures shall be used to slow runoff in accordance with the Contract Documents .
a Check Dams .
Check dams shall be used for the primary purpose of reducing flow velocity and the secondary purpose of allowing sediment to settle .
Check Dams of the type specified shall be installed in the water flow path as shown on the Plans in accordance with the Contract Documents and as directed by the Engineer .
Check Dam Type I .
Check Dam Type I shall be placed in channels and on geotextile meeting the requirements of Section for geotextile under stone fill .
Check Dam Type I shall be constructed of Aggregate for Erosion Prevention and Sediment Control meeting the requirements of Subsection ..
Check Dam Type II .
Check Dam Type II shall be placed along curbs .
Check Dam Type II structures shall vary in height width and length depending on sitespecific conditions .
They shall have a minimum height of inches a minimum width of inches and shall extend foot in a direction perpendicular to the curb and feet up gradient of the curb at an angle ranging from to from the curb face .
For slopes of or less Check Dam Type II shall be constructed of stone meeting the requirements of Subsection .
and Table .C .
For slopes greater than Check Dam Type II shall be constructed of stone meeting the requirements of Subsection ..
Check Dam Type III .
Check Dam Type III shall be installed in accordance with the Contract Documents and the manufacturers recommendations .
Check Dam Type III shall be one of the Check Dam Type III products on the Agencys Approved Products List .
The Contractor shall remove accumulated sediment when the depth of the sediment reaches half the height of the Check Dam measured at the ditch flowline .
Check Dams shall be removed from the Project when deemed no longer necessary by the Engineer and shall remain the property of the Contractor .
b Silt Fence .
Silt Fence shall be installed in accordance with the Contract Documents and shall be installed perpendicular to the water flow to intercept and collect sediment and associated pollutants by filtering and settling .
Silt Fence Type I. Silt Fence Type I shall be constructed of posts and geotextile for silt fence .
Silt Fence Type II .
Silt Fence Type II shall be constructed of posts geotextile for silt fence and woven wire reinforcement .
The Contractor shall remove accumulated sediment when it reaches half the height of the Silt Fence above the existing ground .
The Contractor shall repair or replace damaged Silt Fence as ordered by the Engineer .
Silt Fence shall be removed from the Project by the Contractor when deemed no longer necessary by the Engineer and shall remain the property of the Contractor .
c Erosion Logs .
Erosion logs shall be installed to intercept water flow and collect sediment and associated pollutants by settling and filtering .
Erosion logs may be placed over bare or mulched soils or rolled erosion control products around inlet and outlets to slow runoff velocities in ditches slope interrupters on steep slopes and perimeter control and along stream banks as a base for plantings .
The type of erosion log selected shall be for the intended application .
Prior to placing erosion logs the ground surface shall be properly graded and compacted and free of depressions or obstructions such as tree roots protruding stones or other foreign matter .
Erosion logs shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturers installation guidelines staking pattern guide and details based upon the intended use on the construction site .
The Contractor shall remove accumulated sediment when it has reached one half of the effective height of the log or as directed by the Engineer .
Erosion logs shall be maintained until disturbed area above the device has been permanently stabilized and construction activities have ceased .
Erosion Logs shall be removed from the Project and disposed of when deemed no longer necessary by the Engineer .
When fill material and netting are biodegradable erosion logs may be cut open spread or graded flat and left in place in a manner to not cause concentration of surface runoff in the future . .
TREATMENT MEASURES .
a Stabilized Construction Entrances .
Stabilized Construction Entrances shall be constructed at each access point between the construction area and all public or private roads .
The Contractor shall maintain any existing drainage and flow paths within the Stabilized Construction Entrance .
Stabilized Construction Entrances shall be constructed of stone meeting the requirements of Subsection .
and shall be placed on top of geotextile meeting the requirements of Section for Geotextile Under Stone Fill .
Stabilized Construction Entrances shall be maintained such that aggregate does not become clogged resulting in tracking of sediment onto public rightsofways .
Additional aggregate may be added on top of the existing aggregate only to a point which a smooth transition between the road surface and construction area is maintained .
When a smooth transition can no longer be maintained when adding aggregate the Stabilized Construction Entrance shall be removed in its entirety and replaced .
Stabilized Construction Entrances shall be removed from the Project and disposed of when deemed no longer necessary by the Engineer .
b Inlet Protection Devices .
Inlet Protection Devices shall be used for treating stormwater prior to entering a drainage structure .
Inlet Protection Devices shall be constructed and installed such that flow is directed through the device and into the inlet .
Inlet Protection Device Type I. Inlet Protection Device Type I shall be for use at drop inlets located outside of roadway surface and shall be installed in accordance with the Contract Documents .
Block and stone devices shall be constructed of Aggregate for Erosion Prevention and Sediment Control and concrete blocks approved by the Engineer .
Stake and fabric devices shall be constructed of geotextile for silt fence and stakes approved by the Engineer .
When deemed necessary by the Engineer filtering aggregate shall be applied to the upstream surface of the Inlet Protection Device Type I. Inlet Protection Device Type I shall be removed from the Project and disposed of when deemed no longer necessary by the Engineer .
Inlet Protection Device Type II .
Inlet Protection Device Type II shall be for use at drop inlets located within the roadway surface and shall be installed in accordance with the Contract Documents and the manufacturers recommendations .
Inlet Protection Device Type II shall be one of the Inlet Protection Devices Type II on the Agencys Approved Products List .
Inlet Protection Device Type II shall be removed from the Project when deemed no longer necessary by the Engineer and shall remain the property of the Contractor .
Inlet Protection Device Type III .
Inlet Protection Device Type III shall be for use at culvert inlets and shall be installed in accordance with the Contract Documents .
Inlet Protection Device Type III shall be constructed of Aggregate for Erosion Prevention and Sediment Control and shall be placed on top of Geotextile Under Stone Fill .
When deemed necessary by the Engineer filtering aggregate shall be applied to the upstream surface of the Inlet Protection Device Type III .
Inlet Protection Device Type III shall be removed from the Project and disposed of when deemed no longer necessary by the Engineer .
Aggregate may be flattened along the channel upon approval of the Engineer .
Geotextile shall be removed .
The Contractor shall remove accumulated sediment when it reaches half the height at its lowest point of Inlet Protection Devices .
c Filter Bag .
A Filter Bag is a device that may be used during dewatering pumping operations .
The filter bag shall retain silt sand and fines while allowing filtered water to pass through .
Where possible a Filter Bag shall be placed a minimum of feet from any waters of the State and on a gradual slope in order that incoming water flows downhill through the bag .
To increase the efficiency of filtration the Filter Bag shall be placed on a coarse aggregate or hay bale bed unless otherwise directed by the Engineer or specified in the Contract Documents .
The neck of the Filter Bag shall be strapped tightly to the discharge hose .
A Filter Bag is full when it no longer can efficiently filter sediment or allow water to pass at a reasonable rate .
Use of excessive flow rate or overfilling a Filter Bag with sediment will cause rupture of the bag or failure of the hose attachments and shall not be permitted under any circumstances .
Filter Bag shall be one of the Filter Bags on the Agencys Approved Products List .
Filter Bags shall be disposed of at an approved location as directed by the Engineer . .
THIS SUBSECTION RESERVED . .
THIS SUBSECTION RESERVED . .
THIS SUBSECTION RESERVED . .
THIS SUBSECTION RESERVED . .
THIS SUBSECTION RESERVED . .
THIS SUBSECTION RESERVED . .
METHOD OF MEASURMENT .
The quantity of EPSC Plan to be measured for payment will be on a lump sum basis for design and modification of an EPSC Plan in the complete and accepted work .
The quantity of Monitoring EPSC Plan to be measured for payment will be the number of hours authorized by the Engineer actually spent monitoring the EPSC Plan .
Hours will be rounded to the nearest quarter hour .
Travel time and other time not spent at the construction sites or time not authorized by the Engineer will not be measured for payment e.g .
travel expenses clerical staff time copying miscellaneous expenses overhead etc ..
The quantity of Maintenance of EPSC Plan will be on a lump unit basis for installation and maintenance of EPSC measures not otherwise included in the Contract .
The quantity of Barrier Fence Project Demarcation Fence Erosion Log Silt Fence Type I and Silt Fence Type II to be measured for payment will be the number of linear feet used in the complete and accepted work .
The quantity of Hay Mulch and Straw Mulch to be measured for payment will be the number of tons used in the complete and accepted work .
The quantity of Hydraulic Mulch to be measured for payment will be the number of gallons used in the complete and accepted work .
The quantity of Rolled Erosion Control Product of the type specified to be measured for payment will be the number of square yards used in the complete and accepted work as measured in its final position using slope measurements for determining area .
The quantity of Check Dam Type I Check Dam Type II Stabilized Construction Entrance and Inlet Protection Device Type III to be measured for payment will be the number of cubic yards of the stone specified used in the complete and accepted work .
The quantity of Check Dam Type III Inlet Protection Device Type I Inlet Protection Device Type II and Filter Bag to be measured for payment will be for each used in the complete and accepted work .
Wood Chip Mulch will not be measured for payment separately but will be considered incidental to other Contract Items . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT .
The accepted quantity of EPSC Plan will paid for at the Contract lump sum price .
Payment will be full compensation for the initial preparation of an EPSC Plan modifications submittals and all incidentals necessary to complete the work .
Subsequent modifications to the EPSC Plan during Construction will be considered incidental .
The accepted quantity of Monitoring EPSC Plan will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per hour .
Payment will be full compensation for monitoring reviewing and reporting on the construction site including waste borrow and staging areas or other support activities as it relates to the EPSC Plan .
Payment will not be made unless a report for the monitoring is submitted to and accepted by the Engineer .
The accepted quantity of Maintenance of EPSC Plan will be paid for as specified for Force Account Work in Subsection .. Payment will be drawn against the Contract Lump Unit amount .
To provide a common proposal for all bidders the Agency has entered an amount in the proposal to become part of the Contractors total bid .
Maintenance related to material supply and disposal areas shall be performed in accordance with Subsection ..
The accepted quantities of Delineation Measures Stabilization Measures RunOff Control Measures and Treatment Measures will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price specified for each item .
Payment shall be full compensation for furnishing transporting handling placing and removing the material specified and for furnishing all labor tools equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
Geotextile culverts excavation or any other items necessary to complete the work shall be considered incidental to the appropriate Contract Item .
Unless otherwise specified in the Contract payment for the maintenance of erosion prevention and sediment control measures will be incidental to the specific Contract Item .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
EPSC Plan Lump Sum .
Monitoring EPSC Plan Hour .
Maintenance of EPSC Plan N.A.B.I .
Lump Unit .
Hay Mulch Ton .
Hydraulic Mulch Gallon .
Straw Mulch Ton .
Rolled Erosion Control Product Type I Square Yard .
Rolled Erosion Control Product Type II Square Yard .
Check Dam Type I Cubic Yard .
Check Dam Type II Cubic Yard .
Check Dam Type III Each .
Stabilized Construction Entrance Cubic Yard .
Inlet Protection Device Type I Each .
Inlet Protection Device Type II Each .
Inlet Protection Device Type III Cubic Yard .
Filter Bag Each .
Silt Fence Type I Linear Foot .
Silt Fence Type II Linear Foot .
Barrier Fence Linear Foot .
Project Demarcation Fence Linear Foot .
Erosion Log Linear Foot SECTION THIS SECTION RESERVED SECTION PLANTING TREES SHRUBS AND VINES .
DESCRIPTION .
This work shall consist of furnishing transporting planting and transplanting various size trees shrubs vines perennials and ground cover plants. . MATERIALS .
Materials shall meet the requirements of the following Subsections Barrier Fence .
Water .
Landscape Backfill .
Topsoil .
Compost .
Fertilizer .
Mycorrhizal Fungi Product .
Bark Mulch .c Plant Materials .
Antidesiccant .
Tree Watering Bags . .
PLANTING SEASON .
Unless otherwise specified on the Plans plantings shall take place between April st and October st inclusive .
No planting shall be done in frozen ground when snow covers the ground or when the soil or weather is determined by the Engineer to be unsatisfactory for planting . .
INSPECTION AND DELIVERY .
Plants transported in open vehicles shall be covered by tarpaulins or other suitable covers securely tied to the body of the vehicle .
Closed vehicles shall be adequately ventilated to prevent overheating of the plants .
The Engineer will make a preliminary inspection of all plants at the time of delivery on the Project .
Trees with multiple leaders will be rejected unless otherwise specified in the Contract .
Trees with damaged or crooked leaders bark abrasions sun scald disfiguring knots insect damage or cuts of limbs over inch in diameter that are not completely closed will be rejected .
Container grown plants that have stem girdling roots will be rejected .
Balled and burlapped trees and shrubs with excessive soil on top of the root flare and an otherwise minimal root ball will be rejected .
Substitutions of plant materials will not be permitted unless authorized in writing by the Engineer .
Plant substitutions shall be either the nearest available size of that variety or a similar variety with comparable form and function .
The Engineer shall perform an inspection at the time of planting .
Plants rejected by the Engineer at this inspection shall not be planted. . PROTECTION AND TEMPORARY STORAGE .
The Contractor shall keep all plant material moist and protected from drying out .
Temporary storage shall be limited to Calendar Days from the time of delivery .
Plants shall be protected when in transit in temporary storage and on the Project site awaiting planting .
The Contractor shall exercise the utmost care in loading unloading and handling of plants to prevent injuries to the branches or to the roots of the plants .
The solidity of balled and burlapped plants shall be carefully preserved .
Plants which are not scheduled for planting within hours shall be kept in a moist condition and protected adequately by covering the roots with topsoil wood chips or other suitable material until removed for planting .
Failure to manage the storage of plant material as specified herein may be cause for rejection . .
LAYOUT .
Plant material locations and bed outlines shall be staked by the Contractor and approved by the Engineer. . EXCAVATION .
Prior to excavating for plant pits and beds the area shall conform to the lines and grades shown on the Plans .
All sod weeds roots and other objectionable material unsuitable for backfill shall be removed from the site and disposed of by the Contractor in a manner satisfactory to the Engineer .
Bare root noncontainerized seedlings or transplants may be planted in the existing soil .
The size of planting pits shall be as shown in the Contract Documents .
The Contractor shall restore all areas disturbed by the planting operations at no cost to the State . .
SETTING PLANTS .
Plants shall be set at the locations shown on the Plans and in accordance with the Contract Documents .
All plants shall be moved with the root ball intact using mechanical methods if needed .
If the root ball has been badly cracked or broken the plant shall be rejected for use .
a Watering .
All plant material shall be watered thoroughly at planting .
Unless otherwise specified the minimum number of waterings during the establishment period shall be twice weekly .
At each watering the soil around the plant shall be thoroughly saturated .
The time interval between waterings may be increased or decreased by the Engineer to maintain adequate moisture levels .
Trees shall receive a minimum of gallons at each watering shrubs a minimum of gallons and vines and plants a minimum of gallons .
Natural rainfall shall not be considered a watering unless otherwise approved by the Engineer .
Tree watering bags may be utilized at the discretion of the Contractor .
The installation and maintenance of the bags shall be in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
The bags shall be removed by the Contractor after final inspection .
Replacement of watering bags during the establishment period shall be the responsibility of the Contractor .
The Contractor shall provide to the Engineer a weekly log to account for the frequency and amount of watering during the establishment period .
When natural rainfall replaces a watering it shall be noted in the log as measured on site or noted by the U.S .
Weather Service .
b Pruning .
All broken injured or damaged branches shall be pruned before or immediately after planting in accordance with the current VTrans Technical Landscape Manual .
c Mulching .
Bark mulch material shall be applied as detailed in the Contract .
Wood chip mulch shall not be used .
The same type of material shall be used in all areas to provide visual uniformity .
d Antidesiccant Spray .
The use of antidesiccant spray shall be at the discretion of the Contractor .
Antidesiccant spray shall be applied per the manufacturers recommendations unless otherwise specified in the Contract Documents .
e Fertilizer and Mycorrhizal Fungi .
The use of fertilizer and mycorrhizal fungi shall be at the discretion of the Contractor .
Fertilizer and mycorrhizal fungi shall be applied per the manufacturers recommendations unless otherwise specified in the Contract Documents .
f Rodent Guards .
Rodent guards may be used at the Contractors discretion .
The Engineer shall approve the type of rodent guard .
If used rodent guards shall be removed prior to acceptance of the Project . .
ESTABLISHMENT AND MAINTENANCE .
The Contractor shall actively maintain the plants after planting .
All mulched areas shall be kept weeded neat and maintained to the original layout lines .
Saucers shall be maintained in accordance with the Contract Documents until acceptance .
If the Contractor feels that spraying of the plant materials and mulched areas is necessary to prevent damage from insects or plant diseases the material application rate number of applications and any other data pertinent to the spraying shall be submitted to the Engineer for approval .
The submittal shall also include a letter from the Vermont Agency of Agriculture Food and Markets approving the spraying .
Approximately four to six months following planting the Engineer and Contractor shall inspect the plantings .
Any dead dying or damaged plantings shall be replaced by the Contractor .
Any replacement plantings shall be completed within Calendar Days after inspection or as directed by the Engineer .
This cycle shall continue until a survival rate has been achieved to the satisfaction of the Engineer. . TRANSPLANTING .
Transplanting shall be done in accordance with the requirements of Subsection .
or as ordered by the Engineer .
Transplanted plant materials shall be maintained during establishment in accordance with the requirements of Subsection .
except that on Projects where only transplanting of existing plant materials is performed the establishment period shall end on the Contract Acceptance Date. . TREE PROTECTION .
The purpose of this item is to prevent damage to branches stems and root systems of existing individual trees to remain and to ensure their survival .
Provisions under this item include steps to minimize soil and root disturbance and to construct protection measures for trees close to construction areas .
The Contractor shall install barrier fence to the drip line of existing trees or shrubs marked either Save or Protect or shown with a Tree Protection Zone TPZ on the Plans prior to any earth disturbance barrier fence shall not be removed until the final Project inspection .
There will be no activity within the TPZ or the drip line of the tree except watering or installation of erosion prevention or sediment control measures where required .
Only hand digging shall be allowed within the TPZ when necessary .
Avoid making root cuts during hot dry weather .
All tree protection shall be performed in accordance with the current version of the VTrans Technical Landscape Manual .
The Engineer shall approve tree protection methods and schedule of work .
The following protection procedure shall apply when excavation is to be performed near trees or shrubs labeled Save or Protect or shown with a TPZ on the Plans a Care shall be taken to avoid breaking tree limbs and branches with construction equipment .
Prior to construction tree limbs of trees identified for protection and any other trees identified by the Engineer shall be pruned in accordance with the requirements of Subsection .b .
b Roots encountered during excavation work near a TPZ area shall be cleanly cut with no tearing of roots .
Exposed tree roots shall be protected by a double layer of dampened burlap at all times until they can be covered with soil at which time the dampened burlap shall be removed .
c Following excavation and during the Construction Season water shall be provided to impacted trees at a minimum of gallons per week per inch caliper or as directed by the Engineer .
The Contractor shall provide a log to document watering and natural rainfall to the Engineer .
If a tree is damaged due to the Contractors negligence and determined to be nonrepairable by the Engineer the Contractor shall replace it at no additional cost to the Agency with a tree of equal value or two or more trees with a total value equal to that of the damaged tree .
The appraisal shall be performed by an Arborist who has been certified by the International Society of Arboriculture .
Replacement plantings shall be installed as specified herein . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT .
The quantity of Seedlings Trees Shrubs Ground Covers and Vines and Perennials to be measured for payment will be the number of each of the specified types and sizes furnished and planted or transplanted in the complete and accepted work except for Transplanting Groundcover which will be measured by the square yard .
Only living plants in healthy condition at the completion of Establishment and Maintenance period as defined in Subsection .
will be accepted .
The quantity of Landscape Watering to be measured for payment will be the number of thousand gallons MGAL of water used in the complete and accepted work .
The Contractor shall provide a written log meeting the approval of the Engineer for measuring the quantity of water applied .
The quantity of Landscape Backfill Truck Measurement to be measured for payment will be the number of cubic yards used in the complete and accepted work as determined by vehicle loads using threedimensional measurement .
All loads designated shall be leveled at the point of delivery when directed by the Engineer .
A load ticket shall be furnished to the Engineer with each load delivered to the job site .
The quantity of Tree Protection to be measured for payment will be on a lump sum basis in the complete and accepted work . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT .
The accepted quantity of Seedlings Trees Shrubs Ground Covers and Vines and Perennials will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price each for the specified types and sizes and kinds for planting or transplanting except for Transplanting Groundcover which will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per square yard .
All Seedlings Trees Shrubs Ground Covers and Vines and Perennials that have died failed to grow or otherwise have proven unsatisfactory to the Engineer during the establishment period shall be replaced with healthy stock of the same type or approved substitute at the Contractors expense .
Payment will be made as follows a of the Contract Unit Price shall be paid after the initial planting .
b The remaining of the Contract Unit Price shall be paid upon completion of the Establishment and Maintenance period as defined in Subsection .. Payment for these items will be full compensation for testing furnishing transporting handling and placing plants fertilizer mycorrhizal fungi mulch and all incidental materials .
Payment for these items will be full compensation for excavation pruning guying and staking mulching wire rodent guards water basin formation cleanup restoration and plant maintenance establishment work and care including replacement .
Payment for these items will be full compensation for furnishing all labor tools equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
Weed separator fabric water bags or any other item necessary to complete the work will be considered incidental to the appropriate Contract Items .
The accepted quantity of Landscape Watering will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per thousand gallons MGAL .
When the Landscape Watering item is not specified as a separate Pay Item in the Contract water applied during the plant establishment period will not be paid for directly but will be considered incidental to the other Section items in the Contract .
Water bags when specified in the Contract will not be paid for directly but will be considered incidental to Landscape Watering .
The accepted quantity of Landscape Backfill Truck Measurement will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per cubic yard .
Payment will be full compensation for furnishing mixing testing transporting and placing the material specified and for furnishing all labor tools equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
The accepted quantity of Tree Protection will be paid for at the Contract lump sum price .
Payment will be full compensation for all tree protection measures including barrier fence branch and root pruning watering and all incidentals necessary to complete the work .
The Project will not be accepted until the replacement of all dead dying or poorlygrowing material has been completed to the satisfaction of the Engineer .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Evergreen Seedlings Each .
Deciduous Seedlings Each .
Evergreen Trees Each .
Evergreen Shrubs Each .
Deciduous Trees Each .
Deciduous Shrubs Each .
Ground Covers and Vines Each .
Perennials Each .
Transplanting Trees Each .
Transplanting Shrubs Each .
Transplanting Groundcover Square Yard .
Landscape Watering MGAL .
Landscape Backfill Truck Measurement Cubic Yard .
Tree Protection Lump Sum SECTION THIS SECTION RESERVED SECTION THIS SECTION RESERVED SECTION THIS SECTION RESERVED SECTION THIS SECTION RESERVED SECTION THIS SECTION RESERVED SECTION THIS SECTION RESERVED SECTION TRAFFIC SIGNS .
DESCRIPTION .
This work shall consist of constructing furnishing and installing sign post foundations sign posts traffic signs removing existing signs setting salvaged sign posts and erecting salvaged signs. . MATERIALS .
Materials shall meet the requirements of the following Subsections Paint for Traffic Signs .
Bar Reinforcement .
Sign Posts .
Extruded Aluminum Panels .
Flat Sheet Aluminum .
Retroreflective Sheeting .
Demountable Characters .
Plastic Lettering Film .
Extruded Aluminum Molding .
Assembly Hardware .
Concrete shall conform to the requirements of Section for Concrete Class B. . GENERAL .
Foundation components sign posts and traffic signs shall always be handled to prevent damage .
Damaged foundations sign posts or traffic signs will be rejected .
Signs shall be installed with adequate sight distance in accordance with the MUTCD . .
FOUNDATIONS .
Foundations of the size and type specified shall be constructed at the locations shown on the Plans .
The Contractor shall excavate to depths and dimensions as required and shall construct the foundation in accordance with the Contract Documents .
Stub posts or steel pipe whichever applies shall be placed in position plumbed leveled and braced prior to the construction of the foundation and projection above final grade shall be as shown in the Contract Documents .
Care shall be taken during construction of foundations to ensure that minimum shimming between the post and foundation is required .
Forms and braces shall not be removed and posts shall not be mounted on foundations until the concrete has cured in accordance with the requirements of Section .
It shall be the Contractors responsibility to ensure that all foundations stub posts and steel pipes are oriented such that when posts are mounted to the foundation the applicable sign post faces will be in the same plane as required by the Contract Documents .
Foundations shall be backfilled with material approved by the Engineer and compacted in layers of not more than inches by use of a mechanical tamper. . SLIP BASES .
Slip bases shall be installed on sign posts at the locations shown on the Plans .
Slip bases shall be compatible with the type and size of sign post on which they are to be installed .
Slip bases shall meet the requirements of NCHRP Report MASH or later .
The Contractor shall provide the type of slip base and FHWAs corresponding eligibility letter to the Engineer for approval prior to installation. . SIGN POSTS .
Sign posts of the size and type specified shall be installed at the locations shown on the Plans .
Sign posts shall be installed on foundations in anchors or directly in the ground as specified in the Contract Documents .
Sign posts shall be erected plumb and level and shall remain plumb and level after the installation of the traffic sign bracing or the sign itself will not be used to maintain sign posts plumb and level .
When installed on foundations minimum shimming will be allowed between a foundation and sign post at the discretion of the Engineer .
When two or more sign posts are required for a singlesign installation they shall be oriented such that the sign post faces which the signs will be attached to will be in the same plane the plane shall be as required by the Contract Documents .
The tops of all posts in a singlesign installation shall be the same elevation and shall not extend above the sign .
For posts that do not require foundations and are set into a dug hole holes shall be backfilled with material approved by the Engineer and compacted in layers of not more than inches by use of a mechanical tamper .
Unless otherwise specified in the Contract Documents all required modifications to posts shall be incidental to other Traffic Sign items. . TRAFFIC SIGNS .
Traffic signs of the design specified shall be installed at the locations and on the post types as shown on the Plans .
a General .
All traffic signs shall conform to the requirements of the Contract Documents and the current MUTCD and its latest revisions .
The Traffic Sign Type will be determined by measurement of the area of the sign face .
Type A signs will be classified as measuring square feet and less regardless of whether extruded aluminum panels are required due to attachment to a Type B sign installation .
Type B signs will be classified as measuring greater than square feet .
All new signs installed excluding doublesided signs shall include a decal on the back of the sign with the following information in inch numbers and text and as shown in this example Ownership Town or VTrans Date Fabricated MMYY Route US VT or TH Decals shall remain intact and legible during the life of the sign at least years .
Ownership shall refer to the entity owning the sign .
Generally signs on State highways and U.S. routes as well as stop signs and legal load signs on Town highways at the intersection with a State or US route belong to VTrans .
All other signs on Class and Town highways belong to the town .
Date Fabricated shall be the month and year of sign fabrication in MMYY date format .
Route shall be the designation of the route the sign is located on .
Note that in the case of stop and legal load signs at the intersection of a Town highway and a State highways the Owner will be VTrans and the route will be US or VT . b Sign Substrate .
Type A signs shall be flat sheet aluminum except that Type A signs shall be extruded aluminum panels when attached to a Type B sign .
Type B signs shall be extruded aluminum panels .
The surfaces of sign substrate shall be flat and free of buckles warps dents burrs open cracks open splits open joints loose knots or other defects .
All edges shall be true and smooth with no tears cracks burrs or other defects .
Extruded Aluminum Panels .
Extruded aluminum panels shall be of the butting type inches wide and of the lengths shown on the Plans .
The moment of inertia of a panel shall not be less than .
inch and the panel shall be designed to carry a wind load of psf .
All signs fabricated from extruded aluminum panels shall have extruded aluminum molding on the two vertical sides .
The color shall be the same as the parent sign .
Fabrication including punching or drilling holes and cutting to length shall be completed prior to metal degreasing treating and application of the background material .
Flame cutting will not be permitted .
The panels shall be fabricated for horizontal mounting .
Each panel shall extend the full width of a sign and shall be bolted at least every inches to each adjacent panel .
Flat Sheet Aluminum .
Fabrication of the flat aluminum sheets including cutting to size and punching or drilling holes shall be completed prior to degreasing etching or treating and application of the retroreflective sheeting .
Flat sheet aluminum may be sheared blanked sawed or milled .
No flame cutting will be permitted .
c Retroreflective Sheeting .
Retroreflective sheeting shall be of the color and type shown in the Contract Documents or in accordance with the MUTCD whichever applies .
The face of a sign shall be completely covered by the retroreflective sheeting when used as a background .
All panels of a multi panel sign shall be of uniform background color and brilliance both day and night .
All sheeting shall be retroreflective .
Transparent sheeting will not be allowed .
Sign substrate shall be prepared and retroreflective sheeting applied in accordance with the retroreflective sheeting manufacturers recommendations for the respective sign substrate .
d Mounting .
Signs shall be mounted as tightly to the posts frame or the horizontal supporting members as shown on the Plans .
Horizontal and vertical supporting members required to hold together the separate extruded aluminum panels forming a multipanel sign and to attach the sign to the posts shall be either standard steel or aluminum structural shapes meeting the same requirements as for sign posts in accordance with the Plans .
After a multipanel sign is mounted the individual panels shall be joined together as shown on the Plans to ensure a smooth flat sign face free of deflection . .
REMOVING SIGNS .
The Contractor shall remove signs as shown on the Plans .
Unless otherwise shown on the Plans removal shall include foundations to a minimum depth of inches below finished grade and anchors sleeves sign posts traffic signs frames overhead supports hardware all other incidentals as applicable and filling holes and returning the area to a condition consistent with the adjacent areas .
Foundations shall not be removed when signs are to be set or reset on them .
Except for where signs that are to be removed are also to be salvaged or reset sign faces shall be defaced including decal so as not to be reused .
Defacing shall be done using paint or to the satisfaction of the Engineer .
Unless otherwise shown on the Plans all material removed shall become the property of the Contractor .
Signs shown on the Plans that are to be removed and salvaged including anchors sleeves sign posts frames traffic signs and hardware as applicable shall be removed as specified herein and delivered to the locations identified in the Contract Documents .
Mounting hardware shall be in a sealed container and clearly marked with its contents .
Components damaged during removal or salvaging through the fault of the Contractor as determined by the Engineer shall be replaced at no cost to the Agency .
Signs shown on the Plans that are to be removed and reset including anchors sleeves sign posts frames traffic signs and hardware as applicable shall be removed as specified herein and stored as necessary until they are to be reset .
Components damaged during removal or storage through the fault of the Contractor as determined by the Engineer shall be replaced at no cost to the Agency. . RESETTING SIGNS .
Signs that are to be reset including anchors sleeves sign posts sign frames and mounting hardware as applicable shall be reset to the location shown on the Plans .
The Contractor shall be responsible for transporting and stockpiling all anchors sleeves sign posts sign frames and mounting hardware as applicable to and from the stockpiling location .
The Contractor shall supply new mounting hardware as required to reset signs .
Anchors sleeves sign posts frames and traffic signs damaged through the fault of the Contractor as determined by the Engineer shall be replaced at no additional cost to the Agency . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT .
The quantity of Traffic Sign to be measured for payment will be the number of square feet of the type specified installed in the complete and accepted work .
The measured quantities of traffic signs for signs with retroreflective sheeting on both sides shall be multiplied by a factor of ..
The quantity of Square Tube Sign Post and Anchor to be measured for payment will be linear feet measured from the top of the post to the bottom of the anchor installed in the complete and accepted work .
No additional measurement will be made for required sleeves anchors andor overlap of posts .
The quantity of WShape Steel Sign Post Tubular Aluminum Sign Post and Tubular Steel Sign Post to be measured for payment will be the number of pounds of each type of post installed in the complete and accepted work as determined by the lengths and the standard weight per linear foot of the specified material .
No additional measurement will be made for required anchors slip bases or breakaway features .
The quantity of Foundation for WShape Steel Post Foundation for Tubular Steel Post Soil Bearing Slip Base Erecting Salvaged Signs and Setting Salvaged Posts to be measured for payment will be the number of each installed in the complete and accepted work .
The quantity for Removing Signs and Resetting Signs to be measured for payment will be the number of each sign removed or reset in the complete and accepted work . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT .
The accepted quantities for Traffic Signs of the type specified will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per square foot .
Payment will include frames supports tee bars and mounting hardware as required .
The accepted quantities for Square Tube Sign Post and Anchor will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per linear foot .
Anchors sleeves and other required hardware will not be paid for directly but will be considered incidental to the respective sign post item .
The accepted quantities for WShaped Steel Sign Post Tubular Aluminum Sign Post and Tubular Steel Sign Post will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per pound .
Payment will include anchors slip bases breakaway features and other hardware as required .
Foundation for WShaped Steel Post inch Diameter Foundation for WShaped Steel Post inch Diameter and Foundation for Tubular Steel Post will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per each .
Payment will include concrete reinforcing steel anchor bolts stub posts steel pipe breakaway features and other hardware as required .
Soil Bearing Slip Base Setting Salvaged Posts Removing Signs and Resetting Signs will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per each .
Removal of sign posts and foundations will be considered incidental to the Contract Item Removing Signs as applicable .
The cost of attachment hardware including vandalproof hardware when required will be considered incidental to the Contract Item for the particular sign being used .
Payment will be full compensation for furnishing and erecting fabricating transporting handling applying and installing the materials specified and for furnishing all labor tools equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
Excavation and backfill will not be paid for separately but will be considered incidental to the Contract Unit Prices for other items in the Contract .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Traffic Sign Type A Square Foot .
Traffic Sign Type B Square Foot .
WShape Steel Sign Post Pound .
Tubular Aluminum Sign Post Pound .
Tubular Steel Sign Post Pound .
Square Tube Sign Post and Anchor Linear Foot .
Soil Bearing Slip Base Each .
Foundation for WShape Steel Post Inch Diameter Each .
Foundation for WShape Steel Post Inch Diameter Each .
Foundation for Tubular Steel Post Each .
Removing Signs Each .
Resetting Signs Each .
Setting Salvaged Posts Each SECTION DELINEATORS .
DESCRIPTION .
This work shall consist of removing or furnishing and installing reflector units or delineators consisting of new or salvaged posts reflectors and plaques. . MATERIALS .
Materials shall meet the requirements of the following Subsections Flat Sheet Aluminum .
Retroreflective Sheeting .
Delineator Posts .
Assembly Hardware . .
INSTALLATION .
Delineator posts shall be set to the heights and at the locations shown on the Plans .
They shall be set vertically facing the direction shown on the Plans or as directed by the Engineer .
Posts set in the ground shall be driven either by hand or by mechanical devices using a suitable driving cap and shall be set in the ground to the satisfaction of the Engineer .
Hand tamping will be permitted .
Posts set on the roadway surface shall have the base securely fastened to the surface .
Delineators to be attached to Bridge rail shall be consistent with the design shown on the Plans and securely fastened to the railing as shown on the Plans or as directed by the Engineer .
Delineator assemblies and plaques when required shall be attached after the posts are set .
Delineators shall consist of flat sheet aluminum substrate and completely covered by retroreflective sheeting of the color and type shown in the Contract Documents .
The replacement of delineators on existing posts that are to remain shall be as shown on the Plans or as directed by the Engineer . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT .
The quantity of Delineators with Steel Post Removal of Existing Delineator and Post Remove and Replace Delineator and Delineator with Flexible Post to be measured for payment will be the number removed installed or replaced in the complete and accepted work . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT .
The accepted quantity of Delineators with Steel Post Removal of Existing Delineator and Post Remove and Replace Delineator and Delineator with Flexible Post will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price each .
Payment will be full compensation for removing or furnishing fabricating transporting handling and installing the materials specified including plaques when required and for furnishing all labor tools equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Delineator with Steel Post Each .
Removal of Existing Delineator and Post Each .
Remove and Replace Delineator Each .
Delineator with Flexible Post Each SECTION OVERHEAD TRAFFIC SIGN SUPPORTS .
DESCRIPTION .
This work shall consist of furnishing and installing overhead traffic sign supports and removing and disposing of existing overhead traffic sign supports including the concrete footings. . MATERIALS .
Materials shall meet the requirements of the following Subsections Mortar Type IV .
Caulking Compound .
Bar Reinforcement .
Carbon Steel Bolts Nuts and Washers .
HighStrength Bolts Nuts and Washers .
Anchor Bolts Traffic Signals Lighting and Overhead Sign Structures .
Steel Tubing .
Preformed Fabric Bearing Pads .
Grounding Electrodes .
The sign support shall be of the materials shown on the Plans .
The sign support design may be a cantilever structure or a multisupport structure tubular beam trichord or box truss .
All design details quality of work procedure materials etc .
shall be in accordance with the latest edition of the AASHTO Standard Specifications for Structural Supports for Highway Signs Luminaires and Traffic Signals .
Concrete shall conform to the requirements of Section for Concrete Class B .
All welding shall be performed in accordance with the provisions of Section . . GENERAL .
The overhead traffic sign supports shall be constructed in accordance with the details shown on the Plans .
The design of mast arm and overhead sign support foundations shall be performed in accordance with VTrans Materials Research Engineering Instructions MREI Geotechnical Design Procedures for Mast Arm and Overhead Sign Support Foundations .
Prior to installation the Contractor shall submit Fabrication Drawings in accordance with Section which shall include a complete list of materials .
HighStrength Bolts Nuts and Washers shall be tensioned in accordance with Subsection .. Anchor bolts shall be pretensioned in accordance with the following procedure a Verify that the nuts can be turned onto the bolts past the elevation corresponding to the bottom of each inplace leveling nut and be backed off by the effort of one person on a inch long wrench or equivalent i.e .
without employing a pipe extension on the wrench handle .
b Clean and lubricate the exposed threads of all anchor bolts .
Clean and lubricate the threads and bearing surfaces of all leveling nuts .
Relubricate the exposed threads of the anchor bolts and the threads of the leveling nuts if more than hours has elapsed since earlier lubrication or if the anchor bolts and leveling nuts have become wet since they were first lubricated .
c Turn the leveling nuts onto the anchor bolts and align the nuts to the same elevation .
d Place structural washers on top of the leveling nuts with one washer corresponding to each anchor bolt .
Install the base plate atop the leveling nuts and place structural washers on top of the base plate with one washer corresponding to each anchor bolt .
Turn the top nuts onto the anchor bolts .
e Tighten the top nuts to a snugtight condition in a star pattern .
Snugtight is defined as the maximum nut rotation resulting from the full effort of one person on a inch long wrench or equivalent .
A star tightening pattern is one in which the nuts on opposite or nearopposite sides of the bolt circle are successively tightened in a pattern resembling a star .
For example for an bolt circle with bolts sequentially numbered to tighten the nuts in the following bolt order .
f Tighten leveling nuts to a snugtight condition in a star pattern .
g Before final tightening of the top nuts mark the reference position of each top nut in a snugtight condition with suitable marking on one flat with a corresponding reference mark on the base plate at each bolt .
Then incrementally turn the top nuts using a star pattern until achieving the required nut rotation specified below .
Turn the nuts in at least two full tightening cycles passes .
After tightening verify the nut rotation .
h Top nuts for ASTM F Grade Anchor Bolts shall be tightened to turn beyond snugtight condition for bolts less than or equal to inch diameter and turn beyond snugtight condition for bolts greater than inch diameter .
The tolerance for nut rotation is .
Use a beveled washer if the nut is not in firm contact with the base plate or the outer face of the base plate is sloped more than VH .
Tightening requirements for all other bolted connections shall be specified on the Fabrication Drawings .
Concrete footings shall be backfilled by placing and compacting uniform layers of approved material not exceeding inches in depth .
Where aluminum alloys come in contact with other materials the contacting surfaces shall be separated with a fabric pad inch in thickness or cleaned and thoroughly coated with an aluminum impregnated caulking compound .
The space between the top of the concrete footing and metal base of the support shall be sealed with a stainless steel wire cloth .
The wire cloth shall be stainless steel standard grade with a inch maximum opening and a minimum wire diameter of AWG number with a inch lap .
It shall be secured with inch stainless steel banding after anchor bolts are fully tightened .
Where existing overhead traffic sign supports are to be removed the Contractor shall remove and dispose of the entire sign assembly including concrete footings to a depth of inches below existing grade .
Areas of ground disturbance shall be restored to the satisfaction of the Engineer. . GROUNDING .
All posts used in overhead sign supports shall be grounded in accordance with Section . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT .
The quantity of Overhead Traffic Sign Support of the type specified to be measured for payment will be the number of each installed in the complete and accepted work .
The quantity of Remove and Reset Overhead Traffic Sign Support to be measured for payment will be the number of each removed and reset in the complete and accepted work .
The quantity of Remove Existing Overhead Sign Assembly of the type specified to be measured for payment will be the number of each assembly removed in the complete and accepted work . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT .
The accepted quantity of Overhead Traffic Sign Support of the type specified will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price for each .
Payment will be full compensation for furnishing transporting handling and installing the materials specified including the concrete footings excavation and backfilling and for furnishing all labor tools equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
The accepted quantity of Remove and Reset Overhead Traffic Sign Support will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price for each .
Payment will be full compensation for removing the existing sign support including all excavation removal of the existing base as required furnishing placing and compacting all necessary backfill all necessary disconnections and modifications to existing wiring construction of a new base as required grading all areas disturbed by the work turf establishment in those areas if turf establishment is not otherwise included in the Contract and for furnishing all labor tools equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
The accepted quantity of Remove Existing Overhead Sign Assembly of the type specified will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per each .
Payment will be full compensation for removing and disposing of assembly components including concrete footings for performing any excavation necessary for restoring areas of ground disturbance and for furnishing all labor tools equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
Costs associated with providing traffic control andor Flaggers for performing the work will be paid under the appropriate Contract Items .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Overhead Traffic Sign Support Cantilever Each .
Overhead Traffic Sign Support MultiSupport Each .
Overhead Traffic Sign Support Cantilever with Lighting Each .
Overhead Traffic Sign Support MultiSupport with Lighting Each .
Remove and Reset Overhead Traffic Sign Support Each .
Remove Existing Overhead Sign Assembly Cantilever Each .
Remove Existing Overhead Sign Assembly MultiSupport Each SECTION TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNALS .
DESCRIPTION .
This work shall consist of furnishing and installing a traffic control system and removing existing traffic control systems .
All electrical work performed under the Contract and all materials installed shall be subject to inspection and approval of the State or Municipal Electrical Inspector whichever position is applicable .
As a minimum all work must meet the requirements of the National Electrical Code. . MATERIALS .
Materials shall meet the requirements of the following Subsections Mortar Type IV .
Paint for Traffic Control Signals .
Polyvinyl Chloride PVC Plastic Pipe .
Anchor Bolts Traffic Signals Lighting and Overhead Sign Structures .
Preformed Fabric Bearing Pads .
Pedestal Posts and Bases .
Strain Poles .
Traffic Signal Poles with Mast Arms or Bracket Arms .
Span Wire .
Traffic Signal Heads .
Traffic Signal Controllers and Cabinets .
Flashing Beacons .
Electrical Conduit .
Traffic Signal Conductor Cable .
Detectors .
Vehicle Detector Slot Sealant .
Pull Box .a Junction Box .b Accessible Pedestrian Signals .
Pedestrian Pushbutton Assemblies .
Grounding Electrodes . . GENERAL .
Prior to beginning any work the Contractor and the Engineer will perform a joint inspection of the condition of existing equipment and components .
Any equipment that is found to be defective or damaged prior to beginning work shall be maintained in at least as good condition until replaced under the Contract .
Prior to ordering any traffic control components of the signal system the Contractor shall submit Fabrication Drawings in accordance with Section .
One advance copy of equipment manuals furnished by the manufacturer shall be submitted to the Engineer .
The submittal shall contain as a minimum the following information a Traffic Signal Controller .
Type of controller manufacturer model number of phases and functions and assurance of conformance to NEMA standards .
Bench testing a minimum of Calendar Days will be required .
Copies of the test results shall be submitted as discussed in Subsection ..
The test results shall contain the begin and end time and date of the test all controller and timebased coordinator settings used equipment serial numbers signature of the person performing the test and signature of a witness who shall be either a registered electrical engineer or a licensed master electrician .
The bench test report shall be approved by the Agency prior to the shipping of the controllers .
b Traffic Signal and Pedestrian Heads .
Size manufacturer model lamp wattage wiring housing material and color visors and back plates if required .
The signal heads shall conform to the requirements of ITE Standards .
c Controller Cabinet .
Size manufacturer model accessories materials and finish .
d Auxiliary Equipment .
Flashers vehicle detectors conflict monitors or malfunction management units pedestrian audio units accessible pedestrian signals manufacturer model functions and assurance of conformance to NEMA standards where applicable .
e Strain Poles Cantilevers and Pedestal Posts .
Dimensions for polepost height span wire attachment height polepost diameter top and bottom pole gauge handhole size and location baseplate bolt circle and anchor bolt size Material Specifications for each component Welding information for all welded connections Special features as shown on the Plans such as finish or color Polebaseplate stamping detail In the above all information supplied shall match or be equivalent to the details shown on the Plans .
If equivalent the Contractor may be asked to supply proof of equivalency .
Copies of catalogue sheets are acceptable if all the appropriate information is included .
Submitted Fabrication Drawings shall indicate by either text in the transmittal letter or by text and signature on the Fabrication Drawings that the Contractor has reviewed the Fabrication Drawings and that the Fabrication Drawings are in conformance with the Contractors proposed installation procedures .
Strain pole styles other than that shown on the Plans will be permitted .
The poles must be able to carry the design loads with a maximum dead load span wire and signal head deflection of inches .
Bending stress fb is limited to of the minimum yield stress fy .
All design details quality of work procedures materials etc .
shall be in accordance with the latest edition of the AASHTO Standard Specifications for Structural Supports for Highway Signs Luminaires and Traffic Signals .
Schedule conduit shall be used for all applications .
Concrete shall conform to the requirements of Section for Concrete Class B .
Steel bar reinforcement shall conform to the requirements of Section .
Where the cover is exposed to vehicle or pedestrian traffic it shall have an approved nonskid surface such as diamond plate .
Frames and covers shall be galvanized in accordance with AASHTO M MM .
Pull boxes shall be designed and constructed to support at least an AASHTO HS loading . .
VEHICLE DETECTION SYSTEM .
The Contractor shall be responsible for furnishing all training labor materials cables connectors tools equipment shipping and incidental items necessary to complete the installation and make the Vehicle Detection System fully operational .
The vehicle detection system shall be as specified in the Plans .
All work associated with the Vehicle Detection System shall be completed prior to testing and turn on of the traffic signal system .
All equipment shall be installed and wired in a neat and orderly manner in conformance with the manufacturers instructions .
All Vehicle Detection System components shall be current production equipment produced by the same manufacturer for system operation compatibility purposes unless otherwise specified .
The Contractor shall install the detector to achieve the desired fields of detection as shown on the Plans or as directed by the Engineer .
Routing of the detector cable shall provide a drip loop for protection of the detector and connector .
The detector cable shall be installed as a continuous run with no splices from the detector to the processor in the traffic control cabinet unless specified otherwise by the manufacturer .
Removal and disposal of existing detection systems will be considered incidental to other Contract Items . .
EMERGENCY VEHICLE PREEMPTION SYSTEM .
a System Requirements .
The Emergency Vehicle Preemption System shall include type of phase selector size of chassis manufacturer model number of phases and functions detectors strobe and detection cables .
The Emergency Vehicle Preemption System shall be installed in the same cabinets as the controllers .
The emergency vehicle preemption system shall consist of a dataencoded phase selector to be installed within the traffic control cabinets .
Those units will serve to validate identify classify and record the signal from the optical detectors located on support structures at the intersections .
Upon receiving a valid signal from the detectors the phase selectors shall generate a preempt call to the controllers initiating preemption operations as shown on the Plans .
The preemption detectors shall be single input single output units used to control one approach .
All traffic signal installations shall be supplied with a single optical detector for each approach to the intersection unless otherwise noted in the major list of equipment or as shown on the Plans .
The phase selectors shall have full ID and logging capabilities and be a rackmounted plugin four channel or twochannel dual priority devices .
The phase selectors shall plug into shelfmounted single card slot chasses .
Programming the phase selectors shall be via a PCbased computer utilizing unitspecific software .
One copy of software shall be supplied and licensed to the towns listed in the Plans .
A hard copy of final programming data shall be left in the control cabinet .
The Contractor shall supply a complete set of interface cables for phase selector to laptop connection in each controller cabinet .
The Contractor shall also supply any required cables .
b Construction Requirements .
The Contractor shall be responsible for furnishing all training labor materials cables connectors tools equipment shipping and incidental items necessary to complete the installation and make the Emergency Vehicle Preemption System fully operational .
The optical preemption detectors for each intersection shall be mounted facing the mainline approaches or as shown in the Plans .
Final equipment locations and positioning of the preemption detectors shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturers instructions to provide the optimal field of detection .
The Contractor shall install the quantity of confirmation strobes at each traffic signal location as shown in the Plans or as directed by the Engineer .
The confirmation strobe shall serve to validate to the driver of the emergency vehicle that the traffic signal has recognized the preemption call and will initiate the proper preemption sequence .
The confirmation strobes shall be illuminated whenever any emergency vehicle preemption green is on .
The confirmation strobes shall have a red lens .
The Contractor shall be responsible for the proper programming of the phase selector orientation of the optical detectors and all other work necessary to provide a complete and operating emergency vehicle preemption system .
The Contractor may be required to field adjust the location of the optical detectors in the presence of the Engineer and the emergency services if necessary listed in the Plans to properly detect preemption calls from approaching vehicles . .
GLOBAL POSITIONING SYSTEM GPS CLOCK ASSEMBLY .
a System Requirements .
The GPS Clock Assembly shall consist of a programmable GPS interface device GPS receiver receivertointerface device harness and poweroutput harness .
The assembly shall be designed to reset the clock time for the controller using a time reference signal from GPS at least once a day .
The interval for the controller clock resetting shall be programmable .
The assembly shall automatically adjust for Daylight Saving Time .
The GPS Clock Assembly shall come with a fully enclosed case and be suitable for wall mounting or setting on a shelf inside the cabinet .
The device shall have a removable frontback cover a liquid crystal display LCD programmingstatus switches poweroutput port and antenna input port .
The receiver shall be a fully enclosed raintight GPS antenna unit that shall be suitable for mounting on the exterior of a traffic signal cabinet .
The GPS antenna case shall be made of a long life exterior grade UVresistant plastic .
The GPS Clock Assembly shall include a direct serial interface National Marine Electronic Association Standard that can accommodate either a pin or pin serial cable as specified in the Plans .
The GPS Clock must have flexible input voltage levels of volts DC .
The required temperature range is F to F. The GPS Clock Assembly shall be as specified in the Plans .
b Construction Requirements .
The Contractor shall be responsible for furnishing all training labor materials cables connectors tools equipment shipping and incidental items necessary to complete the installation and make the GPS Clock Assembly fully operational .
The Contractor shall install the quantity of GPS Clock Assembly at each location as shown in the Plans or as directed by the Engineer. . PAINTING TRAFFIC SIGNAL STRUCTURES .
a General Requirements .
All signal structures specified to be painted flat black shall be galvanized and powdercoated with at least two coats of exterior grade powder coat paint suitable for a low speed traffic environment subject to high levels of salt .
All steel components except for stainless steel and anchor plates shall be galvanized pretreated and shop painted except as noted .
Hardware need not be painted after galvanizing except for the portions exposed to view after installation such as bolt heads ends nuts and washers which may be field painted .
Touchup and repairs shall be made using paint from the same batch run as used for the shopapplied coats and supplied by the shop applicator .
b Fabrication Drawings and Samples .
The following provisions shall be made for hotdip galvanizing and shopapplied paint for traffic signal hardware as shown on the Plans or as directed .
The requirements for the surface preparation shall conform to Subsection .
except as required herein or approved otherwise .
The Fabricator shall send the Fabrication Drawings to the galvanizer for review to note considerations particular to the galvanizing process and to coordinate any proposed modifications to the fabricated materials prior to submission of Fabrication Drawings to the Engineer for approval .
One sample of material to be used in the work each approximately inches inches shall be galvanized and painted as specified herein and submitted to the Engineer for approval of surface texture and color prior to full production galvanizing and painting .
The Fabricator of the material shall provide the galvanizer with samples taken from the same material to be used in the work .
To determine its suitability for processing the Fabricator shall notify the galvanizer if the chemical composition of the steel to be galvanized exceeds the following limits .
carbon .
silicon .
phosphorous and .
manganese .
c Coating System Process and Material .
The galvanizingpaint duplex coating system shall consist of the following generic type at the minimum coating thickness specified in Table .A .
TABLE .A MINIMUM COATING THICKNESS Coating Description Thickness Galvanized Hotdipped galvanizing Per Subsection .
PreTreatment SP solvent cleaning PreTreatment SP brushoff blast cleaning PreTreatment Phosphate cleaning Intermediate forcecured High build epoxy polyamide mils DFT Finish forcecured Aliphatic polyurethane mils DFT Required when painting occurs more than hours after galvanizing Dry film thickness d Galvanizing .
Surfaces to be galvanized shall be zinc coated in conformance with AASHTO M MM or AASHTO M MM utilizing the dry kettle process in a bath of molten zinc containing nickel .
to .
by weight .
Hardware may be mechanically galvanized in conformance with ASTM B Class .
The galvanized steel product shall be pretreated and painted by one of the following methods Method Under Hours .
The galvanized steel shall be pretreated .
The first coat of paint shall be applied within hours of galvanizing and within hours of blast cleaning or surface abrasion by approved mechanical means .
Method Over Hours .
When the galvanized steel is to be painted more than hours after galvanizing the steel shall be pretreated followed by a treatment of zinc phosphate applied within hours of blast cleaning or surface abrasion by approved mechanical means .
The first coat of paint shall be applied within hours of phosphating .
e PreTreatment .
Prior to painting the galvanized surface shall receive pretreatment consisting of SSPCSP Solvent Cleaning and SSPCSP BrushOff Blast Cleaning or abraded by approved mechanical means to remove detrimental contaminants and to thoroughly roughen the entire surface and produce a uniform anchor profile of to mils .
The required thickness of the zinc coating shall be maintained and checked prior to painting .
The pretreatment shall meet the paint manufacturers requirements .
An additional pretreatment or tie coat may be considered if required by the paint manufacturer and approved by the Engineer .
Blast cleaning shall be performed prior to the formation of wet storage stain also known as white rust on the galvanized surface .
Wet storage stain shall be defined in the Inspection of Products Hot Dip Galvanized After Fabrication by the American Galvanizers Association .
If any white rust is detected by visual means the galvanizing shall be stripped off and the steel regalvanized in conformance with these provisions .
Paint coating shall be shop applied to the galvanized product within Calendar Days of galvanizing .
Painting shall be performed inside a controlled environment meeting applicable atmospheric requirements as recommended by the coating manufacturer .
Prior to pretreatment rough areas of galvanizing shall be ground smooth to achieve a uniform galvanized surface to accept paint .
Phosphating when required as described herein shall conform to zinc phosphate coating light of galvanized steel DOD Specification TTCE or approved equal and shall be applied in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
When phosphating is required the phosphate applicator shall document in writing that the phosphating procedure is acceptable to the galvanizer and coating manufacturer prior to performing the work .
f Painting .
Each coat of paint shall be separately colored to contrast with other coats and to ensure complete coverage .
The previous coat shall be hidden by a single application of each coat .
The final color of the painted product shall be Flat Black Chip per SAE AMSSTDB .
Intermediate and finish coats shall be shopapplied only when the air and steel temperatures are a minimum of F above the dew point .
The finish coat shall be spray applied .
The intermediate and finish paint coats shall each be forcecured in a heated booth maintained at a minimum temperature of F for to hours .
The finished shopcoated material shall be handled with care using nylon slings padded cables etc .
as required to protect the finished coating .
The paint applicator shall be responsible for the condition of the finished coating until the material arrives at the job site .
g Field Touchup and Repairs .
Damaged galvanized surfaces shall be repaired by applying an organic zinc repair paint conforming to ASTM A MA and recommended by the galvanizer .
Galvanizing repair paint shall be zinc by weight minimum and shall be brush applied .
The thickness of repair shall not be less than the coating thickness required by AASHTO M MM or M MM but not less than mils DFT .
Repair touch up shall not be permitted using aerosol spray silver paint bright paint Brite paint or aluminum paints .
Damaged shopapplied paint shall be repaired in conformance with the solvent cleaning and abrasion pretreatment requirements specified above or the paint manufacturers recommendations to a minimum thickness of the original system .
Touchups shall be such that the repair is not noticeable to the Engineer from feet away. . EXCAVATION AND BACKFILL .
a General .
Unless otherwise shown in the Contract Documents the Contractor shall perform all excavation backfilling and resurfacing work including removal and replacement of curbs sidewalks paved surfaces and any other materials necessary to complete the work in accordance with the Contract Documents or as directed by the Engineer .
In making excavations in paved surfaces cuts shall be made with a concrete saw to a minimum depth of inches along the neat lines of the area to be removed .
All landscaping and underground Utility systems that have been disturbed by construction operations shall be restored to their original condition at the Contractors expense upon completion of the work .
b Excavation .
Excavation shall be at the locations and to the dimensions shown on the Plans .
c Backfill .
Backfill of suitable material shall be placed and compacted in layers not exceeding inches .
The bottom of pull boxes shall be filled with granular materials approved by the Engineer to within inches of the bottom of conduit. . ERECTION OF POSTS AND POLES .
All posts and poles shall be erected on concrete bases at the locations shown on the Plans .
In the erection of posts and poles leveling nuts shall be provided for installation between the bases and the concrete foundation to aid in plumbing .
The space between the top of the concrete footing and metal base of the support shall be sealed with stainless wire cloth .
The wire cloth shall be stainless steel standard grade with a inch maximum opening with a minimum wire diameter of AWG number with a inch lap .
It shall be secured with inch stainless steel banding after anchor bolts are fully tightened .
Highstrength bolts nuts and washers shall be tensioned in accordance with Subsection .. Anchor bolts shall be tightened in accordance with Subsection .. Where aluminum alloys come in contact with other materials the contacting surfaces shall be separated with a fabric pad inch in thickness or cleaned and thoroughly coated with an aluminumimpregnated caulking compound . .
PLACING OF CONDUIT PULL BOXES AND JUNCTION BOXES .
Unless otherwise specified the conduit for the cable shall be placed not less than inches below the top of curb in the sidewalk areas and not less than inches below the finished grade of pavement when passing under roadways .
Conduit shall be pitched or graded at not less than VH and provision shall be made for draining moisture away from pull boxes as directed by the Engineer .
Red plastic marking tape inches wide shall be placed in the excavated trench to inches below the finished grade for all conduit and sleeve runs except those jacked under the roadway .
High Density Polyethylene HDPE plastic pipe conduit shall be used only for underground installations .
A minimum of inches of cover shall be required over conduit at all times during construction .
Unless otherwise specified the conduit shall be laid in a straight line with no bends except preformed bends and at the entrance to a pull box or a concrete base .
All joints for PVC or HDPE conduit shall be made with a tapering tool and not an edging tool .
For metal conduit all couplings shall be tightened until the ends of the conduit are together and provide a good electrical connection .
Any cutting of the conduit shall be made squarely so that the resulting ends will butt together over their full area .
The ends of conduits shall be reamed and have threaded connections .
Slip joints or running threads shall not be used for couplings .
The exposed ends for all types of conduits shall be capped with standard conduit caps until wiring starts at which time they shall be replaced with approved bushings .
Where factory conduit bends are not being used the conduit shall be bent using the longest radius possible but not less than six times the inside diameter of the conduit and in a manner that will not crimp or flatten the conduit .
No more than three bends or equivalent total shall be used on a continuous conduit line .
If more than in total bends are necessary then a pull box or junction box shall be installed .
Either elbows or sweeps may be used for entering concrete bases but elbows shall be used at the base of a service pole on the street quarter of the pole One approved expansion fitting shall be used for each conduit run on a bridge structure at every expansion joint of the bridge .
Expansion couplings shall also be used on the power service pole and all conduits entering or leaving the meter or disconnects on a power drop stanchion .
After the conduit lines are completed the Contractor shall in the presence of the Engineer check the installation by pushing a one diameter long mandrel having a diameter of inch less than the diameter of the conduit through the length of conduit .
Any obstructions including stone and dirt shall be removed .
Damaged conduit shall be removed and replaced at the Contractors expense .
When conductor cable is not being placed in conduit under the Contract a pull cord with a kips minimum pull strength shall be installed in all conduits .
The pull cord shall terminate beyond the end of the conduit in each pull box or just under the cap at concrete bases for poles .
Pull Boxes and Junction Boxes shall be placed at locations shown on the Plans or as directed by the Engineer . .
INSTALLATION OF ELECTRICAL CONDUIT SLEEVES .
Electrical conduit sleeves shall be installed at the locations shown on the Plans or as directed by the Engineer .
Unless otherwise specified electrical conduit sleeves placed under roadways or drives shall have a minimum cover depth of feet measured from the finished roadway surface .
Sleeves shall be pitched or graded at not less than VH and provision shall be made for draining moisture away from the sleeve location or as directed by the Engineer .
Unless otherwise specified the Contractor shall install electrical conduit sleeves in a straight line with no bends .
The installed sleeve shall terminate a minimum of feet outside the face of curb or edge of shoulder of the roadway or drive that the sleeve crosses .
Electrical conduit sleeves may be placed by an open cut or may be directionally bored under roadways or drives .
When conduit is not being placed in a sleeve prior to backfilling around the sleeve the Contractor shall install a suitable pull cord with a kips minimum pull strength in the sleeve and seal the ends prior to backfilling the sleeve . .
DETECTORS AND CONTROLLERS .
Detectors and controllers shall be installed at the locations shown on the Plans and in accordance with directions furnished by the manufacturer .
The type of mounting of the controller cabinet shall be as shown on the Plans .
Controller cabinets shall be provided with locks as shown on the Plans .
Two keys shall be furnished with each lock .
All pedestrian activated push buttons shall have an advisory sign attached as shown on the Plans .
At locations where Accessible Pedestrian Signals APS are installed the push buttons shall include audible locator tones raised arrows and vibrotactile features that comply with the latest editions of the MUTCD and ADA standards as specified in Subsection ..
When applying vehicle detector slot sealant to the slot it shall be by a pressurized system such as a manual or mechanical caulking gun or in a manner approved by the manufacturer .
The loop wires shall be held in place during sealing by nonmetallic strips or tabs approximately inches long located about every inches along the slot. . ELECTRIC POWER SERVICE .
Prior to submitting a proposal the Contractor shall obtain from the Utility company the location of the power source the amount of power to be supplied an understanding of the termination of the power companys services and the requirements of the power company for connection of the electrical facilities to be constructed under the Contract .
The Contractor shall furnish and install a service riser at the power control center a fully enclosed and watertight cabinet with a meter socket appropriate sized and number of disconnect equipment and circuit breakers to meet load andor equipment manufacturers requirements .
The Contractor shall adhere to all State and local codes .
Luminaires installed on strain poles shall utilize the same power source as the traffic signal but with a separate disconnect breaker and meter. . WIRING .
All wiring shall be performed in accordance with the National Electrical Code .
Splices shall be made only at pull boxes junction boxes or pole bases .
All splices shall be electrically and mechanically secure and shall be insulated for V. The completed splice shall be watertight and shall test electrically equal to or greater than the cable .
All splices shall be soldered using rosin core solder and then be fully sealed by the application of dual wall heatshrinkable tubing .
Unless otherwise shown on the Plans each cable shall have a minimum of feet of slack in each box or base .
Where shown on the Plans wired conduit may be either prewired before the conduit is installed or the wire may be installed after the conduit is installed .
The Contract Item Wired Conduit includes both the conduit and the wires contained within the conduit however the wires and the conduit shall not be attached to each other and the wires shall be readily pulled from the conduit for replacement without excessive effort .
Except when otherwise shown on the Plans the minimum size for installed conduit shall be inch nominal inside diameter conduit or it shall match the size of the existing conduit to which it is to be attached .
In either case the installed conduit shall be of sufficient inside diameter to contain wiring of a size such that the voltage drop in the secondary circuits will not exceed .
Wiring conduits shall have a sufficient inside diameter such that the combined crosssectional area of the wiring does not exceed the percentage of conduit fill specified in the National Electrical Code .
Conduits shall in accordance with the other requirements of this Subsection contain all the wiring necessary to make the completed system or subsystem function .
Where electrical wiring is shown on the Plans the Contractor shall remove the existing wiring if such exists from the existing conduit strain pole streetlight pole or bracket arm and shall install new wiring meeting all code and Specification requirements .
The wiring shall be of a size such that the voltage drop in the secondary circuits will not exceed and the wiring will contain only the number of conductors necessary to make the completed system or subsystem function .
The minimum wire sizes for circuits shall conform to the requirements specified in Table .A .
TABLE .A MINIMUM WIRE SIZES Service AWG From supply to disconnect No .
Ground No .
Disconnect to controller or flasher No .
Controller to signals or beacons No .
Controller to pavement units No .
Controller to push buttons No .
Interconnect figure Onehalf mile or less No .
Solid Interconnect figure Onehalf to one mile No .
Solid There shall be a neutral wire for every eight or fewer ungrounded conductors .
Plastic cable rings shall not be permitted for supporting electrical cable from a span wire .
Stranded wire shall be used for all unsupported and span wire supported wiring .
The Contractor shall furnish and install sufficient cable and wire to operate the system properly as shown on the Plans and as specified and shall provide at least two spare conductors in all signal and interconnect cable runs including fire and railroad preemption cables .
The Contractor shall wire the system in accordance with the following colorcoding system where practicable as specified in Table .B .
TABLE .B WIRE COLORCODING Wire Color Application Red Red light main street Orange Yellow light main street Green Green light main Street Red with tracer Red light side street Orange with tracer Yellow light side street Green with tracer Green light side street White Common ground for all signals and exposed metal parts Blue All steady burning arrows Blue with tracer Intermittent arrows Remaining Pavement units push buttons and spare Green wires shall be tagged NOT GROUNDED WIRES .
GROUNDING AND TESTING .
Each metal pedestal post strain pole and signal pole and the common grounding electrode connector of the signal system shall be grounded to the power source and shall be effectively grounded by connection to a grounding electrode driven at each post or pole location .
The grounding shall be accomplished by means of a softdrawn bare copper wire with a crosssectional area of No .
AWG run between the post or pole base and the grounding electrode or electrodes .
The grounding electrode conductor shall be attached to the grounding electrode by an exothermic welding process .
The white wire shall be used for the neutral ground connections and shall be continuously connected to ground .
All exposed metal parts including service pipe and control box housing shall be connected to ground .
On all controllers employing the solid common ground there shall be installed a visible jumper between the service neutral and the signal common ground .
The signal common ground bar shall be jumpered to the bonded grounding electrode .
Upon completion of each signal or beacon system the Contractor shall demonstrate by tests that all circuits are continuous and free from short circuits and all circuits are free from unspecified grounds .
The Contractor shall demonstrate by tests that the resistance to ground of nongrounded conductors is at least M for new construction or M for existing wiring at F when the test is conducted using V DC .
The resistances in the entire specified grounding systems shall not be more than .
If luminaires are to be installed on strain poles the lighting work shall be performed in accordance with the applicable requirements of Section .
All new traffic and pedestrian signal heads that have been installed but not placed in either flashing or full operation shall be covered .
Existing signal heads which are placed out of service to perform work on the signal system shall also be covered except when such work can be completed in a relatively short time several hours and with provisions for traffic control .
The signal covers shall consist of a onepiece plastic bag having a minimum thickness of mils .
The bag shall be black or dark brown in color and shall be opaque .
The cover shall slip over the entire signal head and shall be securely tied at the opening to secure the cover .
An intermediate tie of the same material shall be drawn around the center of the cover to prevent excess flapping in the wind .
A drain hole shall be made at the bottom of the bag to allow the escape of moisture .
No tape or adhesive will be allowed to be attached to any surface of the signal housing or lenses .
All covers shall be placed in a neat professional manner .
Any cover that is torn or missing shall be immediately replaced .
Payment for the covers their placement and removal and all incidentals for completion of the work will be considered incidental to the installation of the traffic signal . .
TURN ON AND TESTING .
Prior to turn on and testing all construction of the signal system shall be complete .
a Turn On .
The traffic control signal systems shall not operate without the pavement markings and signal related signing in place .
Full operation for a new installation or switch over for replacement signals shall not be initiated except in the presence of the Roadway Traffic and Safety Engineer or a designated representative .
A Uniform Traffic Officer shall be required at every turn on .
Existing Signals .
Any locations that require a switch over from one traffic signal system to another does not require a flash period .
New Signals .
Traffic signals installed at locations that were previously unsignalized shall be operated in the flash mode for a minimum of hours prior to being put into full operation .
b Testing .
Once all equipment is installed and the traffic control signal system has been turned on an inspection to start the day test period shall be scheduled .
Each traffic control signal system shall successfully complete a minimum day test period .
The required day test period for the signal installation shall not begin until all construction of the signal installation is complete and the Engineer has received notice from the responsible Agency parties that all paperwork including Fabrication Drawings materials certifications bench test reports etc .
related to the signal equipment and installation have been completed to the satisfaction of the Agency .
The Engineer will notify the Highway Safety and Design Program Manager to request to begin the day test period .
An indepth inspection will be conducted to start the day test period .
A written Punch List of items will be provided to the Contractor to correct by the end of the day test period .
a .
The test period for the traffic signal shall be at least Calendar Days of continuous satisfactory operation .
b .
If a component or system fails or shows unsatisfactory performance the condition must be corrected and the test restarted until Calendar Days of continuous satisfactory operation is obtained .
The traffic control signal system shall not be accepted until successful completion of the test period .
Once the day test period has been successfully completed the Engineer will notify the Highway Safety and Design Program Manager the Traffic Signal Operations Engineer and the appropriate Agency party stating that the above criteria have been met and that the Agency is now responsible for the maintenance of the traffic control signal system .
The name of the power company and the account number on the power bill shall be included for the DTAs records . .
INSTALLATION AND COMPLETION .
The signals and equipment shall be properly installed and operating sequences set as shown on the Plans by a competent factorytrained representative of the manufacturer or by workers under the manufacturers supervision .
All span wire mounted signals shall have disconnect hangers .
All fixed mounted signals shall have terminal components .
The traffic signals shall not operate without the pavement markings and signal related signing in place .
All work shall conform to the requirements of the National Electrical Code .
After the signal or beacon system has been completely installed any fixtures with damaged factory applied paint shall be corrected by applying one coat of enamel meeting the requirements of VT . Flat Black Enamel or VT . Yellow Enamel applied to the complete sectional area that is damaged after being lightly sanded to remove gloss .
The visors hoods and the entire surface of louvers fins and the front surface of back plates shall have a dull black finish .
The Contractor shall submit in duplicate to the Engineer the wiring diagrams signal sequence chart signal terminal connection diagram service manual programming manual if applicable and parts list for each signal controller .
The foregoing and manufacturers warranties and guarantees furnished for materials used in the work shall be delivered to the Engineer prior to acceptance of the work .
The warranties shall be the manufacturers customary trade warranties .
The Contractor shall make every reasonable effort to have the installation complete and operating including the test control period prior to the date specified in the Contract .
However if all other work under the Contract has been completed any portion of the test control period which extends beyond the completion date may not be considered time charged for Liquidated Damages .
For new traffic signals or flashing beacons the Contractor shall be responsible for all Utility costs until acceptance of the signal or beacon system .
For upgrading of existing signals or beacons the State or Municipality whichever is applicable shall continue to pay for normal monthly power usage while the Contractor shall be responsible for all other Utility costs .
When the installation of a telephone line in a traffic signal controller cabinet is included in the Contract the Contractor shall initiate the installation by the telephone company by contacting the Business Manager for the Agencys Maintenance and Operations Bureau .
The billing for the telephone service will be set up in the name of the Agencys Maintenance District within which the traffic signal controller is located .
The Contractor shall reimburse the District for all costs incurred for the installation and for the monthly fees until acceptance of the traffic signal installation .
The Contractor shall reimburse the District within Calendar Days of receiving a copy of the bill .
The Final Estimate will not be paid until the Agencys District Transportation Administrator DTA certifies that all reimbursements have been received .
For Projects where several signal systems are coordinated all the individual signal systems must have successfully completed the day test control period before the signal systems can be accepted .
The Contractor shall notify the Engineer andor the town or city engineer at least hours prior to turning off existing traffic control signals at any location or when the Contractor is ready to install the traffic control signal system .
Notice is required so that a representative may be provided to observe the installation of the equipment in preparation for maintenance and repair of the system and to have a Uniformed Traffic Officer present to maintain traffic .
Removal of existing or reuse of salvaged traffic control equipment shall be conducted as follows a Unwanted equipment must be disposed of by the Contractor .
Removal of equipment shall include removal of concrete bases and backfill of the holes where applicable .
Any equipment that is damaged or lost by the Contractor during removal shall be repaired or replaced to the satisfaction of the Engineer at the Contractors expense .
The Contractor shall remove any equipment to be salvaged or reused in such a manner that the equipment is not damaged .
b All salvaged and reused equipment shall be thoroughly cleaned and painted as required before reuse .
c All reused traffic signal flashing beacon or street lighting lenses and reflectors shall be cleaned and all lamps shall be replaced using lamps conforming to the applicable requirements of Subsection .. .
TEMPORARY TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNALS AND FLASHING BEACONS .
a General .
Temporary traffic control signals and temporary flashing beacons shall be installed by the Contractor at the locations shown on the Plans or directed by the Engineer .
The temporary traffic control signal system or temporary flashing beacon system installed at the designated location shall include all necessary existing or Contractor provided materials and equipment shown on the Plans including but not limited to controllers flashers wiring conduit strain poles associated signs sign posts pavement markings electrical service vehicle detectors span wires interconnect cables signal heads warning beacons and lights .
In the case of temporary signals at a temporary bridge location the signal system shall include all the signals and associated signage to be installed at all approaches to the temporary bridge .
b Materials .
The traffic signal flashing beacon and lighting equipment provided shall conform to the requirements of the latest edition of the MUTCD and NEMA but are not required to be new .
Fabrication Drawings and certification will not be required for the temporary signal flashing beacon and lighting materials and equipment .
Materials shall conform to the applicable requirements of Section and Section .
All associated signing shall conform to the MUTCD and Section except that the materials are not required to be new .
Pavement marking shall conform to the MUTCD and Section .
c Installation .
The components of the temporary traffic signal and flashing beacon systems shall be installed in accordance with the applicable requirements of Section Section Section Section and Section with the following modifications Concrete bases will not be required for temporary traffic signal installations .
The Contractor shall correct all deficiencies found in the traffic control signal system and shall repair or replace defective equipment at no cost to the State .
During installation of the temporary traffic signal system or flashing beacons for advanced warning signs no conduit shall be placed under the existing roadway .
The entire signal system including signs warning beacons poles lights detectors and other required materials shall be in place and operating correctly prior to the start of the part of the Project requiring its operation .
Removal of the temporary signal system in its entirety and restoration of the disturbed areas shall constitute completion of the Contract Item .
The Contractor shall be responsible for all permits and costs associated with providing electrical power for the traffic signal and warning beacon operation .
The Contractor shall notify the Engineer andor the town or city officials at least hours prior to turning off the existing traffic control signals andor installing temporary signals .
Pavement marking shall meet the requirements for temporary pavement markings unless otherwise shown on the Plans .
d Detectors .
Unless shown on the Plans detectors for temporary traffic signal activation may be of the type and manufacture chosen by the Contractor .
However the furnished detector must function properly and provide the actuation required for the specific installed site .
If in the opinion of the Engineer the furnished detector either does not function properly or does not perform the required actuation the Contractor shall replace the detector within hours of receiving notice to do so from the Engineer .
The costs of replacement shall be solely at the Contractors expense .
Unless otherwise shown on the Plans detectors designed to be installed in the roadway shall be cut and sealed in the pavement in the same manner as permanently installed detectors .
If temporary loop detectors are installed in a gravel roadway they shall be placed in Schedule PVC or HDPE conduit and buried at least inches below the travel surface .
Other detectors installed in gravel roadways shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT .
The quantity of Traffic Control Signal System Intersection to be measured for payment will be the number of each signal system installed in the complete and accepted work .
The quantity of Flashing Beacon Ground Mounted or Flashing Beacon Aerial Mounted to be measured for payment will be the number of each beacon system installed in the complete and accepted work .
The quantity of Interconnecting Cable to be measured for payment will be the number of linear feet of the interconnected system installed in the complete and accepted work as measured between controller units along the alignment shown on the Plans .
No allowance will be made for sag between poles or for loops created in making connections .
The quantity of Electrical Conduit and Wired Conduit to be measured for payment will be the number of linear feet of the specified conduit installed as required by the system being constructed in the complete and accepted work .
The measurement will include sweeps into and out of bases pull boxes and junction boxes .
The quantity of Vehicle Loop Detector to be measured for payment will be the number of linear feet of pavement cut and sealed measured from the curb containing the loop and leadin wires in the complete and accepted work .
The quantity of Electrical Wiring to be measured for payment will be the number of linear feet of specified wiring installed in the complete and accepted work as measured between connection points along the installed alignment .
No allowance will be made for sags or loops for making connections but including the wiring installed in sweeps into and out of bases pull boxes and junction boxes .
The quantity of Pull Box of the type specified and Junction Box to be measured for payment will be the number of each box installed in the complete and accepted work .
The quantity of Electrical Conduit Sleeve to be measured for payment will be the number of linear feet of the specified sleeve installed in the complete and accepted work .
The quantity of Temporary Traffic Signal System Temporary Flashing Beacon or Temporary Detector to be measured for payment will be the number of each system installed in the complete and accepted work maintained during construction and then removed from the Project when the Engineer determined it was no longer required .
The quantity of Removal of Existing Traffic Control Signal System to be measured for payment will be for each traffic control signal system removed in the complete and accepted work . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT .
The accepted quantity of Traffic Control Signal System Intersection will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per each at each designated intersection .
Payment will include strain poles foundations signal heads controller and cabinet detection and preemption equipment all wiring not included in the Contract Items Wired Conduit and Electrical Wiring all removal disposal and salvage andor reuse of existing system equipment and components and all other materials necessary for a fully operational Traffic Control Signal System not otherwise paid for under other Contract Items in this Section .
The Contractor shall be responsible for all maintenance costs for new or existing signals and beacons until Project acceptance .
This period shall include any winter shut downs during the Contract period .
Replacement of poles and cabinetcontrollers will not be considered maintenance costs unless the loss is due to the Contractors negligence .
At the discretion of the Engineer the Contractor may be required to replace poles and cabinetcontrollers that are lost or damaged due to an accident or to perform routine repairs to existing signals that are not necessitated by the Contractors operations .
If required such work will be considered Extra Work under Subsection .
and additional payment will be allowed .
Any equipment that is defective or damaged prior to the beginning of the Contract shall be maintained in at least as good condition until it is replaced as part of the Contract .
The accepted quantity of Flashing Beacon Ground Mounted will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per each at each designated location .
Payment will include beacon heads flasher and cabinet all wiring not included in the Contract Items Wired Conduit and Electrical Wiring power source and all other materials necessary for a fully operational Flashing Beacon not otherwise paid for under other Contract Items in this Section .
Sign posts and panels will be paid for under their own Contract Items .
The accepted quantity of Flashing Beacon Aerial Mounted will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per each at each designated location .
Payment will include strain poles span wire attachment hardware beacon heads and all other materials necessary for a fully operational flashing beacon system not otherwise paid for under other Contract Items in this Section .
Sign posts and panels will be paid for under their own Contract Items .
a Payment for Traffic Control Signal System Intersection Flashing Beacon Ground Mounted and Flashing Beacon Aerial Mounted will be made as follows When applicable of the Contract Unit Price will be paid for the installation of strain poles .
Upon installation of a functioning system as indicated by a successful continuous hour operation test period an additional of the Contract Unit Price will be paid .
When the installation does not include strain poles of the Contract Unit Price will be paid upon successful completion of a continuous hour operation test .
Thirty percent of the Contract Unit Price will be paid upon receipt by the Engineer of notice from all responsible Agency parties that all paperwork related to the signal or beacon installation has been completed to the satisfaction of the Agency .
The remainder less of the Contract Unit Price will be paid after successful completion of the day test control period .
The final of the Contract Unit Price will be paid upon acceptance of the work under this Section .
The Contractor will not be paid more than of the Contract Unit Price for the traffic signal or flashing beacon installation whether directly or through stockpile or any other means until the Engineer has been notified that all signal related paperwork has been completed to the satisfaction of the Agency .
The accepted quantities of Interconnecting Cable Electrical Conduit and Vehicle Loop Detector will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per linear foot .
Payment for Electrical Conduit will include installed electrical conduit only .
The accepted quantity of Wired Conduit will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per linear foot .
Payment will include both the installed conduit and the wiring inside the conduit .
The accepted quantity of Electrical Wiring will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per linear foot .
Payment will include removing any existing wiring in an existing conduit strain pole streetlight pole or bracket arm installing new updated wiring including necessary connections fusing in that existing enclosed location and providing all the required number of conductors including grounds neutrals and the designated number of spares .
No adjustment of the Contract price will be made if a lesser or greater number of conductors becomes necessary to complete the work .
Unless otherwise shown on the Plans Wired Conduit and Electrical Wiring will not occur in the same location as Electrical Conduit .
Furthermore Electrical Wiring will only occur inside existing and previously installed conduits strain poles streetlight poles or bracket arms .
The accepted quantities of Pull Box of the type specified and Junction Box will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per each .
The accepted quantity of Electrical Conduit Sleeve will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per linear foot .
The cost of excavation and backfill will not be included in the costs of the sleeve .
When the sleeve is installed for use with one or more conduits the costs of excavation and backfill will be considered included in the Contract Unit Price for the conduits installed within the sleeve .
When the sleeve is installed without conduit the pay limits and the excavation and backfill will be paid in the same manner as specified for culverts in Subsection .. Payment for the above Contract Unit Prices will be full compensation for furnishing transporting handling and installing the materials and equipment specified including excavation backfill concrete hanger hardware for pole mounting of cable pole identification cutting and resealing the pavement and for furnishing all labor tools equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
Disconnecting existing loop or other detectors will be considered incidental to other Contract Items .
The accepted quantity of Temporary Traffic Signal System will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per each .
Payment will include the installation and removal of strain poles signal heads controller and cabinet luminaires signs sign posts flashing beacons pavement markings wiring conduit and all other materials necessary for a fully operational Temporary Traffic Signal System complete in place .
When a Temporary Flashing Beacon system is installed on a Project that also requires the installation of a temporary traffic signal the Temporary Flashing Beacon will not be paid for directly but will be considered incidental to the Contract Item Temporary Traffic Signal System .
The accepted quantity of Temporary Flashing Beacon will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per each .
Payment will include the installation and removal of poles span wires signs sign posts beacon heads flasher units and cabinets conduit wiring attachment hardware and all other materials necessary for a fully operational Temporary Flashing Beacon system complete in place .
The accepted quantity of Temporary Detector will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per each .
Payment will include the detector and all necessary installation hardware and materials .
A detector consists of the black box container or the loop and leads within the paved area of the roadway on unpaved highways the graveled surface .
Wiring from the controller to the detector including connection to the detector is included in the Contract Item Temporary Traffic Signal System .
Payment of the above Contract Unit Prices will be full compensation for furnishing transporting handling and installing the materials and equipment specified including excavation backfill hanger hardware for cable and signals span wires poles cutting and resealing pavement providing electrical service and power and for furnishing all labor tools equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work to maintain the system while it is required and then to completely remove it from the Project and properly dispose of it when so directed by the Engineer .
All components materials and equipment furnished by the Contractor shall remain the property of the Contractor and shall be properly removed from the Project and disposed of by the Contractor when the temporary system is removed .
Existing components and materials that were utilized for the temporary system shall be disposed of as shown in the Contract Documents .
b Payment for Temporary Traffic Signal System and Temporary Flashing Beacon will be made as follows When the entire system has been installed at a site including signing and pavement markings and working for hours to the satisfaction of the Engineer of the Contract Unit Price for each will be paid .
When of the Working Days between the date of installation and the original completion date have elapsed an additional of the Contract Unit Price for each will be paid .
Upon complete removal of the system from the site and restoration of disturbed areas the remaining of the Contract Unit Price will be paid .
The accepted quantity of Removal of Existing Traffic Control Signal System will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per each .
Payment will be full compensation for removing and handling the existing traffic control signal system components as specified in the Contract Documents and for furnishing all labor materials tools equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Traffic Control Signal System Intersection Each .
Flashing Beacon Ground Mounted Each .
Flashing Beacon Aerial Mounted Each .
Interconnecting Cable Linear Foot .
Electrical Conduit Linear Foot .
Vehicle Loop Detector Linear Foot .
Wired Conduit Linear Foot .
Electrical Wiring Linear Foot .
Pull Box Standard Each .
Junction Box Each .
Pull Box Double Each .
Electrical Conduit Sleeve Linear Foot .
Temporary Traffic Signal System Each .
Temporary Flashing Beacon Each .
Temporary Detector Each .
Removal of Existing Traffic Control Signal System Each SECTION STREET LIGHTING .
DESCRIPTION .
This work shall consist of removing furnishing and installing the street lighting components necessary to provide a complete and operational system .
Street light assemblies shall consist of Light Pole Foundations Transformer Bases Light Poles Bracket Arms and Luminaires. . MATERIALS .
Materials shall meet the requirements of the following Subsections Grounding Electrodes .
Light Pole Foundations .
Transformer Bases .
Light Poles .
Bracket Arms .
Luminaires .
Highway Illumination Conductor Cable .
Finish . . GENERAL .
Street lights shall be installed as specified in the Contract Documents .
Street Lights shall be designed to withstand an equivalent wind load of mph velocity with an allowable angular deflection of arc minutes or less .
All wiring shall meet the current National Electrical Code .
Street lighting design shall conform to the current edition of the AASHTO Standard Specifications for the Structural Supports for Highway Signs Luminaires and Traffic Signals and its latest revisions. . SUBMITTALS .
The Contractor shall submit Fabrication Drawings in accordance with Subsection ..
The submittal shall contain the following information at a minimum a Wiring .
Conductor material insulation type voltage rating and temperature rating .
b Light Pole Foundations .
Dimensions and material Specifications for all hardware used to mount the transformer base to the Light Pole Foundation For precast Light Pole Foundations complete design details and material Specifications shall be supplied c Transformer Bases .
Dimensions for bottom and top of transformer base height of transformer base transformer base door dimensions bolt pattern for mounting the transformer base to the light pole foundation and type of transformer base .
Include documentation indicating the transformer base meets the AASHTO standards .
Dimensions and material Specifications for all hardware used to mount the light pole to the transformer base d Light Poles .
Dimensions for pole height mounting height pole diameter top and bottom handhole size and location anchor base bolt circle and mounting bolt size Dimensions for the bolt pattern for mounting the light pole to the transformer base Material Specifications for all components of the light pole Welding information in accordance with Subsection .
The welding process and procedures and the materials used to make the two continuous circumferential welds one attaching the top of the anchor base to the pole shaft and the other attaching the bottom of the pole shaft to the inside of the shoe base Special features as shown on the Plans such as finish or color e Bracket Arms .
Dimensions for bracket arm length and diameter Details for connection of bracket arm to light pole .
The details shall be specific to the pole material on which the arm is to be mounted .
Welding information in accordance with Subsection .
Material Specifications for bracket arm and mounting hardware f Luminaires .
Luminaire Data a .
Manufacturer b .
Model number c. Wattage d. Lamp type with number of LEDs e. Any other features such as finish special wire access etc .
f. BUG rating g. Operating amperage h. Street Lighting Control Device Photometric data shall be supplied when a street lighting design is not included in the Plans or when changes to the Plans are proposed a. IES Distribution type b .
Utilization curve c. Isolux curves d. Mounting height factor e. Maintenance factor .
BRACKET ARM .
Bracket arms shall be installed as shown in the Contract Documents .
The length and mounting height of bracket arms shall be as shown on the approved drawings .
The bracket arm shall be mounted perpendicular to the centerline of roadway unless otherwise specified .
The bracket arm shall be provided with a inch slipfit mounting of sufficient length to accommodate the luminaire .
All welds shall conform to the requirements of Subsection .. No field welds shall be allowed. . LUMINAIRE .
Luminaires shall meet the requirements of the current Vermont Agency of Transportation Lighting Design Guide unless otherwise specified in the Plans. . STREET LIGHT ASSEMBLY .
Street light assemblies shall be installed as shown in the Contract Documents and shall include the following a Light Pole Foundation .
Light pole foundations shall be installed as shown in the Contract Documents .
Excavation and backfill shall be in accordance with Section .
b Transformer Bases .
Transformer bases shall be installed on light pole foundations as shown in the Contract Documents .
The bottom plate of the transformer base shall have a grounding bolt and nut easily accessible from the transformer base door .
Transformer bases and all wiring contained in the transformer bases shall meet the requirements of the current AASHTO Standard Specifications for Structural Supports for Highway Signs Luminaires and Traffic Signals for breakaway features .
c Light Poles .
Light poles shall be mounted on transformer bases as shown in the Contract Documents .
The anchor base shall be attached to the pole shaft by two continuous welds one inside the base at the end of the shaft and the other on the outside at the top of the anchor base .
All welds shall conform to the requirements of Subsection .. No field welding shall be allowed .
Light poles shall be plumb and level .
A inch inch handhole complete with cover and hardware shall be located approximately inches above the top of the transformer base directly above the transformer base door .
A lip shall be provided around the handhole opening to prevent the cover from tipping and falling inside the hole .
A grounding bolt and nut easily accessible from the handhole shall be located inside the pole shaft .
The pole cap shall be securely held in place .
d Bracket Arms .
Bracket arms shall be as specified herein .
e Luminaires .
Luminaires shall be as specified herein . .
REMOVE STREET LIGHT ASSEMBLY .
The Contactor shall remove the entire street light assembly as identified in the Plans including the light pole foundation transformer base light pole bracket arm luminaire wiring and all other incidentals .
The street light assembly shall become property of the Contractor .
All components of the street light assembly shall be removed from the Project and properly disposed of by the Contractor .
All voids resulting from this work shall be backfilled in accordance with Section . .
REMOVE AND RESET LIGHT POLE .
The Contractor shall remove store and reset the transformer base light pole bracket arm luminaire wiring and other incidentals as shown in the Plans .
All light poles shall be carefully separated from the light pole foundation on which they are mounted .
Light poles shall be completely removed from the light pole foundation transported and stored at locations specified in the Contract Documents or as ordered by the Engineer and reset on the light pole foundation at the original location. . STREET LIGHTING CONTROL DEVICES .
An astronomical clock shall be provided for each wired group of street lights and installed at the power drop stanchion for each group unless otherwise noted in the Plans .
Astronomical clocks shall have twocircuit scheduling at least set points for individual programs for each day of the week be capable of Daylight Saving Time adjustments have a manual override and a power outage backup system with permanent schedule retention and memory module .
All astronomical clocks shall be placed in an enclosure meeting NEMA R Standards and all shall be the same for the Project .
A mix of clocks will not be allowed for new installations. . POWER DROP STANCHION STREET LIGHTING .
Power drop stanchion street lighting shall conform to the requirements of Subsection .. . ELECTRIC WIRING .
All wiring shall be in accordance with the NEC and Section .
All current carrying conductors shall have a fusible disconnect in the base of each light pole accessible from the hand hole or breakaway base .
Conductors shall not have any unnecessary kinks or bends .
End caps when necessary of the appropriate size for the service conductors shall be installed at all termination points in pull boxes junction boxes and pole bases . .
FINISH .
All transformer bases light poles bracket arms and luminaires shall have either a powder coating or anodized aluminum finish .
All finishes shall be factoryapplied finishes .
Anodized aluminum coatings shall have a minimum coating thickness of .
mil .
Powder coatings shall be a thermosetting material with a minimum film thickness of .
mils .
The powder coating process shall have pretreatment steps that ensure complete cleaning and adherence of the coating materials including at least the following steps hot alkaline wash rinse hot phosphoric acid etching and final rinse .
It shall be free of blisters cracks stains and similar defects . .
ACCEPTANCE .
Acceptance of street lighting systems shall be based on the following conditions a Prior to acceptance of the street lighting system the system shall successfully complete a test period .
The street lighting systems shall be completely operable and energized for consecutive Calendar Days without any defects in the system for successful completion of the test period .
All required adjustments to the street lighting control device if required shall be completed to the satisfaction of the Engineer prior to acceptance .
b The Contractor shall be responsible for all power costs through Project acceptance . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT .
The quantity of Bracket Arm to be measured for payment will be the number of each bracket arm installed in the complete and accepted work .
The quantity of Luminaire to be measured for payment will be the number of each luminaire installed in the complete and accepted work .
The quantity of Street Light Assembly to be measured for payment will be the number of each Street Light Assembly installed in the complete and accepted work .
The quantity of Remove Street Light Assembly to be measured for payment will be the number of each Street Light Assembly removed in the complete and accepted work .
The quantity of Remove and Reset Light Pole to be measured for payment will be the number of each Salvaged Light Pole removed stored and erected in the complete and accepted work .
The quantity for Street Lighting Control Device to be measured for payment will be the number of each Street Lighting Control Device installed in the complete and accepted work .
The accepted quantity of Power Drop Stanchion Street Lighting to be measured for payment will be the number of each stanchion installed in the complete and accepted work . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT .
Street lighting item prices shall be full compensation for furnishing transporting handling and placing the materials specified .
When a Power Drop Stanchion Street Lighting is not a Contract Item connections to the power source circuit testing and the furnishing of all labor tools equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work will be incidental to other items .
The accepted quantity of Bracket Arm shall be full compensation for the bracket arm wiring within the bracket arm hardware required to mount the bracket are to light pole and other incidentals as necessary to complete the work .
Bracket arm shall be paid for at the Contract Unit Price for each .
The accepted quantity of Luminaire shall be full compensation for the luminaire housing ballasts lamps photoelectric control device and other incidentals as necessary to complete the work .
Luminaire shall be paid for at the Contract Unit Price for each .
The accepted quantity of Street Light Assembly shall be full compensation for the light pole foundation transformer base light pole bracket arm luminaire wiring within the Street Light Assembly and other incidentals as necessary to complete the work .
Street Light Assembly shall be paid for at the Contract Unit Price for each .
The accepted quantity of Remove Street Light Assembly shall be full compensation for removing and disposing a street light assembly including light pole foundation transformer base light pole bracket arm luminaire wiring and other incidentals .
Remove Street Light Assembly shall be paid for at the Contract Unit Price for each .
The accepted quantity of Remove and Reset Light Pole shall be full compensation for removing storing and installing a salvaged light pole including transformer base light pole bracket arm luminaire wiring and other incidentals as necessary to complete the work .
Remove and Reset Salvaged Light Pole shall be paid for at the Contract Unit Price for each .
The accepted quantity of Street Lighting Control Device shall be full compensation for installing a fully functional Street Lighting Control Device at the Contract Unit Price for each .
The accepted quantity of Power Drop Stanchion Street Lighting shall be full compensation for all work materials and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
Power Drop Stanchion Street Lighting shall be paid for at the Contract Unit Price for each .
Circuit testing and connections to power sources will not be paid for separately but will be considered incidental to the Contract Items that include the costs of wiring .
The cost of furnishing and installing electrical conduit wired conduit electrical wiring electrical conduit sleeve pull boxes and junction boxes when not covered under the Section shall be considered incidental to items in this Section .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Remove Street Light Assembly Each .
Remove and Reset Light Pole Each .
Street Light Assembly Each .
Bracket Arm Each .
Luminaire Each .
Street Lighting Control Device Each .
Power Drop Stanchion Street Lighting Each SECTION TRAVEL INFORMATION SIGNS .
DESCRIPTION .
This work shall consist of furnishing erecting and maintaining travel information signs and information plazas. . MATERIALS .
Materials shall meet the requirements of the following Subsections Aggregate for Bituminous Surface Treatment .
Paint for Traffic Signs .
Structural Timber and Lumber .
Nonstructural Lumber .
Timber Preservative .
Signs Posts .
Retroreflective Sheeting .
Plastic Lettering Film .
Assembly Hardware .
All materials shall be in conformance with the requirements of the State of Vermont Travel Information Council .
The colors used for specific signs symbols and plaques shall be as shown on the Plans and shall provide an acceptable match to the appropriate color chip in SAE AMSSTDB as specified in Table .A .
TABLE .A SIGN COLORS Color Black White Magenta Brown Orange Gray Chip No .
The color of retroreflective material shall be SilverWhite .
Concrete shall conform to the requirements of Section for Concrete Class B. . PLANS .
Plans for travel information signs associated components and work required will consist of assembly drawings of information plazas Standard Drawings location and site plan and order forms detailing the work to be performed at each specified location. . SIGN POSTS .
The installation of steel and aluminum sign posts shall conform to the requirements of Section .
Posts shall be set to the depth shown on the Plans. . SIGNS .
Travel and business information signs shall be prepared and installed according to the requirements of Section except as modified by this Subsection .
All lettering mileage numerals and directional arrows shall be formed from retroreflective sheeting .
Basic travel information symbols for use on sign boards carrying only travel information symbols shall be reflectorized either by silkscreening the background color on retroreflective sheeting or by applying reflective symbols on acrylic material of the appropriate color .
All other travel information symbols and background material shall be nonreflectorized and shall be of the colors shown on the Plans .
Commercial logos furnished by others will be applied to certain signs as shown on the Plans. . INFORMATION PLAZAS .
Information plazas shall be constructed at locations shown on the Plans or directed by the Engineer .
The information plaza shall be constructed from materials shown on the Plans and shall be erected as shown on the Plans .
The plazas shall also be erected in conformance with the Application for Official Business Directional Signs OBDS found on the Agencys website .
The area in which the information plaza is erected shall be reasonably level and unobstructed to provide for easy circulation by pedestrians .
In areas subject to vehicular traffic an foot length of curbing shall be installed parallel to the axis of the structure for the separation of vehicular and pedestrian traffic .
Pedestrian traffic areas shall be excavated and surfaced with inches of peastone .
The relocation of an existing information plaza shall consist of removing the information plaza from its present location and reinstalling it on new posts or concrete bases at the location specified .
The reinstallation shall be made as shown on the Plans and shall include the necessary electrical connections grading and curb installation if necessary .
Removal and disposal of the original mounting posts and curb if any and any necessary cleanup of the original site shall also be included in the relocation item .
An information plaza that is damaged during its removal and resetting due to negligence on the part of the Contractor shall be repaired or components replaced by the Contractor at no additional cost to the Agency .
If lighting is called for the plazas shall be lighted during the hours of darkness under the control of a suitably designed photoelectric device .
Information plaza lighting and electrical circuitry shall be as shown on the Plans .
All electrical materials and installation methods shall conform to the provisions of the National Electrical Code and all electrical work shall be in accordance with State and local regulations . .
MAGNETIC PLAZA INFORMATION PLAQUES .
When indicated in the Contract the Contractor shall furnish magnetic plaques of the sizes and types indicated on the order form complete with the legend provided on the order form .
Plaques shall have space reserved for the application of a commercial logo to be furnished by others .
The plaques shall be installed by others .
The graphics shall be white on a square panel of magnetic vinyl in the color specified .
Graphics shall be on plaques inches square with point lettering for headings point lettering for text and logos inches square . .
SYMBOLS .
When called for in the Contract the Contractor shall furnish travel information symbols as ordered by the Engineer .
The symbols shall consist of a selfadhesive acrylic background with the appropriate symbol superimposed all of the size and color specified .
The symbols shall be installed by others . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT .
The quantity of Travel Information Sign and Business Directional Sign to be measured for payment will be the number of square feet of signs installed in the complete and accepted work .
The quantity of Travel Information Plaza or Relocate Information Plaza to be measured for payment will be the number of each plaza installed or relocated in the complete and accepted work .
The quantity of Magnetic Information Plaque of the type specified Travel Information Symbol or Overlay for Travel Information Signs will be measured for payment as the number of plaques symbols and overlays furnished in the complete and accepted work . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT .
The accepted quantity of Travel Information Sign and Business Directional Sign will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per square foot .
Payment will include furnishing the sign complete with letter and symbol text and installing the sign as part of a unit at the location specified .
Sign posts for Travel Information Signs will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price for the appropriate Contract Item for sign posts under Section .
The accepted quantity of Travel Information Plaza will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per each .
Payment will include excavation preparation and grading of the area furnishing and placing backfill material furnishing and placing protective curb where required and the information plaza complete with electrical service .
The accepted quantity of Relocate Information Plaza will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per each .
Payment will include disassembly of the plaza disposal of the original posts cleanup of the original area and reinstallation of the plaza on new posts or base at the location specified complete with prepared graded and curbed area and electrical service .
The accepted quantity of Inch Magnetic Information Plaque and Travel Information Symbol will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per each .
Payment will be full compensation for furnishing the materials specified with the required text or symbols superimposed .
The accepted quantity of Overlay for Travel Information Sign will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per each .
Payment will include furnishing the acrylic background of the color specified placing the required text on the background and installation of the overlay on the sign panel at the location specified .
Payment for the above Contract Unit Prices will be full compensation for performing the work specified and for furnishing all labor materials tools equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Travel Information Sign Square Foot .
Business Directional Sign Square Foot .
Travel Information Plaza Each .
Relocate Information Plaza Each .
Inch Magnetic Information Plaque Each .
Travel Information Symbol Each .
Overlay for Travel Information Sign Each SECTION THIS SECTION RESERVED SECTION THIS SECTION RESERVED SECTION THIS SECTION RESERVED SECTION THIS SECTION RESERVED SECTION THIS SECTION RESERVED DIVISION MATERIALS SECTION GENERAL .
GENERAL STATEMENT .
Where the Contract requires that materials conform to the requirements of AASHTO ASTM or other Specifications the latest publications and all modifications thereto in effect on the date of the Invitation for Bids shall apply .
Materials shall be accepted in accordance with the Agencys Quality Assurance Program and the Materials Sampling Manual .
Whenever there is a Subsection entitled General Requirements within any Division Section the requirements of that Subsection are applicable to all other Subsections in that Section . .
THIS SUBSECTION RESERVED. . APPROVED PRODUCTS .
The Approved Products List APL is a listing of products and materials that have been tested andor evaluated by the Agency and have been deemed satisfactory for use on Agency Projects .
Materials required to be on the APL do not have certification requirements therefore material substitutions are not allowed .
The Agency reserves the right to remove any product from the APL at any time . .
DEFINITION OF TERMS .
ADVANCED DECAY In the case of wood the older stage of decay in which the disintegration is readily recognized because the wood has become punky soft and spongy .
BEDROCK LEDGE Rock of relatively great thickness and extent in its native location any solid rock exposed at the surface of the earth or overlain by unconsolidated material .
BITUMINOUS MATERIAL A substance which is characterized by the presence of bitumen or one from which bitumen can be derived .
BOULDER A rock fragment usually rounded by weathering or abrasion with an average dimension of inches or more .
CAPILLARY ACTION CAPILLARITY The rise or movement of water in the interstices of a soil due to capillary forces .
CHECK In the case of wood a separation of the wood grain due to internal stresses caused by severe moisture cycling .
CLAY CLAY SOIL Finegrained soil or the finegrained portion of soil that can be made to exhibit plasticity puttylike properties within a range of water contents and that exhibits considerable strength when airdried .
COBBLE COBBLESTONE A rock fragment usually rounded or semirounded with an average dimension between and inches .
COHESIONLESS SOIL A soil that when unconfined has little or no strength when airdried and that has little or no cohesion when submerged .
COHESIVE SOIL A soil that when unconfined has considerable strength when airdried and that has significant cohesion when submerged .
COMPACTION Densification by means of mechanical manipulation .
COMPACTION CURVE PROCTOR CURVE MOISTUREDENSITY CURVE The curve on a graph that shows the relationship between the dry density and the water content of a soil for a given compactive effort .
COMPACTION TEST MOISTUREDENSITY TEST A Laboratory procedure whereby a soil at a known water content is placed in a specified manner into a mold of given dimensions subjected to a compactive effort of controlled magnitude and the resulting unit mass weight determined .
COMPRESSIVE STRENGTH The maximum compressive stress that a material is capable of sustaining .
CONSOLIDATION Gradual reduction in volume of a soil mass .
CRUSHED GRAVEL The product resulting from the mechanical crushing of gravel and cobblestones .
CRUSHED STONE The product resulting from the mechanical crushing of blasted ledge rocks boulders or cobblestones .
DENSITY The density of a soil is measured in terms of the ratio of its mass weight per unit volume and usually expressed as pounds of wet soil or dry soil per cubic foot kilograms per cubic meter .
These ratios are designated as wet density and dry density respectively .
DRYING TIME Drying times are based on the following criteria a Set to Touch .
Film is set to touch when it still exhibits a tacky condition but none of it adheres to the finger .
b Dry to Recoat .
Film is dry to recoat when the top coat can be applied without the development of film irregularities such as lifting or loss of adhesion of the undercoat .
c Dry Through Dry to Handle .
Film is dry through when there is no loosening detachment wrinkling or other distortion of film under condition of test .
Test conditions require full thumb pressure with twisting action .
ELONGATED PIECE One in which the ratio of the length to width of its circumscribing rectangular prism is greater than five .
ELONGATION The increase in gauge length of a tension test specimen usually expressed as a percentage of the original gauge length .
FAMILY OF CURVES A group of similar moisturedensity curves assuming a characteristic shape .
FILTER PROTECTIVE FILTER A layer or combination of layers of pervious materials designed and installed in such a manner as to provide drainage yet prevent the movement of soil particles due to flowing water .
FINENESS MODULUS An empirical factor obtained by adding the total percentages of a sample of the aggregate retained on each of a specified series of sieves and dividing the sum by .
FINES Portion of a material finer than a No. . mm sieve .
FLY ASH Finely divided residue that results from the combustion of ground or powdered coal .
FRACTURED FACES Faces on aggregate pieces with sharp and welldefined edges .
FREEZING DEGREEDAYS The difference between the average temperature each day and F. Freezing degreedays are positive for daily average temperatures above F and negative for those below .
FREEZING INDEX The number of freezing degreedays between the highest and lowest points on the cumulative freezing degreedaystime curve for one freezing season .
GAUGE LENGTH The original length of that portion of the specimen over which strain or change of length is determined .
GLACIAL TILL TILL Material deposited by glaciation usually composed of a wide range of particle sizes which has not been subjected to the sorting action of water .
GRADATION GRAINSIZE DISTRIBUTION SOIL TEXTURE Proportion of material of each grain size present in a given material .
GRAINSIZE ANALYSIS MECHANICAL ANALYSIS The process of determining gradation .
GRAVEL AASHTO Rounded or semirounded particles of rock that will pass a inch .
mm sieve and be retained on a No. . mm sieve .
HARDNESS The resistance of a material to deformation particularly permanent deformation indentation or scratching .
HARDPAN Extremely dense cemented soil which does not soften when wet .
HEAVE Upward movement of soil caused by expansion or displacement resulting from phenomena such as moisture absorption removal of overburden driving of piles and frost action .
INCIPIENT DECAY The early stage of decay that has not proceeded far enough to soften or otherwise perceptibly impair the hardness of wood .
LIQUID LIMIT The water content corresponding to the arbitrary limit between the liquid and plastic states of soil .
LOAM A mixture of sand silt or clay or a combination of any of these with organic matter .
It is sometimes called topsoil in contrast to the subsoils that contain little or no organic matter .
MANUFACTURED SAND The product resulting from the mechanical processing and crushing of gravel or cobbles in which at least of the material passing the No. . mm sieve has two fractured faces as determined by ASTM C C M as modified by the Agencys Materials Section .
MODULUS OF RUPTURE IN BENDING The value of maximum tensile or compressive stress whichever causes failure in the extreme fiber of a beam loaded to failure in bending .
MOISTURE CONTENT WATER CONTENT The ratio expressed as a percentage of the mass weight of water in a given material to the mass weight of solid particles .
MUCK A soil of very soft consistency containing greater than organic matter .
MUD A mixture of soil and water in a fluid or weakly solid state .
NATURAL SAND Any sand that is found to exist in a natural deposit .
OPTIMUM MOISTURE CONTENT OPTIMUM WATER CONTENT The water content at which a soil can be compacted to the maximum dry density by a given compactive effort .
PEAT A fibrous mass of organic matter in various stages of decomposition generally dark brown to black in color and of spongy consistency .
PERCENT COMPACTION The ratio expressed as a percentage of dry density of a soil to maximum density obtained in a Laboratory compaction test .
PERMEABILITY The property of a soil allowing it to transmit water largely dependent upon the size and number of continuous soil pores .
pH An index of the acidity or alkalinity of a soil where seven is neutral below seven is acidic and above seven is alkaline .
PLASTICITY INDEX Numerical difference between the liquid limit and the plastic limit .
PLASTIC LIMIT The water content corresponding to an arbitrary limit between the plastic and the semisolid states of consistency of soil .
POZZOLANS Siliceous or siliceous and aluminous materials which in themselves possess little or no cementitious value but will in finely divided form and in the presence of moisture chemically react with calcium hydroxide at ordinary temperatures to form compounds possessing cementitious properties .
PVC Polyvinyl chloride a plastic polymer .
SAMPLING The process of selecting a fraction of a total material that is similar in all respects to the total material .
SACK A standard unit of dry powder cement with a mass weight of pounds .
SAND AASHTO Particles of rock that will pass the No. . mm sieve and be retained on the No. . mm sieve .
SCREENED SAND The product resulting from the mechanical screening of natural sands or gravels .
SDS Safety Data Sheet as required by OSHA .
Note SDS Replaced MSDS in .
SILICA FUME An extremely fine product of high amorphous silica content resulting from the condensation of rising vapor given off in the manufacture of ferrosilicon and metallic silicon in high temperature electric arc furnaces .
This material is also referred to as microsilica .
SILT Material passing the No. . mm sieve that is nonplastic or very slightly plastic and that exhibits little or no strength when airdry .
STONE SCREENINGS The product resulting exclusively from the mechanical crushing of quarried bedrock .
TENSILE STRENGTH The maximum tensile stress that a material is capable of sustaining .
THIN PIECE One for which the ratio of the width to thickness of its circumscribing rectangular prism is greater than five to one .
THIN AND ELONGATED PIECES One in which the ratio of the length to the thickness of its circumscribed rectangular prism is greater than five to one .
WANE Bark or lack of wood on the surface or edges of lumber .
YIELD STRENGTH The stress at which a material exhibits a specified limiting deviation from the proportionality of stress to strain .
SECTION HYDRAULIC CEMENT .
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS .
Hydraulic cement shall meet the following general requirements .
The Contractor shall provide suitable means for storing and protecting the cement against dampness .
Cement which for any reason has become partially set or which contains lumps or is caked shall be rejected .
The mixing of different brands or types of Portland cement and the mixing of Portland cement of the same brand or types from different mills will not be permitted except by written permission of the Engineer .
Cement used in Subsection .
Subsection .
Subsection .
and Subsection .
shall conform to the requirements of Subsection .
or Subsection .. . PORTLAND CEMENT .
Portland cement shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M Type II and ASTM C C M Type II unless otherwise shown on the Plans or directed by the Engineer. . HIGH EARLYSTRENGTH PORTLAND CEMENT .
High earlystrength Portland cement shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M Type III and ASTM C C M Type III. . PORTLANDPOZZOLAN CEMENT .
Portlandpozzolan cement Type IP shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M MM and ASTM C C M except that the pozzolan constituent shall not be less than of the total mass weight of the Portlandpozzolan cement . .
THIS SUBSECTION RESERVED. . PORTLAND BLASTFURNACE SLAG CEMENT .
Portland blastfurnace slag cement Type IS shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M MM and ASTM C C M except that for concrete mixes complying with Table .A the slag constituent shall not be less than of the total mass weight of the Portland blastfurnace slag cement. . TERNARY BLENDED CEMENT .
Ternary blended cement Type IT shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M MM and ASTM C C M. SECTION BITUMINOUS MATERIALS .
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS .
Bituminous materials shall meet the following general requirements .
a Sampling .
Bituminous materials shall be sampled at the delivery point from vehicle tanks above ground stationary tanks or asphalt plant feed lines in a manner that the samples will show the true nature and condition of the materials .
b Sampling Valves .
Sampling valves shall be installed in strategic locations readily accessible so that representative samples of the required size can be obtained easily and quickly .
The sampling valve shall be constructed of materials compatible with the product at the temperatures handled .
The valve seat shall be either inside the tank or compartment or inside the insulating jacket .
The flow shall be over a route that is as short and direct as practical .
Pockets that will retain product will not be allowed .
The outlet shall be a inch pipe size .
The outlet shall be provided with a chained cap or plug .
The sampling valves shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO R . c Location of Sampling Valves .
The recommended location and number of sampling valves needed is as follows Vehicle Tanks .
Sampling valves on vehicle tanks shall be located below the horizontal mid line of the end head rear preferred at least inches from the shell .
The inlet to the sampling valve shall be at least inches from walls or other internal surfaces except that it shall be at least inches from any heating surface .
Horizontal Tanks .
Sampling valves on horizontal tanks shall be located below the horizontal midline of an end bulkhead .
The inlet of the sampling device shall be at least feet from the bottom and inches from the shell .
Vertical Tanks .
On vertical tanks where the contents can be agitated one sampling device shall be required .
It shall be located on the side at least inches from the bottom .
On vertical tanks in which the contents are not capable of being agitated two sampling devices shall be required .
They shall be located with easy and safe access provided on the side of the tank with one no closer than inches from the top and the other no closer than inches from the bottom .
Asphalt Plant Feed Lines .
Sampling valves for asphalt plant feed lines should be located downstream of all additive lines preferably on a horizontal feed line and be inches to inches above the surface .
Note All sampling valves should be protected from inclement weather so as not to spray hot liquid or introduce moisture into tanks or lines .
d Defective Sampling Valves .
When there is an apparent defect in the sampling valve and a sample can not be obtained as indicated the following procedure shall be used The sample shall be taken directly from the tank through the inspection access port or an alternate valve .
A defective equipment tag shall be filled out and attached to the valve and the plant manager or carrier shall be notified .
A notation shall be made in the plant log or Engineers daily report giving location of valve date storage tank vehicle tank or the asphalt plant number .
The plant manager or carrier shall make the necessary repairs within hours from the time notification is given .
If at the end of the repair period the plant or tank valve is still found to be defective the plant shall be shut down and not started again until repairs are made and inspected to the satisfaction of the Plant Engineer .
Should the tanker return on a second trip and the defective tanker valve not be repaired the load shall not be used but shall be returned to the sender. . PERFORMANCEGRADED ASPHALT BINDER PREPARED FROM PETROLEUM .
a Properties .
Performancegraded asphalt binder PGB shall be homogenous uniformly mixed and blended liquid bituminous materials that are free of contaminants such as water fuel oils or other solvents and shall not foam when heated to ºF ºC .
PGB shall be asphalt prepared solely by the refining of crude petroleum and shall meet the requirements of AASHTO M from facilities compliant with the requirements of AASHTO R with the addition of SBS polymer modifiers .
The performancegraded asphalt binder manufacturersupplier shall furnish to the Agency a Certificate of Analysis COA and bill of lading representing each delivery in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO R . The COA must also indicate the binders specific gravity rotational viscosity and the mixing and compaction viscositytemperature chart for each shipment .
If additives are used for the modification of asphalt preapproval is required .
The addition of any material not normally obtained during the initial refining process shall constitute modified asphalt and shall be labeled appropriately .
The performancegraded asphalt binder shall be manufactured in accordance with the approved Quality Control Plan .
The manufacturer shall remain in compliance with the plan including all notifications sampling testing and reporting requirements .
b Effect of Approval .
VTrans reserves its right to remove its approval of any PGB lot if in the sole discretion of the Agency such approval was based on a material nondisclosure by the PGB supplier .
c Pretest .
Failure of performancegraded asphalt binder from any one source to meet the Specifications may require placing this source on Pretest Status .
This will require that samples from the source be tested in the Agencys Materials Section Central Laboratory and accepted prior to being used on a Project .
The Pretest Status will remain in effect for three consecutive samples meeting the requirements of AASHTO M or until the Engineer is satisfied there is no longer any reason to continue the Pretest Status. . EMULSIFIED ASPHALT .
Emulsified asphalt shall meet the following requirements .
a General .
Emulsified asphalt shall be homogeneous .
It shall show no separation of asphalt at the time of use and shall be used within calendar days after delivery from the manufacturersupplier .
Emulsified asphalt shall not be allowed to freeze .
b Properties .
Emulsified asphalt shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M or AASHTO M as appropriate .
c PolymerModified Emulsified Asphalt .
Polymermodified emulsified asphalt shall meet the requirements of AASHTO M . The polymer modification of the emulsified asphalt shall be performed when it is manufactured . .
THIS SUBSECTION RESERVED . .
APPLICATION TEMPERATURE RANGES .
Bituminous materials for the applications specified in the Specifications shall be applied within the temperature ranges designated in Table .A .
TABLE .A EMULSIFIED ASPHALT APPLICATION TEMPERATURE RANGES Emulsified Asphalt Type Temperature Range F Temperature Range C Spray Mix Spray Mix Min .
Max Min .
Max Min .
Max .
Min .
Max .
RS RS CRS CRS SSh CSSh MSh CMSh .
ANTISTRIP ADDITIVES .
Antistrip additives shall be capable of improving the bonding properties of the cutback asphalt or the performancegraded asphalt binder to the aggregates in the presence of moisture and shall also be capable of reducing film stripping .
a PerformanceGraded Asphalt Binder .
The additive used in performancegraded asphalt binder shall be heat stable for all temperature ranges prescribed for such performancegraded asphalt binder .
The additive shall not alter the material properties nor change the grade of the performancegraded asphalt binder when added in the recommended proportions .
The additive shall be capable of thorough dispersion in the performancegraded asphalt binder and capable of remaining in the performancegraded asphalt binder in storage and at temperatures specified for the mix without losing its effectiveness .
b Testing Procedures .
Testing of antistrip additives shall be in accordance with and meet the requirements of Vermont Agency of Transportation Test Procedures MRD and MRD .
The percentage of antistrip additive shall be a minimum of .
of the asphalt content and shall be adjusted as required above this amount to meet testing requirements .
Prior to the use of any anti strip additive the Contractor shall submit for testing and approval samples of the specific aggregates the specific asphalt and the specific antistrip additive proposed for the mix design .
To identify any change in effectiveness the asphalt and the antistrip additive being used shall be tested daily to verify that they pass the requirements of Test Procedure MRD. . SILICONE ADDITIVES .
Silicone additives shall be a silicone material of the dimethylpolysiloxane type with a viscosity grading of centistokes at F. It shall be added to the liquid performance graded asphalt binder at hot mix plants in amounts not to exceed five parts per million .
After addition of the silicone additive the performancegraded asphalt binder shall be thoroughly mixed by mechanical means to ensure complete dispersal .
SECTION SOILS AND BORROW MATERIALS .
CLASSIFICATION OF SOILS .
Based upon their field performance soils shall be classified into seven groups that are designated as A A A A A A and A .
This classification shall be based upon the results of tests made in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO M as designated in Table .A .
TABLE .A CLASSIFICATION OF SOILS General Classification Granular Materials SiltClay Materials Group Classification Aa Ab A A A A A A A A A A Percentage by Mass Weight Passing Square Mesh Sieves No. . mm No. . mm No. . mm Characteristics of the Fraction Passing the No. . mm Sieve Liquid Limit Plasticity Index NP Usual Types of Soil Gravel and Sand Fine Sand Silty or Clayey Gravel and Sand Silty Soils Clay Soils indicates maximum allowable value indicates minimum allowable value NP indicates nonplastic The plasticity index of the A Subgroup is equal to or less than the liquid limit minus The plasticity index of the A Subgroup is greater than the liquid limit minus Begin the classification procedure by taking the required data and proceeding from left to right in Table .A .
The correct group will be found by the process of elimination .
The first group from the left into which the test data will fit is the correct classification .
Where the Unified Soil Classification System USCS is referenced in the Contract it shall be based on the Soil Classification Chart in ASTM D . . EARTH BORROW .
Earth borrow shall be material of a quality approved by the Agency as meeting the requirements for the particular embankment backfill or other use for which the material is intended and shall show evidence of satisfactory compaction when placed in embankments .
The natural moisture content shall be less than the Laboratory optimum moisture content as determined in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO T Method C. .
SAND BORROW AND CUSHION .
Sand borrow and sand cushion shall consist of material reasonably free from silt loam clay or organic matter .
It shall be obtained from approved sources and shall meet the requirements of Table .A as determined in accordance with AASHTO T . TABLE .A GRADATION OF SAND BORROW AND CUSHION Sieve Designation Percentage by Mass Weight Passing Square Mesh Sieves inch .
mm inch .
mm inch .
mm No. . mm No. . mm No. . mm .
GRANULAR BORROW .
Granular borrow shall be obtained from approved sources consisting of stone and sand reasonably free from loam silt clay and organic material and shall meet the requirements of Table .A as determined in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO T . TABLE .A GRADATION OF GRANULAR BORROW Sieve Designation Percentage by Mass Weight Passing Square Mesh Sieves No. . mm No. . mm The maximum size of stone particles in the granular borrow shall not exceed of the thickness of the layer being spread. . ROCK BORROW .
Rock borrow shall consist of blasted rock broken into various sizes that will form a compact embankment with a minimum of voids .
The maximum size shall be inches in its widest dimension and that size which may be incorporated in a inch layer of rock embankment .
SECTION AGGREGATES .
FINE AGGREGATE FOR CONCRETE .
Fine aggregate for concrete shall consist of natural sand manufactured sand or stone screenings washed in an approved manner or a combination thereof .
Fine aggregate shall consist of clean hard durable grains uniformly graded from coarse to fine and shall be free from detrimental amounts of organic matter or other harmful substances .
a Grading .
Fine aggregate for concrete shall meet the gradation requirements of Table .A as determined in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO T with the exception that when the material is being tested in a producers Laboratory the AASHTO T requirement to perform testing conforming to the requirements of AASHTO T on the material passing the No. . mm sieve is waived and the material reported as passing the No. . mm sieve is obtained by dry sieving methods only .
TABLE .A GRADATION OF FINE AGGREGATE FOR CONCRETE Sieve Designation Percentage by Mass Weight Passing Square Mesh Sieves inch .
mm No. . mm No. . mm No. . mm No. . mm No. . mm The fineness modulus on that portion of material passing the inch .
mm sieve shall be determined by Laboratory sieve tests .
This fineness modulus is defined as the summation of the percentages of sand retained on the following sieve sizes No. . mm No. . mm No. . mm No. . mm No. . mm and No. . mm divided by .
The minimum and maximum fineness moduli shall be .
and .
respectively .
Fine aggregate from any one source for any one designated mix having a variation in fineness modulus greater than .
from the fineness modulus of a representative sample proposed for use may be rejected .
b Organic Impurities .
Fine aggregate for concrete shall show a color of not greater than two as determined in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO T MT .
c Compressive Strength of Mortar .
When sand or a combination of stone screenings and sand is mixed with Portland cement in the proportion of one part of cement to three parts of sand or of the combination of stone screenings and sand by mass weight according to the standard method of making inch mm cubes the resulting mortar at the ages of and days shall have a compressive strength of at least of that developed in the same time by mortar of the same proportions and flow made of the same cement and graded Ottawa Sand when tested in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO T MT .
d Soundness .
When there is any question of either soft or laminated pieces being detrimental to any aggregate a soundness test shall be performed on the aggregate in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO T . The weighted average percentage of loss shall be not more than by mass weight when subjected to five cycles of the sodium sulfate soundness test .
e AlkaliSilica Reaction ASR .
Fine aggregate shall be tested for AlkaliSilica Reaction ASR in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO T . . COARSE AGGREGATE FOR CONCRETE .
Coarse aggregate for concrete shall consist of clean hard crushed stone or washed crushed gravel uniformly graded .
The blending of crushed stone and crushed gravel in the stockpile shall not be permitted .
It shall be free from deleterious material and pieces that are structurally weak and when proportioned in concrete shall not adversely affect the structural integrity or durability of the concrete when subjected to freezing and thawing .
It shall also meet the following requirements a Grading .
Coarse aggregate for concrete shall meet the gradation requirements of Table .A Table .B or Table .C as determined in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO T with the exception that when the material is being tested in a producers Laboratory the AASHTO T requirement to perform testing conforming to the requirements of AASHTO T on the material passing the No. . mm sieve is waived and the material reported as passing the No. . mm sieve is obtained by dry sieving methods only .
TABLE .A GRADATION OF INCH STONE Sieve Designation Percentage by Mass Weight Passing Square Mesh Sieves inch .
mm inch .
mm No. . mm No. . mm No. . mm TABLE .B GRADATION OF INCH STONE Sieve Designation Percentage by Mass Weight Passing Square Mesh Sieves inch .
mm inch .
mm inch .
mm No. . mm No. . mm TABLE .C GRADATION OF INCH STONE Sieve Designation Percentage by Mass Weight Passing Square Mesh Sieves inch .
mm inch .
mm inch .
mm inch .
mm No. . mm b Percent of Wear .
When the coarse aggregate is composed of crushed stone or crushed gravel the percent of wear of the aggregate shall not be more than when tested in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO T . When the coarse aggregate is composed of crushed igneous rock the percent of wear of the aggregate shall not be more than when tested in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO T . c Fractured Faces .
When crushed gravel is used as coarse aggregate at least by mass weight of the material coarser than the No. . mm sieve from each stockpile shall have at least one fractured face in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO T . d Thin andor Elongated Pieces .
Not more than by mass weight of the material coarser than the No. . mm sieve from each stockpile shall consist of thin andor elongated pieces in accordance with the requirements of ASTM D . e Soundness .
Soundness shall meet the requirements of Subsection .d .
f Aggregate Failure .
Coarse aggregate that fractures when used in a test cylinder at a compressive strength less than the minimum compressive strength of the class of concrete tested may be subject to suspension of aggregate source approval .
g FreezeThaw .
Coarse aggregate shall be tested for freezethaw resistance in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO T except as modified to use sodium chloride solution and excess weight loss of more than to constitute a failure .
h AlkaliSilica Reaction ASR .
Coarse aggregate shall be tested for AlkaliSilica Reaction ASR in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO T . .
THIS SUBSECTION RESERVED. . GRAVEL FOR SUBBASE .
Gravel for Subbase shall consist of material reasonably free from silt loam clay and organic matter .
It shall be obtained from approved sources and shall meet the following requirements a Grading .
Gravel for Subbase shall meet the gradation requirements of Table .A as determined in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO T and AASHTO T . TABLE .A GRADATION OF GRAVEL FOR SUBBASE Sieve Designation Percentage by Mass Weight Passing Square Mesh Sieves No. . mm No. . mm No. . mm The gravel shall be uniformly graded from coarse to fine .
The maximum size stone particles shall not exceed of the thickness of the layer being placed .
b Percent of Wear .
Percent of wear shall not be more than when tested in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO T . .
CRUSHED GRAVEL FOR SUBBASE .
Crushed Gravel for Subbase shall be produced from natural gravels or crushed quarried rock and shall be a material reasonably free from silt loam clay or organic matter .
It shall be obtained from approved sources and shall meet the following requirements a Grading .
Crushed Gravel for Subbase shall be uniformly graded from coarse to fine and shall meet the gradation requirements of Table .A or Table .B as determined in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO T and AASHTO T . TABLE .A GRADATION OF SUBBASE OF CRUSHED GRAVEL COARSE GRADED Sieve Designation Percentage by Mass Weight Passing Square Mesh Sieves inch mm No. . mm No. . mm No. . mm TABLE .B GRADATION OF SUBBASE OF CRUSHED GRAVEL FINE GRADED Sieve Designation Percentage by Mass Weight Passing Square Mesh Sieves inch .
mm inch .
mm No. . mm No. . mm No. . mm b Percent of Wear .
Percent of wear shall not be more than when tested in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO T . c Fractured Faces .
At least by mass weight of the material coarser than the No. . mm sieve shall have at least one fractured face in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO T . .
DENSE GRADED CRUSHED STONE FOR SUBBASE .
Dense graded Crushed Stone for Subbase shall consist of clean hard uniformly graded crushed stone .
It shall be sufficiently free from dirt deleterious material and pieces that are structurally weak and shall meet the following requirements a Source .
This material shall be obtained from approved sources .
The area from which this material is obtained shall be stripped and cleaned before blasting .
b Grading .
Dense graded Crushed Stone for Subbase shall meet the gradation requirements of Table .A as determined in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO T and AASHTO T . TABLE .A GRADATION OF DENSE GRADED CRUSHED STONE FOR SUBBASE Sieve Designation Percentage by Mass Weight Passing Square Mesh Sieves inch .
mm inch .
mm inch .
mm inch .
mm inch .
mm No. . mm No. . mm c Percent of Wear .
The percent of wear of the crushed stone shall be not more than when tested in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO T . When the aggregate is composed of crushed igneous rock the percent of wear of the crushed stone shall be not more than when tested in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO T . d Thin andor Elongated Pieces .
Not more than by mass weight of the material coarser than the No. . mm sieve shall consist of thin andor elongated pieces in accordance with the requirements of ASTM D . e Filler .
Filler shall be obtained from approved sources and shall consist of clean hard uniform graded crushed stone andor stone screenings produced by the crushing process .
The material shall consist of hard durable particles sufficiently free from dirt organic material structurally weak pieces and other deleterious materials and shall comply with the requirements of Subsection .a Subsection .c and Subsection .d .
Filler material shall meet the gradation requirements of Table .B as determined in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO T and AASHTO T . TABLE .B GRADATION OF FILLER MATERIAL Sieve Designation Percentage by Mass Weight Passing Square Mesh Sieves in .
mm in .
mm No. . mm No. . mm No. . mm .
GRAVEL FILTER FOR SLOPE STABILIZATION .
Gravel filter for slope stabilization shall be obtained from approved sources consisting of stone and sand reasonably free from loam silt clay and organic material and shall meet the requirements of Table .A as determined in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO T . TABLE .A GRADATION OF GRAVEL FILTER FOR SLOPE STABILIZATION Sieve Designation Percentage by Mass Weight Passing Square Mesh Sieves inch .
mm No. . mm No. . mm .
GRANULAR BACKFILL FOR STRUCTURES .
Granular backfill for structures shall be obtained from approved sources .
It shall consist of satisfactorily graded freedraining granular material reasonably free from loam silt clay and organic material .
Granular backfill for structures shall meet the gradation requirements of Table .A as determined in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO T and AASHTO T . TABLE .A GRADATION OF GRANULAR BACKFILL FOR STRUCTURES Sieve Designation Percentage by Mass Weight Passing Square Mesh Sieves inch .
mm No. . mm No. . mm No. . mm .
BACKFILL FOR MUCK EXCAVATION .
Backfill for muck excavation shall consist of granular material or blasted rock broken into various sizes that will form a compact embankment with a minimum of voids .
When granular material is used it shall meet the requirements of Subsection .. .
AGGREGATE FOR BITUMINOUS CONCRETE PAVEMENT .
Aggregate for bituminous concrete pavement shall meet the following requirements a Bituminous Concrete Pavement Aggregates .
Coarse aggregate for bituminous concrete pavement shall consist of clean hard crushed stone crushed gravel or crushed igneous rock and be uniformly graded .
The blending of crushed stone crushed gravel andor crushed igneous rock may be permitted only in the binder course if in the opinion of the Engineer the materials to be blended are equal in quality and are compatible .
All aggregate shall be free from dirt deleterious material and pieces which are structurally weak .
Coarse aggregate shall mean that portion of material coarser than the No. . mm sieve .
Fine aggregate for bituminous concrete pavement shall consist of stone screenings or a combination of stone screenings screened natural sand andor manufactured sands and other fine aggregates such that at least of any individual stockpile of the fine aggregate shall pass a inch .
mm sieve .
Fine aggregate shall mean that portion of material finer than the No. . mm sieve .
Fine aggregate associated with Marshall mix shall have a minimum percentage by weight of the blended material passing the No. . mm sieve that must be stone screenings as shown in Table .B unless otherwise authorized in writing by the Engineer .
Manufactured sand may be substituted for stone screenings when of the material passing the No. . mm sieve has two or more fractured faces as determined in accordance with the requirements of ASTM C C M Modified .
Grading .
a. Coarse Aggregate .
Coarse aggregate shall be furnished in at least three nominal sizes for Mix Types I and IS and in at least two nominal sizes for Mix Types II IIS III and IIIS .
The gradation of the coarse aggregate shall be such that when combined with the fine aggregate the composite gradation shall meet the gradation requirements for bituminous concrete pavement specified in Table .A or Table .D .
The process of blending coarse and fine aggregates shall be accomplished using separate bins .
Blending in the stockpile shall not be permitted .
b .
Fine Aggregate .
The gradation of the fine aggregate shall be such that when combined with a coarse aggregate the composite aggregate meets the gradation requirements for bituminous concrete pavement specified in Table .A or Table .D .
The process of blending fine and coarse aggregates shall be accomplished using separate bins .
Blending in the stockpile shall not be permitted .
The percentage of fine aggregate passing the No. . mm sieve shall remain uniform within a tolerance of for any one mix design .
Material produced that does not meet this tolerance may be stockpiled separately and used after an appropriate change is made in the mix design .
c. Recycled Asphalt Materials for Bituminous Pavement RAM .
Recycled asphalt pavement RAP and recycled asphalt shingle RAS products may be used individually or in combination in the production of bituminous concrete .
The allowed RAP percentage shall be reduced proportionally based on asphalt cement content if RAS products are also used .
Any changes in the combination of recycled materials shall require a new mix design unless otherwise approved by the Materials Engineer .
The maximum allowable total reused asphalt binder in bituminous concrete mixes from RAM shall be .
of the total binder replacement .
The bitumen component of recycled asphalt materials shall be asphalt cement and shall be free of significant contents of solvents tars and other volatile organic compounds or foreign substances that will make the recycled asphalt materials unacceptable for recycling as determined by the Materials Engineer .
The gradation of recycled asphalt materials shall be such that when combined with a coarse and fine aggregate the composite aggregate shall meet the specified gradation requirements for Marshall bituminous concrete in Subsection .A or Superpave bituminous concrete pavement specified in Subsection .B . .
Recycled Asphalt Pavement RAP .
When RAP is used to produce bituminous concrete pavement the resulting mixture shall meet all Specification requirements for the types of mix specified .
The percentage of RAP when stated as a percentage of the total mix shall be limited to a maximum of .
for both design and production purposes .
The bitumen component of the RAP shall be free of significant contents of solvents tars or other contaminating substances that will make the RAP unacceptable for recycling as determined by the Engineer .
Should the characteristics of any proposed material for recycling be such that an acceptable mixture can not be produced andor maintained the recycled mix will not be allowed for use on the Project .
The Contractor may blend crush or prepare the proposed RAP into one or more homogenous stockpiles .
When a bituminous concrete pavement is proposed using RAP the Contractor shall submit with the mix design information an analysis of the RAP material .
The analysis of the RAP material shall include an extracted aggregate gradation coarse aggregate specific gravity fine aggregate specific gravity asphalt content and recovered binder values .
The recovered binder values will be obtained by AASHTO M testing for the designated Project PG grade .
The recovered RAP binder material shall be graded according to AASHTO R for all samples .
AASHTO M testing will consist of Dynamic Shear Rheometer DSR values tested under Original Rolling Thin Film Oven RTFO residue and Pressure Aging Vessel PAV residue parameters and Bending Beam Rheometer BBR values .
The recovered asphalt will be aged with the RTFO and the PAV for this testing .
A minimum of four samples shall be analyzed or tested to produce design data .
The analysis shall be valid for a month period .
The process of blending the RAP fine aggregate and coarse aggregate shall be accomplished through the use of separate bins .
Blending of these materials in the stockpiles shall not be permitted . .
Recycled Asphalt Shingle RAS Products .
RAS products shall consist of processed asphalt shingle products that comply with the provisions of AASHTO MP and as approved by the Agency .
The RAS products shall be tested every tons for gradation and asphalt binder content as a stockpile is being built .
These test results shall remain on file by the contactor until such time as the entire RAS product stockpile has been utilized .
RAS product shall be covered and kept dry .
When a bituminous concrete pavement is proposed using RAS the Contractor shall submit with the mix design information an analysis of the RAS material .
The analysis of the RAS material shall include an extracted aggregate gradation specific gravity and asphalt content .
A minimum of four samples shall be analyzed or tested to produce design data .
The analysis shall be valid for a month period .
The maximum amount of RAS in any mix design will be limited to a maximum of of the total weight of the aggregate in the mix design and additionally all provisions of AASHTO PP shall apply .
RAS may be used in shim base and intermediate courses .
Percent of Wear .
When the coarse aggregate is composed of crushed stone or crushed gravel the percent of wear of the aggregate shall not be more than when tested in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO T . When the coarse aggregate is composed of crushed igneous rock the percent of wear of the aggregate shall not be more than when tested in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO T . Fractured Faces .
When crushed gravel is used as coarse aggregate in Marshall bituminous concrete pavements at least shall have at least two fractured faces in accordance with the requirements of ASTM D . For Superpave bituminous concrete pavements the following design criteria must be met a. Coarse Aggregate Angularity .
The coarse aggregate angularity criterion relates to a one or two fractured face count as a percentage by mass weight of material coarser than the No. . mm sieve based on traffic ESALs .
A fractured face for this purpose is defined as an angular rough or broken surface of an aggregate created by any means .
A face is considered a fractured face only if it has a projected area at least as large as of the maximum projected area when viewed directly on and the face has sharp and welldefined edges .
Measurement is made using test method ASTM D Standard Test Method for Determining the Percentage of Fractured Particles in Coarse Aggregate .
Measurement is based on the blended aggregate and is used for design and field control to monitor aggregate production .
TABLE .A MINIMUM FRACTURED FACE COUNT COARSE AGGREGATE Traffic ESALs CACA denotes that of the coarse aggregate has one fractured face and has two or more fractured faces .
b .
Fine Aggregate .
The fine aggregate angularity criterion is defined as the percent of air voids in loosely compacted aggregate that passes the No. . mm sieve based on traffic ESALs .
Measurement is made using AASHTO T Method A Standard Test Method for Uncompacted Void Content of Fine Aggregate and is based on the blended aggregate .
Results are used for design purposes not as a field control tool .
TABLE .B MINIMUM UNCOMPACTED VOID CONTENT FINE AGGREGATE Traffic ESALs Uncompacted Void Content All Thin and Elongated Pieces .
Not more than by mass weight of the blended material coarser than the No. . mm sieve shall consist of aggregates which have a ratio of maximum to minimum dimensions greater than five .
Measurement is made using test method ASTM D Standard Test Method for Flat Particles Elongated Particles or Flat and Elongated Particles in Coarse Aggregate Section ..
This criterion is used for design and field control to monitor aggregate production .
Mineral Filler .
Mineral filler shall consist of approved limestone dust talc dust or other approved materials and shall be added to the aggregate if required .
Soundness .
Soundness shall meet the requirements of Subsection .d except the percentage of loss shall not be more than by mass weight and shall apply to wearing course aggregates only .
Control of Aggregate Stockpiles .
Before the start of bituminous concrete paving operations and throughout the duration of the paving operation the cold feed aggregate stockpiles shall each contain at least tons of accepted aggregate or the amount required for the job when less than tons .
The addition of unacceptable material to an accepted stockpile shall result in the rejection of the entire stockpile .
The stockpiles shall be separated by partitions or otherwise separated to the satisfaction of the Engineer to prevent intermixing .
All stockpiles shall be maintained at the mixing plant site unless otherwise approved in writing by the Engineer .
The respective sources of all aggregates to be used in the wearing course shall remain the same for the entire Project unless otherwise authorized in writing by the Engineer .
Clay Content for Superpave Bituminous Concrete Pavements .
The clay content criterion is a measure of the amount of clay material in the portion of blended aggregate finer than the No. . mm sieve based on traffic ESALs .
Measurement is made using AASHTO T and the results are used for design purposes .
TABLE .C CLAY CONTENT CRITERIA MINIMUM SAND EQUIVALENT Traffic ESALs Sand Equivalent b Aggregate for UltraThin Bonded Wearing Course .
Aggregate shall meet the requirements of Subsection .a except as modified in Table .D .
TABLE .D AGGREGATE PROPERTIES Property Test Method Test Requirement One Fractured Face AASHTO T min .
Two Fractured Faces AASHTO T min .
Flat and Elongated ASTM D max .
Percent of Wear AASHTO T max .
Sand Equivalent AASHTO T min .
Clay Lumps and Friable Particles AASHTO T max .
Methylene Blue AASHTO T max .
c Mineral Filler .
Mineral filler may be used to aid in meeting the gradation requirements .
Hydrated lime and Type I Portland cement are acceptable as mineral filler .
Mineral filler shall meet the requirements of Table .E .
TABLE .E GRADATION OF MINERAL FILLER Sieve Designation Percentage by Mass Weight Passing Square Mesh Sieves No. . mm No. . mm .
AGGREGATE FOR BITUMINOUS SURFACE TREATMENT .
The peastone and stone grits shall consist of washed crushed gravel or crushed stone and shall be reasonably free from dirt deleterious material and pieces that are structurally weak .
The sand shall be washed natural sand and shall consist of clean hard durable grains reasonably free from dirt and deleterious material .
a Grading .
The peastone stone grits and sand shall meet the gradation requirements of Table .A as determined in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO T and AASHTO T . TABLE .A GRADATION OF AGGREGATES FOR BITUMINOUS SURFACE TREATMENT Aggregate Type Sieve Designation Percentage by Mass Weight Passing Square Mesh Sieves Peastone inch .
mm inch .
mm No. . mm Stone Grits inch .
mm inch .
mm No. . mm No. . mm Sand inch .
mm No. . mm No. . mm b Percent of Wear .
Crushed Gravel .
When the aggregate is composed of crushed gravel the percent of wear shall not be more than when tested in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO T . No wear requirements shall apply when grits are used as a shoulder treatment .
Crushed Stone .
When the aggregate is composed of crushed stone the percent of wear of the aggregate shall not be more than when tested in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO T . No wear requirements shall apply when grits are used as a shoulder treatment .
c Fractured Faces .
When crushed gravel is used at least by mass weight of the material coarser than the No. . mm sieve from each stockpile shall have at least one fractured face when tested in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO T . d Thin andor Elongated Pieces .
Not more than by mass weight of the material coarser than the No. . mm shall consist of aggregates that have a ratio of maximum to minimum dimensions greater than five .
Measurement is made using test method ASTM D Standard Test Method for Flat Particles Elongated Particles or Flat and Elongated Particles in Coarse Aggregate Section ..
This criterion is used for design and field control to monitor aggregate production in accordance with the requirements of ASTM D . .
AGGREGATE FOR SURFACE COURSE AND SHOULDERS .
Aggregate for Aggregate Surface Course and Aggregate Shoulders shall consist solely of crushed gravel or crushed stone .
It shall be reasonably free from deleterious materials .
All aggregates shall meet the following requirements a Aggregate Surface Course .
Grading .
The entire gradation shall be uniformly graded and shall meet the gradation requirements of Table .A as determined in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO T and AASHTO T . TABLE .A GRADATION OF AGGREGATE FOR SURFACE COURSE Sieve Designation Percentage by Mass Weight Passing Square Mesh Sieves inch .
mm inch mm No. . mm No. . mm No. . mm Percent of Wear .
The percent of wear shall not be more than for material used as Aggregate Surface Course .
Percent wear shall be in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO T . Fractured Faces .
When crushed gravel is used at least by mass weight of the material coarser than the No. . mm sieve from each stockpile shall have at least two fractured faces .
Fractured faces shall be in accordance with AASHTO T . Plasticity Index .
The plasticity index PI shall be determined in accordance with the requirements of ASTM D . The PI shall be between and .
b Aggregate for Shoulders .
Grading .
The entire gradation shall be uniformly graded and shall meet the gradation requirements of Table .B as determined in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO T and AASHTO T . TABLE .B GRADATION OF AGGREGATE FOR SHOULDERS Sieve Designation Percentage by Mass Weight Passing Square Mesh Sieves inch .
mm inch .
mm No. . mm No. . mm No. . mm Percent of Wear .
The percent of wear shall not be more than for material used as Aggregate Shoulders .
Percent wear shall be in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO T . Fractured Faces .
When crushed gravel is used at least by mass weight of the material coarser than the No. . mm sieve from each stockpile shall have at least two fractured faces .
Fractured faces shall be in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO T . Aggregate Shoulders RAP .
RAP shall consist solely of Bituminous Concrete Pavement .
RAP shall be such that of the material passes the inch .
mm sieve prior to placement .
Aggregate Shoulders RAS .
RAS shall be produced at a properly permitted facility and meet the requirements of AASHTO MP . .
SAND FOR CEMENT MORTAR .
Sand for cement mortar shall consist of clean hard durable grains .
It shall be uniformly graded from coarse to fine and shall be free from detrimental amounts of organic matter or other harmful substances .
a Grading .
Sand for cement mortar shall meet the gradation requirements of AASHTO M as determined in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO T and AASHTO T . b Organic Impurities .
The sand shall show a color of not greater than two when determined in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO T MT .
c Soundness .
When there is any question of either soft or laminated pieces being detrimental to any aggregate a soundness test shall be performed on the aggregate in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO T . The weighted average percentage of loss shall be not more than by mass weight when subjected to five cycles of the sodium sulfate soundness test. . LIGHTWEIGHT COARSE AGGREGATE FOR STRUCTURAL CONCRETE .
Lightweight coarse aggregate for structural concrete shall be clean hard and uniformly graded .
It shall be reasonably free from dirt deleterious material and pieces that are structurally weak .
It shall meet the requirements of AASHTO M and ASTM C C M in addition to the following requirements .
a General Characteristics .
Two general types of lightweight aggregates may be used .
Aggregates prepared by expanding calcining or sintering products such as blast furnace slag clay shale or slate .
Other raw materials may be used if the resulting prepared aggregates meet the requirements of these Specifications .
Aggregates prepared by crushing screening and cleaning natural lightweight materials such as pumice scoria or tuff .
b Grading .
Grading shall meet the requirements specified in AASHTO M . c Percent of Wear .
Percent of wear shall not be more than when tested in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO T . d Thin andor Elongated Pieces .
The thin andor elongated pieces shall conform to the requirements specified in Subsection .d .
e Soundness .
Soundness shall meet the requirements of Subsection .d .
f Density .
The maximum dry loose density of the lightweight coarse aggregate shall not exceed pounds per cubic foot when tested in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO T MT .
The density of lightweight aggregate shall not differ by more than from the density submitted on the approved mix design. . QUARTZITE OR GRANITE AGGREGATE USED IN PAVEMENTS .
The Agency has identified a potential stripping problem with some granite and quartzite aggregates used in the production of bituminous concrete pavement .
Until additional research can determine a more finite evaluation of the problem or identify optional corrective alternatives any material supplied under Section that contains aggregates from monomineralic a rock consisting essentially of one mineral quartzite sources or granite sources will require the addition of a minimum of .
by percentage of asphalt weight of an antistrip additive .
Antistrip additives shall comply with the requirements of Subsection ..
The Agency reserves the option to require the use of an antistrip additive at any time that a potential stripping problem is observed. . DRAINAGE AGGREGATE .
Rock for drainage applications shall be produced from natural gravels or crushed quarried rock and shall consist of clean hard sound and durable material .
a Grading .
Drainage aggregate shall be uniformly graded from coarse to fine and shall meet the gradation requirements of Table .A as determined in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO T . TABLE .A GRADATION OF DRAINAGE AGGREGATE Sieve Designation Percentage by Mass Weight Passing Square Mesh Sieves inch mm inch .
inch .
mm No. . mm No. . mm b Percent of Wear .
Percent of wear shall not be more than when tested in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO T . c Soundness .
Soundness shall conform to the requirements of Subsection .d . .
AGGREGATE FOR EROSION PREVENTION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL .
Aggregate for erosion prevention and sediment control EPSC shall consist of clean hard crushed stone or crushed gravel .
It shall be reasonably free from dirt and deleterious material .
It shall be uniformly graded and meet the gradation requirements of Table .A as determined in accordance with AASHTO T . TABLE .A GRADATION OF AGGREGATE FOR EPSC Sieve Designation Percentage by Mass Weight Passing Square Mesh Sieves inch mm inch mm inch .
mm inch .
mm .
SELECT BACKFILL FOR MECHANICALLY STABILIZED EARTH MSE STRUCTURES .
Select backfill material used in mechanically stabilized Earth structures shall be substantially free from organic matter and otherwise deleterious materials .
It shall be obtained from approved sources and meet the following requirements .
a Grading .
Select backfill material used in MSE structures shall conform to the gradation limits in Table .A as determined by AASHTO T . TABLE .A GRADATION OF SELECT BACKFILL FOR MSE STRUCTURES Sieve Designation Percentage by Mass Weight Passing Square Mesh Sieves inch mm inch .
mm No. . mm No. . mm b Soundness .
Select backfill material shall be substantially free of shale or other soft particles with poor durability characteristics .
The material shall have a sodium sulfate soundness loss of less than after five cycles as determined by the requirements of AASHTO T . c Plasticity Index .
The plasticity index PI as determined by the requirements of AASHTO T shall not exceed .
d Electrochemical Requirements .
Select backfill material for metallically reinforced systems shall conform to the requirements in Table .B .
TABLE .B BACKFILL FOR METALLICALLY REINFORCED SYSTEMS Property Requirement Test Method Resistivity at saturation Minimum ohmcm AASHTO T pH Acceptable Range AASHTO T Sulfates Maximum ppm AASHTO T Chlorides Maximum ppm AASHTO T Organic Content AASHTO T Select backfill material for geosynthetically reinforced systems shall conform to the requirements in Table .C .
TABLE .C BACKFILL FOR GEOSYNTHETICALLY REINFORCED SYSTEMS Base Polymer Property Requirement Test Method Polyester PET pH AASHTO T Polyolefin PP HDPE pH AASHTO T e Uniformity Coefficient .
Select backfill material shall have a minimum uniformity CU of . . LIGHTWEIGHT FINE AGGREGATE FOR STRUCTURAL CONCRETE .
Lightweight fine aggregate for structural concrete shall be clean hard and uniformly graded .
It shall be reasonably free from dirt and deleterious material .
It shall meet the requirements AASHTO M and ASTM C C M. SECTION MASONRY UNITS .
BRICK .
Brick masonry units shall meet the following requirements a Clay or Shale Manhole Brick .
Brick used for sewer manhole inverts shall conform to the requirements of ASTM C Grade MS. b Clay or Shale Building Brick .
Building brick shall be used in masonry construction where a high degree of resistance to frost action is desired and the exposure is such that water permeating the brick may be frozen .
It shall conform to the requirements of ASTM C Grade SW. c Clay or Shale Sewer Brick .
Brick used for construction where resistance to the action of sewage is needed shall conform to the requirements of ASTM C Grade SM . .
CONCRETE MASONRY BLOCKS .
Concrete masonry blocks intended for use in the construction of catch basins or manholes shall conform to the requirements of ASTM C for solid precast units or ASTM C for hollow precast units . .
THIS SUBSECTION RESERVED. . PRECAST DROP INLETS CATCH BASINS AND MANHOLES .
Precast drop inlets catch basins and manholes shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M MM except for Reinforced Concrete Pipe for drop inlets which shall conform to the requirements of Subsection .. Reinforced Concrete Pipe shall be of the tongueandgroove type with positive connection between sections .
SECTION STONE FOR MASONRY RIPRAP AND OTHER PURPOSES .
STONE FOR MASONRY .
Stone for masonry shall be quarry stone field stone or rock fragments approximately rectangular in shape and of a hard sound and durable quality acceptable to the Engineer .
The stone shall be free from structural defects or imperfections that would tend to compromise its resistance to the weather .
At least of the individual stones in a unit shall have a thickness of not less than inches and a width of not less than of the thickness .
The minimum size of the other stones in the unit shall have a thickness of not less than inches and a width of not less than of the thickness. . STONE FOR MASONRY FACING .
Stone for masonry facing shall be irregularly shaped or roughly rectangular quarried granite marble or another approved quarried stone .
Stone for capping shall conform to the dimensions shown on the Plans unless changes are ordered in writing by the Engineer .
The stone shall be of approved quality tough sound and durable resistant to weathering action uniform in color free from seams cracks laminations pyrite inclusions and minerals or other structural defects which by weathering would cause discoloration or deterioration and shall be thoroughly cleaned of any iron or rust particles .
Stone shall be of such character that it can be wrought to such lines and surfaces whether curved or plane as required .
Any stone having defects that have been repaired with cement or other materials shall be rejected .
The stone shall be kept free from dirt oil and any other detrimental material that may prevent the proper adhesion of the mortar or detract from the appearance of the exposed surfaces .
The front face of the facial stone including capstones when required shall be smooth quarrysplit free from drill holes in the exposed face with no projections or depressions greater than inch measured from the vertical plane of the face of the stone .
The capstone shall have a top surface sawed to an approximately true plane .
The front and back arris lines of the capstones shall be pitched straight and true. . STONE FOR RIPRAP .
Stone for riprap shall be approved rough unhewn quarry stone as nearly rectangular in section as practical .
The stones shall be hard sound and resistant to the action of water and weathering .
They shall be of a rock type other than serpentine rock containing the fibrous variety chrysotile asbestos and suitable in every respect for the purpose intended .
a Heavy Type .
The individual stones shall have a depth equal to the thickness of the course of riprap .
At least of the volume of the riprap complete inplace shall consist of stones that have a minimum volume of cubic feet .
b Light Type .
The individual stones shall have a depth equal to the thickness of the course of riprap .
The riprap complete inplace shall consist of stones that have a minimum volume of cubic foot. . STONE FOR STONE FILL .
Stone for stone fill shall be approved hard blasted angular rock other than serpentine rock containing the fibrous variety chrysotile asbestos .
The least dimension of the stone shall be greater than of the longest dimension .
The stone fill shall be reasonably well graded from the smallest to the maximum size stone specified to form a compact mass when inplace .
a Type I .
The longest dimension of the stone shall vary from to inches and at least of the volume of the stone inplace shall have a minimum dimension of inches .
b Type II .
The longest dimension of the stone shall vary from to inches and at least of the volume of the stone inplace shall have a minimum dimension of inches .
c Type III .
The longest dimension of the stone shall vary from to inches and at least of the volume of the stone inplace shall have a minimum dimension of inches .
d Type IV .
The longest dimension of the stone shall vary from to inches and at least of the volume of the stone inplace shall have a minimum dimension of inches . .
THIS SUBSECTION RESERVED. . ROCK FILL FOR GABIONS .
Rock fill for gabions shall be wellgraded hard sound durable and free from cracks and other structural defects that may cause it to deteriorate .
It shall not contain any material that easily disintegrates or can be easily cleaved into Thin elongated pieces such as phyllite shale or slate .
In addition to the following requirements the size shall be such that a minimum of two layers of rock can be achieved when filling any gabion .
a Grading .
The rock size shall measure from a inch minimum to an inch maximum when measured in accordance with the requirements of ASTM D . A tolerance of undersize and oversize rock by number of particles shall be allowed .
In addition the rock shall be large enough to prevent individual pieces from passing through the gabion mesh openings .
b Soundness .
Soundness shall meet the requirements of Subsection .d. . ENVIRONMENTAL STONE ESTONE .
Estone fill shall be hard blasted angular rock other than serpentine rock containing the fibrous variety chrysotile asbestos .
Estone fill material of the type specified shall be defined as follows a EStone Type I .
The longest dimension of the stone shall be at least inches and at least of the volume of the stone in place shall have a least dimension of inches and at least of the particles shall have a maximum dimension of inches and be well graded material .
b EStone Type II .
The longest dimension of the stone shall be at least inches and at least of the volume of the stone in place shall have a least dimension of inches and at least of the particles shall have a maximum dimension of inches and be well graded material .
c EStone Type III .
The longest dimension of the stone shall be at least inches and at least of the volume of the stone in place shall have a least dimension of inches and at least of the particles shall have a maximum dimension of inches and be well graded material .
d EStone Type IV .
The longest dimension of the stone shall be at least inches and at least of the volume of the stone in place shall have a least dimension of inches and at least of the particles shall have a maximum dimension of inches and be well graded material . .
THIS SUBSECTION RESERVED .
SECTION JOINT MATERIALS .
MORTAR TYPE I .
Type I mortar is generally used as a joint filler between curb stones for stone slope edging .
It shall be used in small quantities as needed and shall not be retempered or used after it has begun to set .
The mortar shall be composed of one part cement and one part sand and shall be mixed with sufficient water to form a plastic composition .
For grouting sufficient water shall be added to provide the required consistency .
The cement sand and water shall meet the following requirements a Cement .
Cement shall conform to the requirements of Subsection .. b Sand .
Sand shall conform to the requirements of Subsection .
or Subsection .
as appropriate .
c Water .
Water shall conform to the requirements of Subsection .. . MORTAR TYPE II .
Type II mortar is generally used as a joint filler for concrete and clay pipes stone and brick masonry and for repointing .
It shall be used in small quantities as needed and shall not be retempered or used after it has begun to set .
The mortar shall be composed of one part cement and two parts sand and shall be mixed with sufficient water to form a plastic composition .
The cement sand and water shall meet the requirements of Subsection .. . MORTAR TYPE IV .
Type IV mortar is used when a nonshrinking cement mortar is required .
It shall not be retempered or used after it has begun to set .
a Performance Requirements .
Compressive Strength .
The neat material shall exhibit a minimum compressive strength at days days and days that satisfy the requirements of ASTM C C M. FreezeThaw Durability .
Resistance to rapid freezing and thawing shall be determined in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO T Procedure A .
The material shall exhibit no more than an loss in mass weight after cycles .
Volume Stability .
The material shall exhibit a maximum and minimum height change as specified in ASTM C C M. b Other Types of Type IV Mortar .
Instead of a commercially prepared product the Contractor may produce a nonshrinking cement mortar that satisfies all the requirements of Subsection .a .
The cement sand and water shall meet the requirements of Subsection .. . JOINT SEALER POURABLE .
Pourable joint sealer shall meet the following requirements a Joint Sealer Hot Poured .
This material shall consist of a hot applied singlecomponent low modulus elastic sealant meeting the requirements of ASTM D Type II or Type IV as specified in the Contract Documents .
b Joint Sealer Cold Poured .
This material shall consist of a cold applied twocomponent low modulus elastic sealant capable of elongation at F when placed in a typical joint configuration .
c Backer Rod .
Backer rod shall be watertight closedcell nongassing polyethylene polyolefin or other suitable material that does not react chemically with the sealant .
It shall be compatible with the sealant applied at temperatures up to F shall remain stable down to a temperature of F and shall not cause bubbling of the sealant bead .
The backer rod shall be approximately inch larger in diameter than the width of the joint in which it is used. . JOINT SEALER POLYURETHANE .
Polyurethane joint sealer shall consist of a single or a two component coldapplied polyurethane elastomeric compound for use in expansion joints in widths up to inches .
The sealer shall be suitable for installation at temperatures above F and below F selfleveling where used in horizontal joints capable of filling the joint completely without the formation of air holes or other discontinuities and nonsagging or not subject to flow when placed in vertical or inclined joints .
The sealer shall cure by chemical reaction between the two components or by reaction with moisture from the atmosphere .
a Primer .
When recommended by the manufacturer a primer system shall be used to ensure adhesion to steel concrete epoxy epoxy mortar or granite under all conditions .
The primer system shall be furnished by the sealer manufacturer .
b Filler Material .
A foam spacer backing or filler material shall be used where shown on the Plans .
The foam spacer shall be a closedcell polyethylene or PVC foam recommended by the manufacturer of the joint sealer and acceptable to the Engineer .
c Bond Breaker .
A suitable bond breaker shall be applied to those surfaces shown on the Plans .
The bond breaker shall be polyethylenecoated tape or other substitute acceptable to the Engineer .
d Proportioning and Mixing .
When required proportioning and mixing shall be accomplished strictly according to the manufacturers instructions .
e Packaging .
The joint sealer materials shall be delivered to the Project in suitable containers for handling and shall be sealed or otherwise protected from contamination .
The containers shall be clearly labeled with the following information Name and address of the manufacturer Name of the product or component identification Batch number Date of manufacture The manufacturer shall furnish to the Engineer complete instructions for the storage proportioning mixing handling joint preparation joint installation procedures and complete SDS information for each shipment .
f Performance Requirements for TwoComponent Materials .
The joint sealer system consisting of sealer and primer shall meet the requirements of ASTM C . g Performance Requirements for SingleComponent Materials .
The joint sealer system shall meet the requirements of ASTM C . . JOINT SEALER PREFORMED NEOPRENE .
Preformed neoprene joint sealer shall have the following properties Preformed neoprene joint sealer shall conform to the requirements of ASTM D . The lubricantadhesive shall be of the formulation recommended by the manufacturer for the kind of material adjacent to the joint sealer .
The Contractor shall furnish representative samples of joint sealer lubricantadhesive or other components at no additional cost to the Agency for Laboratory testing when requested by the Engineer .
Any material not conforming to this Subsection at the time of application or which has been improperly stored or which has exceeded the stated shelf life will be rejected .
Lubricantadhesive shall not be used beyond one year following its date of manufacture or if the container has been previously opened. . PREFORMED FABRIC MATERIAL .
Preformed fabric material shall be a multilayered sheet composed of multiple plies of ounces per square yard polyester fabric laminated with butadiene acrylonitrile and vulcanized to form an integral laminate .
Physical properties of the laminate shall meet the material requirements in Table .A .
TABLE .A PREFORMED FABRIC PROPERTIES Preformed Fabric Property Number of Plies Minimum mass weight per unit area of laminate lbsft .
. .
Minimum thickness inches Minimum ultimate tensile strength of laminate lbsin .
of width Maximum elongation at ultimate tensile Maximum elongation at of ultimate tensile .
PREFORMED JOINT FILLER CORK AND ASPHALTTREATED FELT .
Preformed joint filler cork and asphalttreated felt shall have the following properties .
Preformed cork joint filler shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M Type II unless otherwise specified .
Asphalttreated felt shall conform to AASHTO M unless otherwise specified. . PREFORMED JOINT FILLER CLOSEDCELL FOAM .
Preformed joint filler shall be a closed cell polyethylene polypropylene or PVC foam premolded to a semirigid consistency and meeting the performance requirements of ASTM D Type I when tested in accordance with the requirements of ASTM D . . POLYVINYL CHLORIDE PVC WATERSTOP .
PVC waterstop shall be manufactured from virgin PVC resin with the addition of only those plasticizers stabilizers or other materials needed to ensure that when the material is compounded it will meet the requirements of this Subsection .
No reclaimed scrap or reprocessed PVC shall be used .
The finished waterstop shall conform to the requirements of Table .A .
TABLE .A PVC WATERSTOP PROPERTIES Waterstop Property Test Method Min .
Max .
Tensile Strength psi ASTM D Type IV Ultimate Elongation ASTM D Type IV Low Temperature Brittleness ASTM D Note Durometer Hardness Shore Type A ASTM D Stiffness in Flexure psi ASTM D Alkali Resistance NaOH Mass Weight Change ASTM D . . Durometer Hardness Change No cracking or chipping shall be permitted on three specimens at F . RUBBER GASKETS .
Rubber gaskets for culvert pipe joints shall conform to ASTM C . . JOINT SEALER BUTYL RUBBER TAPE .
Butyl rubber tape joint sealer shall be a flexible plastic gasket conforming to the requirements of ASTM C . The sealant shall be in roll form with release paper backing dimensioned to the width and thickness specified. . ALUMINUMIMPREGNATED CAULKING COMPOUND .
Aluminumimpregnated caulking compound is generally used to protect the surfaces of aluminum alloy in contact with other metals wood or Portland cement concrete .
The compound shall be impregnated with aluminum flake or powder and shall be of such consistency and properties that it can be readily applied with a trowel putty knife or caulking gun without pulling or drawing .
Aluminumimpregnated caulking compound shall meet the approval of the Engineer. . PREFORMED JOINT FILLER .
Preformed joint filler shall have the following properties a Bituminous Type .
Bituminous type preformed joint filler shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M or AASHTO M . b ClosedCell Polypropylene Type .
Closedcell polypropylene type preformed joint filler shall conform to the requirements of Table .A .
TABLE .A CLOSEDCELL POLYPROPYLENE PREFORMED JOINT FILLER PROPERTIES Preformed Joint Filler Property Requirement Test Method Water Absorption Volume .
AASHTO T ASTM D Compression Strength to psi Compression Recovery from Extrusion at .
in .
Density .
lbsft Heat Resistance F F Shrinkage ASTM D UV Weathering hrs .
Cycle A nm No observable change or cracking ASTM D FreezeThaw Resistance cycles No visual change Tensile Strength change ASTM C C M . ASPHALTIC PLUG BRIDGE JOINT .
All components of the Asphaltic Plug Joints shall conform to the requirements of ASTM D . Acceptable Asphaltic Plug Bridge Joint systems shall be those included on the Agencys Approved Products List . .
CONCRETE BONDING SYSTEMS .
Concrete bonding systems shall conform to the requirements of ASTM C C M. SECTION PAINTS STAINS AND TRAFFIC MARKING MATERIALS .
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS .
a General .
All paints shall be readymixed in accordance with the specific formulas from ingredients that meet the requirements described below .
The paints shall be free of coarse particles skins and water and other foreign and objectionable matter except where tolerances have been allowed .
The paints shall not skin over thicken liver settle out excessively or cake in the container in storage and shall be readily broken up with a paddle into a smooth uniform consistency .
No rosin or rosin derivatives shall be added to the paints but beneficial agents such as antioxidants or wetting aids may be added .
Readymixed paints that have hardened on standing or otherwise deteriorated to any extent will not be acceptable .
All paints shall be suitable for use in airless spray equipment .
b Packaging .
Readymixed paints shall be shipped in strong new airtight containers .
All containers of paint shall be clearly labeled with the following information Name and address of the manufacturer Manufacturers batch number Date of manufacture Vermont Paint Number name and color Volume of contents Containers shall be clearly marked to indicate any hazards connected with the use of the paint and the protective measures that should be provided to prevent injury to the health of workers .
c Sampling Testing and Certification .
No paint or stain shall be used until it has been approved by the Agencys Materials Section .
d Identification .
To provide a means of identification for paints the applicable identification number and name taken from the following list shall be printed on all Test Reports and container labels Coatings for Structural Steel and Other Metals .
For structural steel coatings the identification number and the name for the coating used shall be the manufacturers name the manufacturers name for the coating and the manufacturers lot number .
VT .
Structural Steel Primer Coat VT .
Structural Steel Intermediate Coat VT .
Structural Steel Finish Coat Wood Coatings .
VT .
Dark Brown Oil Base Stain Traffic Sign Paint .
VT . Black Enamel VT . Blue Enamel VT . Green Enamel VT . Red Enamel VT . White Enamel VT . Yellow Enamel VT . Brown Enamel VT . Orange Enamel Traffic Control Signal Paint .
VT . Flat Black Enamel VT . Yellow Enamel Pavement Marking Paint .
VT . White Traffic Paint VT . Yellow Traffic Paint VT . White Traffic Paint Fast Dry VT . Yellow Traffic Paint Fast Dry .
APPROVED STRUCTURAL COATING SYSTEMS .
Acceptable structural coating systems shall be one of the Structural Coating Systems listed on the Agencys Approved Products List .
VT .
Structural Steel Primer Coat VT .
Structural Steel Intermediate Coat VT .
Structural Steel Finish Coat Colors for structural coating systems shall conform to the requirements of SAE AMSSTD as specified in Table .A .
TABLE .A APPROVED COLORS FOR STRUCTURAL COATING SYSTEMS Color Chip Number Green Black Brown .
GREASE RUSTPROOFING COMPOUND .
Grease rustproofing compound shall be a soft film type material made from petroleum combined with special additives to enhance its moisture displacing capabilities .
Grease rustproofing compound shall contain effective rust inhibitors and have properties that conform to the requirements of Table .A .
TABLE .A GREASE RUSTPROOFING COMPOUND PROPERTIES Property Requirement Appearance Color Brown Green Flash COC Min .
ºF Melting Point Min .
ASTM D ºF Thinner Max .
by mass weight Density Min. . lbsgal at ºF Approximate NLGI Grease Grade No .
before solvent evaporation and No .
after solvent evaporation . .
COATINGS FOR WOOD .
a VT .
Dark Brown Oil Base Stain .
Dark Brown Oil Base Stain is used as a protective coating for wood surfaces .
The stain shall conform to the requirements of Table .A and the pigment shall consist of pure mineral pigments combined in proportions necessary to match the specified color .
TABLE .A DARK BROWN OIL BASE STAIN PROPERTIES Component Property Min .
Max .
Vehicle Heavy bodied linseed oil Mineral spirits Stain Pigment Vehicle Density lbsgal .
Drying time dry to recoat hrs Fineness of grind Hegman Scale b InsecticideFungicide .
Insecticidefungicide coatings for interior applications shall be waterglycolbased solutions per the manufacturers Specifications .
Acceptable coatings shall be those on the Agencys Approved Products List .
c Fire Retardant .
Fire retardant coatings for interior and exterior applications shall be nontoxic nonhazardous and waterbased solutions meeting the requirements of ASTM E NFPA UL Standard Test Method for Surface Burning Characteristics of Burning Materials .
Acceptable coatings shall be those on the Agencys Approved Products List . .
PAINT FOR TRAFFIC SIGNS .
Paint for traffic signs shall consist of readymixed enamels suitable for exterior use on primed wood and metal surfaces and shall conform to the requirements of MPI or .
The type of cure shall be as shown on the Plans .
Porcelain enamels shall conform to the requirements of Porcelain Enamel Institute Inc. Specification ALS .
The SAE AMSSTD standard shall be used to determine the acceptable color match for black blue green red white and yellow traffic sign paints .
a VT . Black Enamel .
The color shall be an acceptable match to Chip No .
in SAE AMS STD .
b VT . Blue Enamel .
The color shall be an acceptable match to Chip No .
in SAE AMS STD .
c VT . Green Enamel .
The color shall be an acceptable match to Chip No .
in SAE AMS STD .
d VT . Red Enamel .
The color shall be an acceptable match to Chip No .
in SAE AMS STD .
e VT . White Enamel .
The color shall be an acceptable match to Chip No .
in SAE AMS STD .
f VT . Yellow Enamel .
The color shall be an acceptable match to Chip No .
in SAE AMS STD . .
PAINT FOR TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNALS .
Paint for traffic control signals shall consist of readymixed enamels suitable for exterior use on primed metal surfaces .
Paint colors used for traffic control signals shall conform to the requirements of MPI or .
The SAE AMSSTD standard shall be used to determine the acceptable color match for black and yellow traffic control signal paints .
a VT . Flat Black Enamel .
The color shall conform to the requirements of MPI or .
The color shall be an acceptable match to Chip No .
in SAE AMSSTD .
b VT . Yellow Enamel .
The color shall conform to the requirements of MPI or .
The color shall be an acceptable match to Chip No .
in SAE AMSSTD . .
PAINT FOR PAVEMENT MARKINGS .
Readymixed traffic paint suitable for marking on either bituminous or Portland cement concrete pavements shall conform to the following requirements a Polyurea Pavement Markings .
Approved polyurea marking materials shall be one of the markings listed on the Agencys Approved Products List .
b Epoxy Paint .
Epoxy Paint shall be one of the Epoxy Paints on the Approved Products List .
c Waterborne Traffic Paint .
Waterborne Traffic Paint shall consist of properly formulated pigment and vehicle to give the desired results .
The paint shall show the proper capillary action at the bead surface to provide anchorage refraction and reflection when beads are applied at the standard rate of pounds per gallon of paint Materials .
a. Pigments .
The pigments used shall be those designated which shall conform to the stated requirements .
b. Titanium Dioxide .
Titanium dioxide shall be of the rutile type and shall meet the requirements specified in ASTM D Type II .
c. Vehicle .
The vehicle will be water .
Composition .
The waterborne paint binder shall be a acrylic binder as determined by infrared analysis according to the requirements of ASTM D or other standard ASTM methods designated herein .
The composition of the paint shall comply with Table .C .
TABLE .C WATERBORNE TRAFFIC PAINT COMPOSITION Performance Characteristic Test Method White YellowBlueGreen Pigment content by mass ASTM D min .
max .
min .
max .
Vehicle content by mass min .
max .
min .
max .
VOC content lbsgal ASTM D . lbsgal gL max. . lbsgal gL max .
Lead content .
max. . max .
Yellow pigment NA Yellow or Titanium dioxide rutile Type II ASTM D . lbsgal gL max. . lbsgal gL max .
Total nonvolatile content by mass ASTM D . min. . min .
Total volatile content by mass ASTM D max .
max .
Total nonvolatile content by volume ASTM D . min. . min .
Density ASTM D . . lbsgal . . kgL . . . . kgL Paint pH .
min. . min .
Close cup flash point ASTM D F C min .
F C min . .
OPTICS .
a Glass Beads .
Glass beads for pavement markings shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M Type unless otherwise specified .
b Premium Optics .
Approved premium optics shall be one of the premium optics listed on the Agencys Approved Products List .
c Wet Recoverable and Wet Reflective Optics .
Approved wet recoverable and wet reflective optics shall be one of the wet recoverable and wet reflective optics listed on the Agencys Approved Products List. . THERMOPLASTIC PAVEMENT MARKINGS .
a Thermoplastic Pavement Markings Type A .
Type A Thermoplastic Pavement Markings shall be one of the Thermoplastic Pavement Markings on the Agencys Approved Products List .
These markings shall be used in long line applications or as specified in the Contract Documents .
Thermoplastic pavement markings shall comply with the requirements of AASHTO M . Thermoplastic Pavement Markings shall have a lead content less than .
by weight .
b Thermoplastic Pavement Markings Type B .
Type B Thermoplastic Pavement Markings shall be one of the Preformed Thermoplastic Pavement Markings on the Agencys Approved Products List .
These markings shall be used in intersection applications for legends stop bars or symbols or as specified in the Contract Documents. . PAVEMENT MARKING TAPE .
a Pavement Marking Tape Type A .
Acceptable Type A Pavement Marking Tape shall be one of the nonremovable permanent pavement marking tapes on the Agencys Approved Products List that exhibit high adhesion high durability and high retroreflectivity .
These markings shall be used in high AADT locations in long line applications as specified in the Contract Documents and shall conform to the requirements of ASTM D . b Pavement Marking Tape Type B .
Acceptable Type B Pavement Marking Tape shall be one of the nonremovable pavement marking tapes on the Agencys Approved Products List .
These markings shall be used in lower AADT locations in long line applications as specified in the Contract Documents and shall conform to the requirements of ASTM D . c Pavement Marking Tape Type C. Acceptable Type C Pavement Marking Tape shall be one of the nonremovable pavement marking tapes on the Agencys Approved Products List .
These markings shall be used at intersection locations only as specified in the Contract Documents and shall conform to the requirements of ASTM D . d Pavement Marking Tape Type D. Acceptable Type D Pavement Marking Tape for legends and symbols shall be one of the nonremovable pavement marking tapes on the Agencys Approved Products List .
These markings shall be used for preformed traffic markings made of the same material as that of an approved permanent Type A B or C tape and shall conform to the requirements of ASTM D . .
TEMPORARY DELINEATION SYSTEMS .
a Line Striping Targets .
Acceptable Line Striping Targets shall be one of the Line Striping Targets on the Agencys Approved Products List .
b Raised Pavement Markers Type II .
Acceptable Raised Pavement Markers shall be one of the Raised Pavement Markers on the Agencys Approved Products List .
c Temporary Pavement Marking Tape .
Acceptable Pavement Marking Tape shall be one of the removable pavement marking tapes on the Agencys Approved Products List and shall conform to the requirements of ASTM D . d Pavement Marking Mask .
Acceptable Pavement Marking Mask shall be one of the Masking Marking Tapes on the Agencys Approved Products List . .
THIS SUBSECTION RESERVED . .
THIS SUBSECTION RESERVED .
SECTION LUMBER AND TIMBER .
STRUCTURAL LUMBER AND TIMBER .
Structural lumber and timber shall conform to the species and stressgrades specified in the Contract and shall be acceptable to the Engineer .
a Grading .
Structural lumber and timber shall be graded in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO M . Lumber ordered in multiple lengths shall be graded after having been cut to length .
b Moisture Content .
Untreated Lumber and Timber .
The maximum moisture content of untreated lumber and timber material being incorporated into the work shall be .
Treated Lumber and Timber .
The maximum moisture content of treated lumber and timber material prior to treatment shall be .
Material treated with waterborne preservatives in accordance with AWPA Standards shall be dried after treatment to a moisture content not exceeding and shall be maintained at a moisture content of or less until it is incorporated into the work .
c Minimum Stress Requirements .
Unless otherwise specified in the Contract lumber and timber shall meet the allowable unit stress requirements for No .
Grade or better material as specified in the AASHTO LRFD Bridge Design Specifications .
d Lumber Dimensions .
FullSawn Lumber .
Minimum fullsawn lumber sizes are nominal dimension sawn sizes after seasoning .
Pieces shall be sawn to obtain the full nominal dimensions specified with only occasional slight variation permitted .
Thickness and width dimensions are somewhat variable depending upon the sawmill equipment used .
RoughSawn Lumber .
Rough drysized lumber is minimally inch larger in each dimension than standard seasoned dressedsized lumber .
Thickness and width dimensions are somewhat variable depending upon the sawmill equipment used .
Dressed Lumber .
Dressed lumber sizes are the finished planed dimensions of material after seasoning .
Minimum net finished dimensions for dressed lumber shall be inch less than nominal dimension except that the minimum net width of dressed lumber exceeding inches shall be inch less than nominal dimension .
e Lumber Finish .
Lumber finishes shall be as specified per the requirements of AASHTO M for manufacturing classifications e.g .
Rough Lumber or Dressed Surfaced Lumber .
f Soundness .
Lumber material shall be sound and free from any incipient or advanced form of decay .
g Preservative Treatment .
Preservative treatment of lumber and timber materials shall conform to the requirements of Subsection ..
Unless otherwise specified the treatment for lumber and timber materials shall conform to the requirements of Type II preservative .
h Miscellaneous Hardware Shapes and Fabricated Materials .
Structural steel shapes and metal fabricated materials shall conform to the requirements of the Contract and the specific material requirements as specified in Section and Section .
Unless otherwise specified bolts studs threaded rods nuts and washers shall conform to the requirements of ASTM A Grade A .
Carbon steel nuts unless otherwise specified shall conform to the requirements of ASTM A and ASTM A M. Nails and spikes shall conform to the requirements of ASTM F . Lag screws shall be of low to medium carbon steel and shall be of good commercial quality .
Unless otherwise specified all steel hardware and fabricated materials shall be galvanized in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO M MM or AASHTO M MM whichever is applicable. . NONSTRUCTURAL LUMBER .
Material furnished under this Subsection shall be for nonload carrying structural applications with a maximum nominal thickness of inches e.g .
boarding siding trim etc .. Lumber shall be seasoned or kiln dried Spruce Eastern White Pine Eastern Hemlock Southern Pine or Western Fir unless otherwise specified in the Contract .
a Grade .
The grade classification of Yard Lumber whether Common or Select shall be as specified in the Contract .
Structural lumber meeting the requirements of Subsection .
and nominal inch thickness may be used for nonstructural lumber applications .
Except with the written permission of the Engineer lumber which has not been grade classified or stressgraded shall not be used for nonstructural lumber .
b Moisture Content .
The moisture content of nonstructural lumber shall be as specified in Subsection .b .
c Dimensions .
FullSawn .
When required in the Contract lumber shall be furnished to the minimum full sawn nominal dimensions specified .
See Subsection .d for a full definition of fullsawn lumber dimensions .
Dressed .
Unless otherwise specified all lumber shall be surfaced four sides SS .
Refer to Subsection .d for a full definition of dressed lumber dimensions .
d Finish .
Rough Lumber or Dressed Surfaced Lumber shall be finished per the requirements of AASHTO M manufacturing classifications .
e Soundness .
Nonstructural lumber shall be sound and free from any incipient or advance form of decay .
f Preservative Treatment .
Preservative treatment of lumber shall conform to the requirements of Subsection ..
Unless otherwise specified the treatment shall conform to the requirements of Type IV preservative .
g Hardware Shapes and Fabricated Materials .
Hardware shapes and fabricated materials shall be as specified in Subsection .h . .
STRUCTURAL GLUED LAMINATED TIMBER .
a Material .
Unless otherwise specified structural glued laminated glulam timber shall be fabricated from Southern Pine Coastal Douglas Fir Western Hemlock or Western Larch and shall meet the requirements of AASHTO LRFD Bridge Construction Specifications Section .
Adhesives used in the lamination process shall be for wetuse conforming to the requirements of ASTM D and shall comply with all other requirements of ANSIAITC A ..
Unless otherwise specified the appearance grade of the finished glulam products shall be Industrial .
b Seasoning .
Unless otherwise specified all material shall have a moisture content not exceeding at the time of gluing laminations .
c Preservative Treatment .
Unless otherwise specified all glued laminated timber shall be treated with Type II pentachlorophenol preservative heavy oil solvent conforming to the requirements of Subsection .. Also unless otherwise specified all material shall be shopfabricated prior to treatment .
Any field treatment required by the Engineer shall be performed in accordance with the requirements of AWPA Standard M. d Miscellaneous Hardware Shapes and Fabricated Materials .
Structural steel shapes and metal fabricated materials shall conform to the requirements of the Contract and the specific material requirements as specified in Section and Section .
Unless otherwise specified bolts studs threaded rods nuts and washers shall conform to the requirements of ASTM A Grade A .
Stainless steel fasteners shall conform to the requirements of ASTM F Alloy Group Condition AF Alloy and its supplementary requirements for S with nuts conforming to the requirements of ASTM F . All welding shall conform to the requirements of Subsection .. Nails and spikes shall conform to the requirements of ASTM F . Lag screws shall be of low to medium carbon steel and shall be of good commercial quality .
Unless otherwise specified all steel hardware and fabricated materials shall be galvanized in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO M MM or AASHTO M MM whichever is applicable .
e Dimensions .
The designated dimensions for glued laminated timber shall be taken as the actual net dimensions .
f Handling .
Glued laminated timber shall be carefully handled to avoid damaging the edges and surfaces .
The handling transit and erection procedures shall meet the requirements of AITC .
SECTION CULVERTS STORM DRAINS AND SEWER PIPES NONMETAL .
REINFORCED CONCRETE PIPE .
Reinforced concrete pipe shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M M and AASHTO M with the following notes or exceptions a Design Requirements .
The circumferential reinforcement specified in AASHTO M M and AASHTO M Table for inch Class III Wall B pipe shall be .
square inch per foot of pipe wall .
Elliptical reinforcement shall not be used in circular pipes .
All pipe inches in diameter or smaller shall be of the bellandspigot type .
Pipes larger than inches in diameter may be either of the tongueandgroove or bellandspigot types .
b Marking .
The exterior and interior of each length of pipe shall be clearly marked with the following data pipe class day month and year of manufacture and name or trademark of the manufacturer .
The marking method shall be by either clear legible impressions in the pipe or by clear legible data stenciled on the pipe with waterproof paint. . REINFORCED CONCRETE PIPE END SECTIONS .
Reinforced concrete pipe end sections shall conform to the requirements of Subsection .. Where two cages of reinforcement are required in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO M M and AASHTO M they shall be placed in the barrel of the end section only .
Reinforcement of the apron section shall be equal in area to the inner cage of the barrel reinforcement . .
CORRUGATED POLYETHYLENE PIPE .
Corrugated polyethylene pipe and fittings shall conform to the latest revisions of AASHTO M Type S or AASHTO M Type SP as appropriate .
Acceptable corrugated polyethylene pipe shall be one of the corrugated polyethylene pipe products on the Agencys Approved Products List . .
THIS SUBSECTION RESERVED. . ACRYLONITRILEBUTADIENESTYRENE ABS PLASTIC PIPE .
ABS pipe shall conform to the requirements of Table .A .
TABLE .A ABS PIPE MATERIAL REQUIREMENTS Pipe Type Standard Storm or sanitary sewer pipe composite wall ASTM D . POLYVINYL CHLORIDE PVC PLASTIC PIPE .
PVC pipe shall conform to the requirements of Table .A .
TABLE .A PVC PIPE MATERIAL REQUIREMENTS Pipe Type Pipe Dimensions Standard Smooth wall perforated or unperforated inches mm AASHTO M inches mm ASTM F Corrugated with smooth interior All sizes ASTM F ASTM F Pipe with other cell classifications that meet or exceed the performance requirements of ASTM D will be permitted if the wall thickness is not less than of that in AASHTO M . .
CORRUGATED POLYPROPYLENE PIPE .
Corrugated polypropylene pipe and fittings shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M Type S. Acceptable corrugated polypropylene pipe shall be one of the corrugated polypropylene pipe products on the Agencys Approved Products List .
SECTION CULVERTS STORM DRAINS AND SEWER PIPES METAL .
CORRUGATED STEEL PIPE PIPE ARCHES AND UNDERDRAINS .
Corrugated steel pipe elbows end sections reducer units pipe arches underdrain risers flushing basins and coupling bands shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M . Material furnished under this Subsection shall be formed from sheet material coated in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO M M or M . a Coupling Bands .
Coupling bands shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M with the following modifications Coupling bands and their connections shall be of such dimensions as required to meet the Erodible Special Joint category criteria of AASHTO Standard Specifications for Highway Bridges Section .
Structural steel for band connections shall conform to the requirements of ASTM A A M. a .
The only approved method of connection and connection details at the ends of the bands shall be inch inch inch galvanized steel angles extending the full width of the band as detailed in VTrans Standard D. b. gauge diecast angles shall be used with a configuration that provides at least the same section modulus as the inch inch inch angle extending the full width of the band .
c. A minimum of two bolts shall be used for inch wide coupling bands three bolts shall be used for inch wide coupling bands and five bolts shall be used for inch wide coupling bands .
All bolts shall be uniformly spaced .
Bolts nuts and other threaded items used with coupling bands shall be coated by the electroplating process as specified in ASTM B Class FeZn the zinc coating process as specified in AASHTO M MM or the mechanical zinc coating process as specified in ASTM B Class .
d. Angles will be connected to bands by one of the following methods .
Spot welds spread over full width of the band. . Stitchwelds over the full width of the band . .
Attached by rivets .
The minimum coupling band thickness shall be inch and bands shall be no more than two nominal sheet thicknesses thinner than the wall thickness of the culvert or unit being connected .
Coupling bands and diecast angles may be formed from any one of the three types of sheet material specified above .
The use of projection pipe coupling dimpled bands or preformed channel bands is not allowed .
The Contractor may submit alternate coupling bands for approval to the Agency and shall allow days for evaluation .
Coupling bands shall not be shipped to Projects until the Contractor has been notified that the coupling proposed band has been approved by the Agency .
For attaching metal end sections to corrugated steel pipe the Contractor may supply inch wide gauge galvanized straps connected by a inch galvanized bolt and nut for inch through inch diameter round pipes and for inch inch pipe arches and smaller .
b End Sections .
Materials used in the manufacture of end sections shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M except that the dimensions thickness of metal and fabrication shall be in accordance with the Contract .
c Reducer Units .
Materials used in the manufacture of concentric metal reducer units shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M except that the maximum and minimum diameters dimensions thickness of metal and fabrication shall be in accordance with the Contract .
d Underdrain .
Perforated underdrain including all lateral and special connections shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M . The required minimum sheet metal thickness shall be .
inch for inch diameter underdrain and .
inch for inch diameter underdrain and larger .
e Underdrain Risers and Flushing Basins .
Underdrain risers and flushing basins including all connectors fittings and covers shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M except that the dimensions thickness of metal and fabrication shall be in accordance with the Contract .
Underdrain risers and flushing basins shall not be perforated .
f Marking .
All material furnished under this Subsection shall be clearly marked in an approved manner with the name or trademark of the pipe fabricator and the sheet metal thickness . .
CORRUGATED ALUMINUM ALLOY PIPE PIPE ARCHES AND UNDERDRAINS .
Corrugated aluminum alloy pipe elbows end sections reducer units pipe arches underdrain risers flushing basins and coupling bands shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M . a Coupling Bands .
Coupling bands shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M . Coupling bands and their connections shall be of such dimensions as required to meet the Erodible Special Joint category criteria of the AASHTO Standard Specifications for Highway Bridges Section .
Coupling band connections shall meet the following parameters a. Coupling bands connections shall have either inch inch inch aluminum angles that meet the requirements of ASTM B and ASTM B M Alloy T or gauge minimum diecast aluminum angles .
Angles shall extend the full width of the band .
b. Coupling bands connections shall have a minimum shear strength capacity of .
kips .
c. Connections shall be made with a minimum of two bolts for inch wide coupling bands three bolts for inch wide coupling bands and five bolts for inch wide bands .
Bolts shall be uniformly spaced across the width of the band .
Bolts nuts and other threaded items shall be coated in accordance with the requirements of Subsection .ac .
d. Coupling bands connections shall have angles attached to the bands by stitch welding over the full width of the band or by rivets uniformly spaced across the width of the band .
The minimum coupling band thickness shall be .
inch and bands shall be no more than two nominal sheet thicknesses thinner than the wall thickness of the culvert being connected .
Alternate coupling bands may be submitted for approval as specified in Subsection .a .
b End Sections .
Materials used in the manufacture of end sections shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M except that the dimensions thickness of metal and fabrication shall be in accordance with the Contract .
c Reducer Units .
Materials used in the manufacture of concentric reducer units shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M except that the maximum and minimum diameters dimensions thickness of metal and fabrication shall be in accordance with the Contract .
d Underdrain Risers and Flushing Basins .
Underdrain risers and flushing basins including all connectors fittings and covers shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M except that the dimensions thickness of metal and fabrication shall be in accordance with the Contract .
Underdrain risers and flushing basins shall not be perforated .
e Marking .
All material furnished under this Subsection shall be clearly marked in an approved manner with the name or trademark of the pipe fabricator and the sheet metal thickness. . POLYMERIC COATED CORRUGATED STEEL PIPE AND PIPE ARCHES .
Polymericcoated corrugated steel pipe elbows reducer units and pipe arches shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M . Polymeric coating shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M Grade .
a Coupling Bands .
Coupling bands shall conform to the requirements of Subsection .a modified as follows Coupling bands and diecast angles shall be formed from sheet material coated in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO M M M or M . Coupling bands formed from AASHTO M or M material shall be not more than one nominal sheet thickness thinner than the wall thickness of the culvert or unit being connected .
Coupling bands formed from AASHTO M material shall be not more than two nominal sheet thicknesses thinner than the thickness of the culvert or unit being connected .
Angles must be attached to the band by rivets .
Coupling bands formed from AASHTO M material shall be the same nominal sheet thickness as the culvert or units being connected .
Angles must be attached to the band with rivets or by stitchwelding over the full width of the band .
b End Sections .
Materials used in the manufacture of end sections shall conform to the requirements of Subsection .b .
c Reducer Units .
Materials used in the manufacture of concentric reducer units shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M except that the maximum and minimum diameters dimensions thickness of metal and fabrication shall be in accordance with the Contract .
d Marking .
All material furnished under this Subsection shall be clearly marked in an approved manner with the name or trademark of the pipe fabricator and the sheet metal thickness . .
THIS SUBSECTION RESERVED. . COALTAR BASED COATING .
Coaltar based coating used to repair damaged areas of polymeric coating shall meet the requirements of AASHTO M . .
STRUCTURAL PLATES BOLTS AND NUTS .
Structural steel plates bolts and nuts for pipe pipearches arches and box culverts shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M MM .
Structural aluminum alloy plate bolts and nuts for pipe pipearches arches and box culverts shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M . a Dimensions .
The thickness of the plates or sheets and the radius of curvature shall be as specified in the Contract .
Each plate or sheet shall be curved to one or more circular arcs .
b Fabrication .
Plates shall be formed to provide lap joints .
The bolt holes shall be punched so that all plates having like dimensions curvature and the same number of bolts per foot of seam shall be interchangeable .
Each plate shall be curved to the proper radius so that the crosssectional dimensions of the finished structure will be as specified in the Contract .
Bolt holes along those edges of the plates that form longitudinal seams in the finished structure shall be in two rows .
Bolt holes along those edges of the plates that form circumferential seams in the finished structure shall provide for a bolt spacing of not more than inches .
The minimum distance from center of hole to edge of the plate shall not be less than .
times the diameter of the bolt .
The diameter of the bolt holes in the longitudinal seams shall not exceed the diameter of the bolt by more than inch .
Cut edges shall be free from oxide and burrs .
Legible identification numerals shall be placed on each plate to designate its proper position in the finished structure .
Unless otherwise specified in the Contract plate pipes shall be elongated so that the finished pipe is elliptical in shape with the vertical diameter approximately greater than the nominal diameter of the pipe .
Pipe arches shall not be elongated .
SECTION CRIBBING MATERIALS .
METAL BINTYPE RETAINING WALLS .
Metal bintype retaining walls shall have the following components and properties a Galvanized Metal Units .
The various units of metal bintype retaining wall shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M . The metal sheets used to form the members of the metal wall shall be of the thickness indicated in the Contract .
b Bolts and Nuts .
Bolts and nuts shall conform to the requirements of Subsection .
and shall be galvanized in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO M MM .
c Fabrication .
All units shall be fabricated so that units of the same nominal size shall be interchangeable .
Drilling punching or drifting to correct defects in manufacture will not be permitted .
Any units improperly manufactured shall be replaced at the Contractors expense .
Whenever possible in the manufacture of the units a minimum forming radius of inch shall be maintained .
All units that are formed with less than a inch radius shall be hotdip galvanized after forming . .
CONCRETE BINTYPE RETAINING WALLS .
The materials design details and dimensions shall be as shown on the Plans and approved Working Drawings . .
TIMBER CRIBBING .
Timber cribbing shall meet the following requirements a Material .
Dimensional timber furnished for cribbing shall be seasoned Red Norway Pine White Pine Eastern Hemlock or Southern Pine straight sound and cut from live timber .
Red Pine White Pine and Eastern Hemlock shall meet Number Grade requirements specified by the Northeastern Lumber Manufacturers Association NELMA .
Southern Pine shall meet Number Grade requirements specified by the Southern Pine Inspection Bureau SPIB .
Structural timber furnished for glue laminated cribbing shall be seasoned Southern Pine Coastal Douglas Fir or HemFir meeting the requirements of the AASHTO LRFD Bridge Construction Specifications Section with a minimum fiber stress in bending about either axis of psi .
Dimensional timber shall be fullsawn SE uniformlysurfaced two edges to the dimensions specified .
Surfaces to be exposed in the finished product shall have a uniformly rough finish with a coarse texture .
The maximum allowable unevenness in the surface shall be inch with any finishing processes to be performed prior to preservative treatment .
Adhesive used in the lamination process shall be for wetuse conforming to the requirements of ASTM D and shall comply with all other requirements of ANSIAITC A. b Seasoning .
All material shall have a moisture content not exceeding prior to preservative treatment .
c Preservative Treatment .
Timber cribbing shall be pressuretreated in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO M and AWPA Standards using a preservative as specified in Subsection ..
Treatment inspection and testing of the treated timber materials shall conform to the requirements of Subsection .. d Miscellaneous Hardware .
Connection and washer plates shall be fabricated from material conforming to Subsection .
and galvanized in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO M MM .
Bolts nuts and washers shall conform to the requirements of Subsection .
and shall be galvanized in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO M MM .
Threaded rods with nuts shall be either material conforming to Subsection .
and galvanized in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO M MM or stainless steel conforming to the requirements of ASTM F Alloy Group Condition AF Alloy and its supplementary requirements for S with nuts conforming to the requirements of ASTM F . Bolts and threaded rods shall have a minimum of inches of thread .
Threads shall be wrapped with a minimum of two layers of Teflon tape prior to installation .
All threads shall be UNC Coarse .
Sleeve nuts may either conform to the requirements of Subsection .
and be galvanized or fabricated from stainless steel rod meeting the requirements of ASTM A A M Type .
All nuts shall be heavy hex type. . GABION BASKETS .
Gabion baskets shall be manufactured from woven wire mesh .
All steel wire used in the manufacture of gabion baskets shall be galvanized and PVCcoated .
Gabion baskets shall be Type mesh Style Coating and meet the requirements of ASTM A . Gabion basket wire shall meet the requirements of ASTM A A M Class have a softtemper coating and be gray in color .
The steel wire shall have a minimum elongation of not less than when tested in accordance with the requirements of ASTM A .
SECTION REINFORCING STEEL STRAND AND WELDED WIRE REINFORCEMENT .
BAR REINFORCEMENT .
Bar reinforcement for concrete structures shall be Grade unless otherwise specified in the Contract Documents .
a Plain Reinforcing Steel .
Plain reinforcing steel shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M MM Type S including supplementary requirements .
b LowAlloy Reinforcing Steel .
Lowalloy reinforcing steel shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M MM Type W. c EpoxyCoated Reinforcing Steel .
Epoxycoated reinforcing steel shall have an electrostatically applied epoxy protective coating which has been prequalified fabricated tested and installed in accordance with the requirements of ASTM A A M. d StainlessClad Reinforcing Steel .
Stainlessclad reinforcing steel shall meet the requirements of AASHTO M MM .
e DualCoated Reinforcing Steel .
Dualcoated reinforcing steel shall meet the requirements of ASTM A A M. f Solid Stainless Reinforcing Steel .
Solid stainless reinforcing steel shall meet the requirements of ASTM A A M with one of the following UNS designations S S S S S S S or S. Different designations shall not be mixed within the same Project .
Elongation requirements for solid stainless reinforcing steel shall be the same as for the equivalent size and grade of AASHTO M MM Type S reinforcing steel .
g Continuous Galvanized Reinforcing .
Continuous galvanized reinforcing steel shall meet the requirements of ASTM A A M. Where no core steel requirements are stated in the above Specifications the steel core of the bar reinforcement shall meet the requirements of plain reinforcing steel . .
MECHANICAL SPLICES FOR BAR REINFORCEMENT .
Mechanical splices for bar reinforcement shall develop in tension or compression a minimum of of the specified yield strength of the bar intended to be spliced .
Mechanical splices shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations or as ordered by the Engineer. . WIRE ROPE OR CABLE .
Wire rope or cable for guardrail shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M Type I Class A Coating . .
COLD DRAWN STEEL WIRE .
Cold drawn steel wire shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M MM . . WELDED WIRE REINFORCEMENT .
Welded steel wire reinforcement for concrete structures shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M MM or AASHTO M MM including supplementary requirements. . PRESTRESSING STRAND .
Prestressing elements shall be uncoated high tensile strength seven lowrelaxation wire strands of the grade and diameter shown on the Plans and shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M MM .
Wire for posttensioning shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M MM or AASHTO M MM . .
THIS SUBSECTION RESERVED .
SECTION STRUCTURAL STEEL .
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS .
Structural steel and other related materials shall conform to the requirements specified in this Section .
All main load carrying members and components of rolled or welded sections subject to tensile stress shall meet the longitudinal Charpy VNotch impact requirements specified in AASHTO M MM Supplementary Requirement tables for nonfracture critical steel and fracture critical steel for Zone .
Impact test sampling and testing procedures shall be in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO T . Main members are tension members and members subject to reversals of stress including stringers girders cover plates rigid frames floor beams and curved girder cross frames .
Other members may be indicated in the Contract as main loadcarrying members .
All steel bolts nuts and washers furnished for Agency Projects shall be manufactured in the United States only .
All bolts nuts and washers furnished for a particular application shall be furnished by a single supplier .
All bolts nuts and washers shall have identifiable manufacturers markings on each piece .
Nuts for galvanized fasteners shall be overtapped a minimum amount to ensure fastener assembly .
All galvanized nuts shall be lubricated with a lubricant containing a visible dye that will provide visual verification of the lubricant during installation .
Black bolts must be oily to the touch when installed .
Bolts and nuts not properly lubricated shall be cleaned and relubricated prior to installation . .
STRUCTURAL STEEL .
Structural carbon steel shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M MM Grade . . HIGHSTRENGTH LOWALLOY STRUCTURAL STEEL .
Highstrength lowalloy structural steel with a ksi minimum yield point up to inches in thickness shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M MM Grade andor Grade W as required . .
CARBON STEEL BOLTS NUTS AND WASHERS .
Carbon steel bolts shall conform to the requirements of ASTM A Grade A .
Carbon steel nuts shall conform to the requirements of ASTM A and ASTM A M. Carbon steel washers shall conform to the requirements of ASTM F . . HIGHSTRENGTH BOLTS NUTS AND WASHERS .
Highstrength bolts shall conform to the requirements of ASTM F F M Grade A . Highstrength nuts shall conform to the requirements of ASTM A DH .
Highstrength washers shall conform to the requirements of ASTM F F M. Bolts installed in painted structural components shall be Type and shall be provided with appropriate nuts and washers as required .
The combination of bolt nut and washer shall be mechanically galvanized in accordance with the requirements of ASTM B Class Type .
Bolts installed in unpainted weathering steel structural components shall be Type and shall be provided with appropriate nuts and washers as required. . HEATTREATED STEEL STRUCTURAL BOLTS .
Heattreated steel structural bolts with ksi minimum tensile strength shall conform to the requirements of ASTM F F Grade A . Heattreated steel nuts shall conform to the requirements of ASTM A DH .
Heattreated steel washers shall conform to the requirements of ASTM F F M. Bolts installed in painted structural components shall be Type and shall be provided with appropriate nuts and washers as required .
The combination of bolt nut and washer shall be mechanically galvanized in accordance with the requirements of ASTM F F M. Bolts nuts and washers shall be Type for all unpainted applications. . ANCHOR BOLTS BRIDGE RAILING .
Bridge railing anchor bolts shall conform to the requirements of ASTM A Type .
Bridge railing nuts shall conform to the requirements of ASTM A DH .
Bridge railing washers shall conform to the requirements of ASTM F F M. . ANCHOR BOLTS BEARING DEVICES .
Anchor bolts for bridge bearings shall conform to the requirements of ASTM F Grade unless otherwise specified .
Nuts for bridge bearings shall be heavy hex type and conform to the requirements of ASTM A and ASTM A M. Washers for bridge bearings shall conform to the requirements of ASTM F F M and shall be a minimum of inch in thickness unless otherwise noted in the Plans .
When the bolts furnished under this Subsection are required to be galvanized the bolts nuts and washers furnished shall meet the requirements of ASTM B Class for mechanicallygalvanized fasteners or ASTM F F M for hotdipped galvanized .
Anchor bolts shall be swedged or threaded and shall conform to the shape length and diameter specified in the Contract. . ANCHOR BOLTS TRAFFIC SIGNALS LIGHTING AND OVERHEAD SIGN STRUCTURES .
Anchor bolts for traffic signals lighting and overhead sign structures shall conform to the requirements of ASTM F Grade unless otherwise specified .
Nuts shall be heavy hex type and conform to the requirements of ASTM A DH .
Washers shall conform to the requirements of ASTM F F M and shall be a minimum of inch thick unless otherwise indicated on the Plans .
All components shall be galvanized in accordance with the requirements of ASTM F F M. Anchor bolts shall be swedged or threaded unless otherwise specified on the Plans. . WELDED STUD SHEAR CONNECTORS .
Welded stud shear connectors shall conform to the requirements of the AASHTO LRFD Bridge Construction Specifications ANSIAWS D. and ASTM A A M. . STEEL TUBING .
Steel tubing shall conform to the requirements of ASTM A A M Grade B unless otherwise specified . .
DIRECT TENSION INDICATORS .
Direct Tension Indicators DTIs shall be Compressible WasherType Direct Tension Indicators conforming to the requirements of ASTM F F M. DTIs shall be of the type corresponding to the bolt Specification with which it will be used . .
TENSION CONTROL ASSEMBLIES .
Tension Control Assemblies shall be Twist Off Type Tension Control Structural BoltNutWasher Assemblies conforming to ASTM F F M. SECTION MISCELLANEOUS METALS .
IRON CASTINGS .
Iron castings shall meet the following requirements a General Requirements .
Castings shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M . Castings shall be true to pattern in form and dimensions free from pouring faults sponginess cracks blow holes and other defects in positions affecting their strength and value for the service intended .
Castings shall be boldly filleted at angles and the arises shall be sharp and perfect .
The surfaces shall have a blemishfree finish .
All castings shall be blastcleaned or otherwise effectively cleaned of scale and sand to present a smooth clean and uniform surface .
The dimensions of the frames and covers shall substantially conform to the dimensions for cast iron covers and frames as shown in the Contract Documents .
The covers shall be flush with the upper surface of the frame when seated .
The seatings shall be machined or made quiet using a gasket cushioning insert or supported by a threepoint triangular suspension .
The minimum depth of insertion of the cover into the frame shall be no less than inches .
As a minimum the covers and frames shall meet the HS loading requirements of AASHTO and the proof load requirements of AASHTO M . Covers shall be identified by the words STORM SEWER WATER SEWER ELECTRIC or others as applicable in raised cast letters as indicated in the Contract Documents or as directed by the Engineer .
b Gray Iron Castings .
Gray iron castings shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M Class No .
B unless otherwise specified .
c Ductile Iron Castings .
Ductile iron castings for frames and covers shall conform to the requirements of ASTM A Grade . .
CAST IRON PIPE .
Cast iron pipe and fittings shall conform to either the requirements of ASTM A or the requirements of ASTM A unless otherwise specified. . ALUMINUM ALLOY .
Aluminum alloy material shall be fabricated from Alloy T. a Sheet and Plate .
Aluminum alloy sheet and plate shall conform to the requirements of ASTM B and ASTM B M. b Drawn Seamless Tubes .
Aluminum alloy drawn seamless tubes shall conform to the requirements of ASTM B and ASTM B M. c Bars Rods and Wire .
Aluminum alloy bars rods and wire shall conform to the requirements of ASTM B and ASTM B M. d Extruded Bars Rods Shapes and Tubes .
Aluminum alloy extruded bars rods shapes and tubes shall conform to the requirements of ASTM B and ASTM B M. e Seamless Pipe and Seamless Extruded Tube .
Aluminum alloy seamless pipe and seamless extruded tube shall conform to the requirements of ASTM B B M. f Welding Rods and Electrodes .
Aluminum and aluminum alloy welding rods and bare electrodes shall conform to the requirements of AWS .
g Standard Structural Shapes .
Aluminum alloy standard structural shapes rolled or extruded shall conform to the requirements of ASTM B B M. h Extruded Structural Pipe and Tube .
Aluminum alloy extruded structural pipe and tube shall conform to the requirements of ASTM B B M. i Sand Castings .
Aluminum alloy sand casting shall conform to the requirements of ASTM B B M. j Permanent Mold Castings .
Aluminum alloy permanent mold castings shall conform to the requirements of ASTM B B M. k Rivets .
Aluminum alloy rivets shall conform to the requirements of ASTM B B M. l Bolts Nuts and Screws .
Aluminum alloy bolts nuts and screws shall be made from rod conforming to the requirements of ASTM B and ASTM B M. Bolt heads shall conform to the requirements of American Standard heavy hexagon ANSI B .. ANSI B M. Nuts shall conform to the requirements of ANSI BM in accordance with the requirements of ANSI B .. and ANSI B .. ANSI B. M. Bolt threads shall conform to the requirements of ANSI B.ANSI B. M. Both bolts and nuts shall be given an anodic coating at least .
mil in thickness with a dichromate or boiling water seal .
m Washers and Shims .
Aluminum alloy washers shall be made from aluminum alloy sheet conforming to the requirements of ASTM B and ASTM B M. Aluminum alloy shims shall be made from aluminum alloy sheet or plate conforming to the requirements of ASTM B and ASTM B M or ASTM B and ASTM B M. . STAYINPLACE CORRUGATED METAL FORMS FOR SUPERSTRUCTURE SLABS .
Stay inplace corrugated metal forms SIPCMF and form supports shall be in conformance with the requirements of ASTM A A M Coating Designation G. Fabrication shall be in conformance with the requirements of ASTM A A M. . METAL ROOFING .
Metal roofing shall meet the following requirements a Roofing .
Metal roofing shall conform to the requirements of ASTM E or ASTM E . The Contractor shall provide manufacturers color samples to the Engineer for approval .
The Engineer in consultation with the owner will determine which if any of the samples are acceptable .
b Trim .
Metal roofing trim shall be of the type and size recommended by the roofing manufacturer .
c Fasteners .
Metal roofing fasteners shall be pancakehead screws or other lowprofile fasteners with a minimum nominal penetration length of inch into the roof boards .
A minimum ultimate pullout strength shall be provided to meet uplift requirement .
SECTION EPOXY RESIN MATERIALS .
EPOXY BONDING COMPOUND .
Epoxy bonding compound shall meet the requirements of AASHTO M MM for the type grade and class corresponding to the application and temperature range for which it is to be used .
SECTION GEOTEXTILES .
GENERAL .
Geotextiles shall be listed on the Agencys Approved Products List and shall meet or exceed the properties specified below and in the Contract .
Geotextiles may be rejected by the Engineer if dimensional stability or resistance of the geotextile to ambient temperatures acid and alkaline conditions microorganisms or insects does not appear to be satisfactory for the intended purpose .
The geotextile shall be free of defects or tears .
The material shall be protected from damage and deterioration until incorporated into the Project .
The Contractor shall furnish a product that is clearly labeled with the manufacturers or suppliers name and product identification .
Geotextiles must meet the minimum requirements specified in Table .A .
TABLE .A MINIMUM AVERAGE ROLL VALUES FOR GEOTEXTILES Pay Items .
and .
For Silt Fence Note MD XD .
max .
No .
sieve .
at hrs Woven only Only one criterion applies per Pay Item .
Elongation corresponds to the Maximum Grab tensile strength as measured in accordance with the requirements of ASTM D D M. Where elongation is equal to or greater than post spacing shall not exceed feet where elongation is less than post spacing shall not exceed feet .
MD Machine Direction XD CrossMachine Direction Silt film not permitted .
Pay Item .
For Filter Curtain max. . max .
No .
sieve .
at hrs Woven only Pay Item .
For Underdrain Trench Lining min. . max .
No .
sieve .
at hrs Nonwoven only Pay Item .
Under Railroad Ballast .
max .
No .
sieve .
at hrs Nonwoven only Pay Item .
Under Stone Fill .
max .
No .
sieve .
at hrs Woven or nonwoven Pay Item .
For Roadbed Separator .
max .
No .
sieve .
at hrs Test Method ASTM D D M ASTM D D M ASTM D ASTM D D M ASTM D ASTM D D M ASTM D D M NA Geotextile Property Elongation Criteria at Failure Grab Tensile Strength lbs Static CBR Puncture lbs Trapezoidal Tear Strength lbs Apparent Opening Size mils Permittivity s minimum UV Resistance Strength Retained WovenNonwoven .
THIS SUBSECTION RESERVED . .
THIS SUBSECTION RESERVED . .
THIS SUBSECTION RESERVED . .
THIS SUBSECTION RESERVED . .
THIS SUBSECTION RESERVED . .
THIS SUBSECTION RESERVED .
SECTION CONCRETE CURING MATERIALS AND ADMIXTURES .
CONCRETE CURING MATERIALS .
Concrete curing materials shall meet the following requirements a White BurlapPolyethylene Sheet .
White burlappolyethylene sheet shall conform to the requirements of ASTM C . b Burlap Cloth .
Burlap cloth shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M . Worn burlap cloth with holes or burlap cloth reclaimed from uses other than that of curing concrete will not be permitted .
The burlap cloth shall be free of any ingredients that may damage or be detrimental to concrete .
c White Polyethylene Sheeting .
White polyethylene sheeting film shall conform to the requirements of ASTM C . d Liquid MembraneForming Compounds .
Liquid membraneforming compounds shall conform to the requirements of ASTM C Type D or Type Class B and shall be from the Agencys Approved Products List. . CHEMICAL ADMIXTURES .
a General .
Packaging .
The admixture shall be delivered in the manufacturers original containers that shall be marked with the manufacturers name and trade name of the material .
Bulk deliveries will be allowed provided a copy of the delivery slip accompanies the manufacturers certification or sample submitted for testing .
Sampling and Testing .
Concrete chemical admixtures must be from the Agencys Approved Products List .
b AirEntraining Admixtures .
Airentraining admixtures shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M . c Retarding Admixtures .
Retarding admixtures shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M MM and ASTM C C M Type B. d Latex Admixtures .
Latex admixtures shall conform to the requirements of ASTM C Type II .
Latex admixture shall be stored in suitable enclosures which will protect it from dampness freezing and from prolonged exposure to temperatures higher than F. If no shelf life is specified by the manufacturer the admixture shall not be used after two years from the date of manufacture .
e WaterReducing Admixtures .
Waterreducing admixtures shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M MM and ASTM C C M Type A. f WaterReducing and Retarding Admixtures .
Waterreducing and retarding admixtures shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M MM and ASTM C C M Type D. g WaterReducing High Range Admixtures .
Waterreducing high range admixtures shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M MM and ASTM C C M Type F. h WaterReducing High Range and Retarding Admixtures .
Waterreducing high range and retarding admixtures shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M MM and ASTM C C M Type G. i Accelerating Admixtures .
Accelerating admixtures shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M MM and ASTM C C M Type C. j WaterReducing and Accelerating Admixtures .
Waterreducing and accelerating admixtures shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M MM and ASTM C C M Type E. k Specific Performance Admixtures .
Specific performance admixtures that provide desired performance characteristics including but not limited to shrinkage reduction alkalisilica reaction mitigation and viscosity shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M MM and ASTM C C M Type S. .
MINERAL ADMIXTURES .
a Pozzolans .
Pozzolans and fly ash shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M Class F. The supplier shall provide the State with the test results of the ten consecutive samples preceding the one submitted for approval to demonstrate compliance with AASHTO M Class F. In addition no fly ash shall contain greater than total calcium content expressed as calcium oxide CaO .
The Contractor shall provide suitable means for storing and protecting the pozzolans from contamination with foreign materials .
Fly ash containing any oil shall be rejected .
The mixing of the same type of fly ash from different sources will not be permitted .
b Silica Fume .
Silica fume shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M and ASTM C . When silica fume is delivered in packages or drums the name brand of the manufacturer and the mass weight of the silica fume if dry or the concentration if a slurry shall be clearly marked on the package or drum .
c Ground Granulated BlastFurnace Slag GGBFS .
GGBFS shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M . The Contractor shall provide suitable means for storing and protecting the GGBFS from contamination by any foreign materials and moisture SECTION PROTECTIVE COATINGS AND WATERPROOFING MATERIALS .
TIMBER PRESERVATIVE .
Preservatives and pressure treatment processes for lumber and timber shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M . Acceptable preservatives and AWPA Preservative Standards are as shown in Table .A .
TABLE .A TIMBER PRESERVATIVE STANDARDS Preservative Type Preservative Name or Subtype AWPA Standard I. Creosote Creosote P Creosote Coal Tar Solution P Creosote Petroleum Solution P II .
Pentachlorophenol Pentachlorophenol P Solvent for Pentachlorophenol Heavy Oil Hydrocarbon Solvent Type A P Solvent Light Oil Hydrocarbon Solvent Type C P III .
Chromated Copper Arsenate Chromated Copper Arsenate P IV .
Alkaline Copper Quaternary Alkaline Copper Quaternary P Type B Chromated Copper Arsenate P Type C P Type DV Alkaline Copper Quaternary P V. Copper Naphthenate Copper Naphthenate P For wood components AWPA Product Use and Commodity Specifications shall be as listed in Table .B .
TABLE .B AWPA PRODUCT USE AND COMMODITY SPECIFICATIONS Component AWPA Use Category AWPA Commodity Specification Sawn guardrail post UCB A Sawn bollard marker post guide post and fence post UCA A Sawn sign post UCA A Sawn structural lumber and timber UCB A Sawn nonstructural lumber UCA A Sawn timber cribbing UCB A Structural glued laminated timber UCB F Round fence post UCA B Round timber pole UCB D Any field treatment required by the Engineer shall be performed in accordance with the provisions of AWPA Miscellaneous Standard M. Prior to the delivery of preservative material a copy of the Safety Data Sheet for the product shall be provided to the Resident Engineer . .
THIS SUBSECTION RESERVED . .
MINERAL SPIRITS .
Mineral spirits shall conform to the requirements of ASTM D . .
THIS SUBSECTION RESERVED. . WATERPROOFING PITCH .
Waterproofing pitch shall conform to the requirements of ASTM D D M Type II .
Type A Certification for waterproofing pitch shall be furnished in accordance with the requirements of Subsection .. . WOVEN COTTON FABRIC .
Bitumensaturated woven cotton fabric shall conform to the requirements of ASTM D D M. . WOVEN GLASS FABRIC .
Coated woven glass fabric shall conform to the requirements of ASTM D D M. . GALVANIZING .
Surfaces to be galvanized shall be zinccoated in conformance with AASHTO M MM or when applicable AASHTO M MM .
Galvanizing that has been damaged shall be repaired in accordance with the requirements of ASTM A A M Annex A. . METALIZING .
Surfaces to be metalized shall be prepared and coated in accordance with the requirements of AWS C . Guide for the Protection of Steel with Thermal Sprayed Coatings of Aluminum and Zinc and Their Alloys and Composites and the following a The coating shall be pure zinc with a minimum purity of .. b A minimum thickness of mils shall be applied to all exterior surfaces .
Internal surfaces e.g .
pot bearings shall have a coating with a minimum thickness of mils .
c All surfaces to be thermal sprayed shall be blastcleaned to white metal immediately prior to receiving surface protections .
The final surface appearances shall be equivalent to preparation Grade SSPCSP as defined by SSPCVIS .
The first coating shall be applied within one hour of blastcleaning and the surface shall be completely coated to the specified thickness within two hours of blasting .
d Exterior surfaces shall be sealed with an approved sealant conforming to the recommendations of the thermal spray supplier and approved by the Engineer .
The minimum dry film thickness of the sealant shall be mils .
e Adherence of the metalized coating to the base metal shall be tested in accordance with the requirements of ASTM C . f Metalizing that has been damaged shall be repaired in accordance with the requirements of Subsection .. .
CONCRETE STAINING AND SEALING SYSTEMS .
Approved Concrete Staining and Sealing Systems shall be one of the Concrete Staining and Sealing Systems on the Agencys Approved Products List. . SHEET MEMBRANE WATERPROOFING PREFORMED SHEET .
Approved Preformed Sheet Membrane Waterproofing Systems shall conform the requirements of ASTM D and shall be one of the Preformed Sheet Membrane Waterproofing Systems on the Agencys Approved Products List .
SECTION FENCING MATERIALS .
WOVEN WIRE FENCE .
Woven wire fence shall meet the following requirements a Woven Wire Fabric for Fencing and Gates .
Woven wire fabric shall be rectangular mesh and shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M Class Coating Design Number or ½ .
At the option of the Contractor the woven wire fabric may be aluminum coated and shall conform to the requirements for AASHTO M . b Barbed Wire .
Barbed wire shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M Twostrand Design Number R Class Coating .
The Contractor may also elect to furnish aluminum coated barbed wire which shall conform to the requirements of ASTM A Class Aluminum Coating .
c Wood Posts and Braces .
Round wood posts shall be seasoned Red Norway Pine or Southern Pine straight sound and cut from live timber .
If round posts are used they shall conform to the diameter and length shown on the Plans .
In all cases they shall be not less than inches in diameter at the small end after removal of the bark .
They shall be shaved to an even surface and be free from bark or skin .
If sawn posts are used they shall be roughsawn and conform to the requirements of Subsection ..
The nominal dimensions shall be at least inches square and of the length shown on the Plans .
The types of wood to be used for bracing shall be similar to those required for the posts .
The braces shall conform to the dimensions shown on the Plans .
All wood posts and braces shall be pressure treated with a preservative as specified in Subsection .. Any cut portions shall receive a field application in accordance with the requirements of AWPA M . d Steel Posts and Braces .
Line posts shall be standard commercial TType steel posts conforming to the requirements of AASHTO M . End posts corner posts pull posts bracing and anchor plates shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M . Intermediate posts or line posts shall be provided with an anchor plate having a length andor width of to inches with a net area of not less than square inches .
All posts braces anchors plates and other metal fittings shall be zinc coated on all inner and outer surfaces in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO M MM or AASHTO M MM whichever is applicable .
e Gates .
Frames diagonal tie bars braces and hardware for gates shall be zinccoated on all inner and outer surfaces in accordance with the requirements of ASTM A A M AASHTO M MM or AASHTO M MM whichever is applicable .
Woven wire fabric used for gates shall be of the same material used in fences .
f Miscellaneous Hardware .
Miscellaneous hardware such as but not limited to wire clips nails bolts nuts washers hinges latches and staples shall be of low to medium carbon steel galvanized and shall be of good commercial quality .
Staples shall be .inch diameter gauge galvanized wire at least inches long .
Galvanizing shall be in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO M MM where applicable .
Galvanized wire and clips produced from galvanized wire shall have a Class Coating in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO M . . CHAINLINK FENCE .
Chainlink fence shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M . a ChainLink Fabric .
Chainlink fabric shall consist of .inch diameter gauge wire woven into a inch mesh .
The bottom selvedge of all chainlink fabric shall be knuckled .
When the height of the fabric is feet or less the top edge shall also be knuckled .
Polyvinyl chloridecoated fabric shall be Type IV fabric and when used the wire shall be .inch diameter gauge prior to coating with the polyvinyl chloride .
Galvanized chainlink fabric shall be Type I Class D as specified in AASHTO M . When the Contract Documents specify a .inch diameter gauge wire woven into a inch mesh an aluminumcoated steel conforming to the requirements of AASHTO M Type II will be allowed .
b Posts Gate Frames Rails Braces and Miscellaneous Hardware .
Posts gate frames rails braces and miscellaneous hardware furnished for use in conjunction with zinc or vinyl coated steel fabric shall be of zinc coated steel .
Zinc coated steel shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M Grade or Grade .
Posts gate frames rails braces and miscellaneous hardware shall conform to the requirements of Table .A and Table .B .
TABLE .A ZINCCOATED STEEL MATERIAL FOR GATE COMPONENTS Use and Section Outside Diameter or Dimensions in .
Weight Per Foot lbs Gate Posts for Nominal Width of Gate Single Gate or One Leaf of Double Gate feet and less Round Grade . .
Round Grade . . Square .
. .
Roll Formed .
. . Over to feet Round Grade . .
Round Grade . . Square .
. . Over to feet Round Grade . . Over feet Round . . Gate Frames for Fabric Heights Less than feet Round Grade . . Square .
. . feet and greater Round Grade . .
Round Grade . . Square .
. . Over to feet Round . . Other Gate Components Top Rails and Brace Rods Round Grade . .
Round Grade . . RollFormed .
. . Truss Rods Round with Turnbuckle .
Tension Wire Wire .
Tension Bars Bar TABLE .B ZINCCOATED STEEL MATERIAL FOR POSTS Use and Section Outside Diameter or Dimensions in .
Weight Per Foot lbs End Corner and Pull Post for Fabric Heights Less than feet Round Grade . .
Round Grade . . Square .
. .
Roll Formed .
. . feet and greater Round Grade . .
Round Grade . . Square .
. .
Roll Formed .
. . Line Posts for Fabric Heights Less than feet Round Grade . .
Round Grade . .
Roll Formed .
. . HSection . . . . feet and greater Round Grade . .
Round Grade . .
Roll Formed .
. . HSection .
. . . .
BARRIER FENCE .
Barrier fence shall be fluorescent yellow or orange ultraviolet stabilized high density polyethylene mesh or grid that will not sag corrode rot or conduct electricity. . PROJECT DEMARCATION FENCE .
Project demarcation fence shall be nonadhesive ultraviolet stabilized fluorescent yellow or orange vinylcoated polyester mesh or polyethylene plastic tape that will not sag or tear over time due to natural weather conditions . .
SNOW BARRIER FENCE .
Snow barrier fence shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M and to the design dimensions and details shown on the Plans .
a Snow Barrier Fabric .
Snow barrier fabric shall consist of .inch diameter gauge wire woven into a inch mesh .
The bottom selvedge of all Snow Barrier fabric shall be knuckled .
When the height of the fabric is feet or less the top edge shall also be knuckled .
When vinylcoated fabric is used the wire shall be .inch diameter gauge prior to coating with vinyl .
Galvanized Snow Barrier fabric shall be Type I Class D as specified in AASHTO M . When the Contract Documents specify a .inch diameter gauge wire woven into a inch mesh an aluminumcoated steel conforming to the requirements of AASHTO M Type II will be allowed .
b Posts Gate Frames Rails Braces and Miscellaneous Hardware .
Posts gate frames rails braces and miscellaneous hardware furnished for use in conjunction with zinc or vinylcoated steel fabric shall be of zinccoated steel .
Zinccoated steel shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M Grade or Grade .
Posts gate frames rails braces and miscellaneous hardware shall conform to the requirements of Table .A and Table .B. . PLANK RAIL FENCE .
The plank for rail fence shall be seasoned Red Norway Pine or Southern Pine planed on four sides and of the dimensions shown on the Plans .
Wood shall be pressure treated in accordance with the requirements of Subsection .
Type I II III or IV .
Miscellaneous hardware for plank rail fence such as spikes lag screws bolts nuts and washers shall conform to the dimensions shown on the Plans .
Hardware shall be of low to mediumcarbon steel galvanized and shall be of good commercial quality .
The metal brackets shall be fabricated from inch steel plate and shall be galvanized after fabrication .
SECTION GUARDRAIL GUIDE POSTS AND BARRIERS .
POSTS AND POST ACCESSORIES .
a Wood Posts and Offset Blocks for Rail Guardrail Barriers and Guide Posts .
Wood posts and offset blocks shall be straight and sound seasoned Red Norway Pine or Southern Pine .
Red Pine shall meet Number Stress Grade requirements specified by the Northeastern Lumber Manufacturers Association NELMA .
Southern Pine shall meet Number Stress Grade requirements specified by the Southern Pine Inspection Bureau SPIB .
Preservatives and pressure treatment shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M and AWPA Standards U .
Inspection and care of treated material shall at a minimum conform to the requirements of AWPA Standards M M and M. Material shall be fabricated prior to treatment in conformance with the dimensions and details shown on the Plans .
Material shall be treated with a Type IV preservative as specified in Subsection .. Field repairs shall be made in accordance with the requirements of AWPA Standard M. Cuts holes and damaged areas shall be treated in accordance with the requirements of AWPA M. Bored holes shall be plugged with treated tightfitting wooden plugs .
Timber material shall be produced in accordance with the requirements of the American Softwood Lumber Standard ASLS developed by the American Lumber Standards Committee ALSC .
Acceptable material shall be grade stamped with an appropriate tag or mark identifying conformance with ASLS requirements .
All lumber and timber shall be treated in a plant participating in an independent inspection program designed to provide continuous supervision testing and inspection for establishing acceptable quality control .
Inspection agencies shall be accredited and overviewed by ALSC andor the International Accreditation Service IAS .
Material meeting compliance with applicable Specifications shall bear the quality mark of the authorized inspection agency .
Tags and marks identifying compliance shall at a minimum be placed on each post in a location that will be visible after installation .
Every charge of treated material shall be inspected in accordance with the applicable requirements specified in AWPA Standards .
The treater shall perform Laboratory analysis for measured penetration and retention of each charge .
A copy of each analysis report shall accompany the materials delivered .
It is the responsibility of the producer to arrange for an allindependent inspection process .
All inspection costs shall be included in the unit price of the material .
b Steel Posts and Post Accessories .
Steel posts offset blocks splice plates brackets channel anchors and other post accessories shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M MM Grade Grade .
They shall conform to the details shown on the Plans .
After fabrication all posts post accessories and channel anchors shall be galvanized in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO M MM .
c Alternative Blockouts .
As an alternative to wood or steel blockouts in Subsection .a or Subsection .b blockouts made of synthetic materials and appearing on the Agencys Approved Products List are allowed. . RAIL ELEMENTS .
a Cable Rail .
Cable shall conform to the requirements of Subsection .. b Steel Beam and Thrie Beam Rail .
Steel beam Wbeam and Thrie beam rail elements shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M Class A Type II ZincCoated .
When a heavy duty steel beam is specified the rail elements shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M Class B Type II ZincCoated .
c Box Beam Rail .
Box beam rail shall conform to the requirements of Subsection ..
The rail shall conform to the details shown on the Plans as to size and shape and all holes and slots shall be punched drilled burned or cut as indicated .
After fabrication the rail shall be galvanized in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO M MM .
d SteelBacked Timber Guardrail .
Steelbacked timber for guardrail shall have a minimum allowable bending stress of psi .
Steel rails and splice plates shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M MM Grade Grade Steel and shall be galvanized in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO M MM . . HARDWARE .
a Hardware for Cable Steel Beam and Thrie Beam Rail .
Miscellaneous hardware and fittings such as bolts nuts and washers cable splices hook bolts anchor rod assemblies and cable end units shall conform to the dimensions shown on the Plans .
All cable fittings and anchorages shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M . Bolts nuts and washers for cable steel beam and Thrie beam rail shall conform to the following requirements Steel bolts shall conform to the requirements of ASTM A Grade A .
Steel nuts shall conform to the requirements of ASTM A and ASTM A M. Steel washers shall conform to the requirements of ASTM F F M and ASTM F . Steel cast bolts nuts and washers shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M MM and ASTM A A M Grade fullannealed .
All hardware shall be galvanized in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO M MM .
All bolts nuts and washers shall be either hotdip galvanized in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO M MM or mechanically galvanized using a mechanicallydeposited process conforming to the requirements of ASTM B Class .
b Hardware for Box Beam Rail .
Bolts shall conform to the requirements of ASTM A Grade A nuts shall conform to the requirements of ASTM A and ASTM A M and washers shall conform to the requirements of ASTM F F M and ASTM F . Bolts nuts and washers for rail splice connections shall conform to the requirements of ASTM F F M Grade A .
All bolts nuts and washers shall be either hotdip galvanized in accordance with AASHTO M MM or mechanically galvanized using a mechanicallydeposited process conforming to the requirements of AASHTO M Class .
All bolts nuts and washers required to conform to the requirements of ASTM F F M Grade A shall meet all requirements of Subsection .
except that the rotational capacity tests the proof load tests and the wedge tests will not be required .
c Hardware for Steel Backed Timber Guardrail .
Bolts and lag screws shall conform to the requirements of ASTM A Grade A .
Nuts shall conform to the requirements of ASTM A and ASTM A M. Washers shall conform to the requirements of ASTM F . All fastener hardware shall be galvanized in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO M MM . .
THIS SUBSECTION RESERVED . .
CONCRETE ANCHORS .
Precast or castinplace concrete anchors for guardrail shall conform to the details shown on the Plans as to the size shape and placement of the bar reinforcement .
a Concrete Strength .
Concrete shall attain a minimum day compressive strength of psi when tested in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO T . b Curing .
Concrete anchors shall be subjected to any one of the curing methods specified in AASHTO M MM for a sufficient length of time so that the concrete will develop the specified compressive strength within days .
c Bar Reinforcement .
Bar reinforcement shall conform to the requirements of Subsection .. .
THIS SUBSECTION RESERVED . .
THIS SUBSECTION RESERVED .
SECTION CURB MATERIALS .
VERTICAL GRANITE CURB .
Vertical granite curb shall consist of hard durable quarried granite .
It shall be gray in color free from seams cracks or other structural defects and shall be of a smooth splitting character .
The curb may contain natural color variations that are characteristic of the granite source .
Granite curb shall meet the requirements of ASTM C C M. a Source .
The Contractor shall submit for approval the name of the quarry that is the proposed source of the granite for curb materials .
Such submission shall be made sufficiently in advance of ordering so that the Engineer may have an opportunity to judge the stone both as to quality and appearance .
Samples of curbing shall be submitted for approval only when requested by the Engineer .
b Finish and Surface Dimensions .
The individual curb stones shall be of the dimensions shown on the Plans and shall be of uniform thickness in any continuous run .
The individual curb stones shall be furnished in minimum lengths of feet .
The top surface of the curb stones shall be sawed to an approximately true plane and shall have no projection or depression greater than inch .
The bottom surface may be sawn or split .
The top front arris line shall be rounded to a inch radius as shown in the Contract Documents .
The exposed arris lines shall be pitched straight and true with no variations from a straight line greater than inch .
The front face shall be at right angles to the plane of the top and shall be smooth quarry split or sawn for the full depth .
Drill holes in the exposed part of the face shall not be permitted .
The front face shall have no projections greater than inch or depressions greater than inch measured from the vertical plane of the face through the top arris line for inches down from the top .
For the remaining distance there shall be no projections or depressions greater than inch measured in the same manner .
The back surface of the curb stones shall have no projection for inches down from the top which would fall outside of a plane having a batter of one horizontal to three vertical from the back arris line .
The ends of all curb stones shall be square with the planes of the top and front face and so finished that when the stones are placed end to end as closely as possible no space more than inch shall show in the joint for the full width of the top or down on the face for inches .
The remainder of the end may break back a maximum of inches from the plane of the joint .
Curbing stones to be set on a radius of feet or less shall be cut to the curve required and their ends shall be cut on radial lines . .
THIS SUBSECTION RESERVED . .
GRANITE SLOPE EDGING .
Granite slope edging shall consist of hard durable quarried granite .
It shall be gray in color free from seams cracks or other structural defects and shall be of smooth splitting character .
The edging may contain natural color variations that are characteristic of the granite source .
Granite slope edging shall meet the requirements of ASTM C C M. a Source .
The Contractor shall submit for approval the name of the quarry that is the proposed source of the granite for edging materials .
Such submission shall be made sufficiently in advance of ordering so that the Engineer may have an opportunity to judge the stone both as to quality and appearance .
Samples of edging shall be submitted for approval only when requested by the Engineer .
b Finish and Surface Dimensions .
The individual edging stones shall be of the dimensions shown on the Plans and shall be of uniform thickness in any continuous run .
The individual edging stones shall be furnished in minimum lengths of feet .
The tops and bottoms shall be not under the square more than inches or over the square at the back more than inch when so tested .
The exposed face shall be smooth quarrysplit or sawed .
Drill holes will be permitted on the exposed face but only along the bottom edge and extending no more than inches upward from the edge .
The exposed face shall have no projections or depressions greater than inch measured from a inch long straightedge placed as closely as possible on any part of the face .
The ends of all edging stones shall be square with the plane of the exposed face and so finished that when the stones are placed end to end as closely as possible no space more than inch shall show in the joint for the full depth of the face .
The arris lines at the ends shall be pitched with no variation from the plane of the face more than inch. . PRECAST REINFORCED CONCRETE CURB .
Precast reinforced concrete curb shall be solid precast reinforced units of uniform quality and appearance .
All curb shall be cast in steel or concrete forms which will produce a satisfactory surface requiring no further finishing rubbing or patching after the forms are removed except for the removal of flash or excess material along the edges .
Precast reinforced concrete curb shall conform to the following requirements a Dimensions .
The individual precast curb units shall be of the dimensions shown on the Plans and shall be cast in lengths of not less than feet or greater than feet .
Random lengths of curb of not less than feet in length may be obtained by sawing regular precast curb if the Engineer determines it is necessary to meet field conditions .
All curbs to be set on a radius of feet or less shall be precast to fit the curve as required .
b Marking .
Each pour shall be identified with a sixdigit registration number indicating in order the year month and day of month cast in the curb as well as the name or trademark of the manufacturer and the date of manufacture .
A pour shall be considered one days production .
c Materials .
The concrete shall conform to the requirements of Section and when sampled and tested in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO T shall have a minimum compressive strength of psi .
Bar reinforcement shall conform to the requirements of Subsection .. d Curing .
The precast curb units shall be subjected to any one of the curing methods specified in AASHTO M MM for a sufficient length of time so that the concrete will develop the specified compressive strength at days or less. . BITUMINOUS CONCRETE CURB .
Bituminous concrete curb shall consist of blended aggregate polyester fibers performancegraded asphalt binder and mineral filler if required combined in such proportions that the resulting mixture conforms to the requirements of Table .A Type IV except that the percentage of performancegraded asphalt binder shall be to .
a Aggregate .
Aggregate for bituminous concrete cub shall conform to the requirements of Subsection .. b PerformanceGraded Asphalt Binder .
The grade of performancegraded asphalt binder shall be as specified on the Plans or in the Contract Documents and shall conform to the requirements of Section .
c Polyester Fiber .
Polyester fiber shall meet the requirements specified in Table .A .
TABLE .A POLYESTER FIBER PROPERTIES Property Value Denier ASTM D . .
Length in .
. .
Minimum tensile strength psi ASTM D D M Specific gravity . .
Minimum melting temperature ºF .
TREATED TIMBER CURB .
Treated timber curb and stakes shall be either seasoned Red Norway Pine Eastern Northern White Pine or Southern Pine straight sound and cut from live timber .
Material shall be fabricated prior to treatment in conformance with the dimensions and details shown on the Plans .
The sides of the planks may be either surfaced or roughsawn .
Treatment shall be performed inspected tested and reported in accordance with the requirements of Subsection .a .
All spikes fasteners Ubolts nuts and washers for treated timber curb shall conform to the dimensions shown on the Plans .
They shall be of low to mediumcarbon steel either galvanized or corrosionresistance treated and shall be of good commercial quality .
SECTION PILING .
STEEL PILING .
Steel piling shall be rolled steel sections of the mass weight and shape shown on the Plans .
Piles splice plates and point reinforcement shall be new material conforming to the requirements of ASTM A A M Grade Grade .
When cast steel shoes are used they shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M MM Grade Grade or ASTM A A M Grade Grade . . STEEL SHEET PILING .
Steel sheet piling shall be rolled steel sections of the type shape and mass weight shown on the Plans and shall be capable of being interlocked so that a continuous wall is formed when individual pieces are driven side by side .
Permanent steel sheet piling shall be new material conforming to the requirements of AASHTO M MM .
SECTION BEARING PADS FOR STRUCTURES .
PREFORMED FABRIC BEARING PADS .
Preformed fabric bearing pads shall be manufactured from all new materials comprised of multiple layers of prestressed duck impregnated and bound with high quality oilresistant rubber vulcanized and cured under pressure to form a resilient pad of uniform thickness .
The duck material shall have a mass weight of at least ounces per square yard with a filling of warp threads per inch and a filling of woof threads per inch .
The finished product shall have plies per inch of thickness and withstand a compressive load perpendicular to the plane of the laminations of pounds per square inch .
Load deflection shall not exceed at pounds per square inch and the material shall perform effectively in the temperature range of F to F. The test sample for measuring load deflection shall be inches inches .
Bearing pads over inch in thickness may be manufactured by laminating vulcanized sheets together to obtain the designed pad thickness .
The number of laminated joints shall not be greater than the values specified in Table .A .
TABLE .A NUMBER OF LAMINATED JOINTS BY BEARING PAD THICKNESSES Bearing Pad Thickness in .
Number of Laminated Joints Permitted to to to Over .
BEARING PADS .
Bearing pads shall be manufactured from allnew materials comprised of high quality elastomer with a random distribution of synthetic fibers in proper proportion to maintain strength and stability .
The finished product shall withstand a compressive load perpendicular to the plane of laminations of psi .
The surface shall have a hardness of using a Shore A Durometer in accordance with the requirements of ASTM D . . ELASTOMERIC MATERIAL .
Elastomeric material shall conform to the requirements in the latest version of the AASHTO LRFD Bridge Design Specifications Section and AASHTO M . Unless otherwise shown on the Plans or specified in the Contract the elastomeric compound shall be virgin crystallizationresistant polychloroprene neoprene or virgin natural polyisoprene natural rubber as the raw polymer .
The raw polymer for a disc shall be based on polyether urethane using only virgin materials .
The resulting product shall be free of porous areas weak sections bubbles foreign matter or other defects affecting serviceability .
Unless noted otherwise elastomer shall have a design hardness of points and a design shear modulus of psi .
Testing of elastomeric material shall be waived for bearings that will be encased in concrete in the final work .
All other bearings shall be tested in accordance with Table .A .
TABLE .A ELASTOMERIC MATERIAL TEST PARAMETERS Material Property Test Method Required Result Hardness ASTM D Design Hardness points Shear Modulus ASTM D with AASHTO M Subsection .. Design Shear Modulus Low Temperature Brittleness ASTM D Procedure B Pass Grade test Shear Bond Strength AASHTO M Annex A or Appendix X Pass Minimum Tensile Strength ASTM D psi Minimum Ultimate Elongation ASTM D design Hardness .
STAINLESS STEEL .
Stainless steel shall conform to the requirements in the latest versions of AASHTO LRFD Bridge Design Specifications Section and of AASHTO LRFD Bridge Construction Specifications Section .
Stainless steel used as a mating surface with polytetrafluoroethylene PTFE material and incorporated in bearing devices shall conform to the requirements of ASTM A A M Type . . BRASS RINGS .
Brass sealing rings shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO LRFD Bridge Design Specifications Subsections and and AASHTO LRFD Bridge Construction Specifications Section .
Brass sealing rings shall conform the requirements of ASTM B B M Half Hard for rings with a rectangular crosssection and ASTM B B M for rings with a circular cross section. . PTFE MATERIAL .
Polytetrafluoroethylene PTFE material incorporated in bearing devices shall be allnew material with a minimum thickness of inch and conforming to the requirements of AASHTO LRFD Bridge Design Specifications Subsection .. and AASHTO LRFD Bridge Construction Specifications Section .
SECTION RAILING MATERIALS .
METAL HAND RAILING .
Material for metal hand railing and sleeves shall conform to the requirements of ASTM A A M. . ALUMINUM BRIDGE RAILING .
a Aluminum Alloy .
Aluminum alloy for aluminum bridge railing including hand railing shall conform to the requirements of Subsection .. b Stainless Steel Bolts Nuts Washers and Set Screws .
Bolts and washers for post rail and offset block connections shall conform to the requirements of ASTM F Alloy Group Condition AF Alloy and its supplementary requirements for S. Nuts shall conform to the requirements of ASTM F M Property Class A Condition AF Alloy and ASTM F Alloy Group Condition AF Alloy .
Stainless steel set screws for use in aluminum bridge railing connections shall conform to the requirements of ASTM F and ASTM F M Property Class A Condition CW Alloy and ASTM F and ASTM F M Alloy Group Condition CW Alloy .
Stainless steel anchor bolts and washers shall conform to the requirements of ASTM F Alloy Group Condition CW Alloy .
Heavy hex stainless steel nuts for stainless steel anchor bolts shall conform to the requirements of ASTM F M Property Class A Condition CW Alloy and ASTM F Alloy Group Condition CW Alloy .
c Structural Carbon Steel .
Structural carbon steel for anchor channel bars approach railing posts offset brackets and anchor bolt sleeve bases shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M MM Grade Grade or ASTM A A M. d Steel Pipe .
Steel pipe for anchor bolt sleeves shall conform to the requirements of Subsection .. e Anchor Bolts Nuts and Washers .
Anchor bolts nuts and washers shall conform to the requirements of Subsection .. f Fabric Pads .
Fabric pads for aluminum posts shall conform to the requirements of Subsection .
or Subsection .. g Aluminum Impregnated Caulking Compound .
Aluminum impregnated caulking compound shall conform to the requirements of Subsection .. . GALVANIZED BOX BEAM BRIDGE RAILING .
a Structural Steel Tubing .
Tubing for posts and rails shall conform to the requirements of ASTM A A M Grade B except as modified below General Requirements for Rail and Post Sections .
a .
The manufacturer shall test both welded and formed tubular material for the physical properties specified .
Results of all tests shall be submitted with material certifications .
b. Welds shall be sound free from defects and have no repairs .
Transverse mill welds will not be permitted .
c. Longitudinallywelded tubing shall have a tensile strength of psi when tested in accordance with the requirements of ASTM E E M. d. A traceable identification number shall be placed on each piece of material in a form that can be read after the galvanizing process .
Post Sections .
a .
Post and baseplate material shall meet the requirements of ASTM A A M Grade and shall be tested for impact properties in accordance with the requirements for Charpy Impact Testing in ASTM A using a Type A specimen .
b .
Sampling procedures shall be conducted in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO T MT using Frequency H testing .
c. Full size inch inch specimens shall be used whenever thickness permits .
Subsize specimens may be used when material thickness is less than inch .
d. To qualify the average energy absorbed by a fullsize specimen shall be not less than footpound force at F. The average energy absorbed by a subsized specimen shall be prorated for the actual thickness of the specimen .
Rail Sections .
a .
Rail section materials shall be tested in accordance with the requirements of ASTM E . Test samples shall be galvanized in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO M MM prior to testing .
b .
Sampling procedure shall be in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO T MT with one test a set of three specimens for each heat .
c. Tests shall be conducted at a temperature of F without removing the galvanizing .
d. Specimens shall be inches inches supported at a span of inches .
e. The percent shear area shall be determined from testing nine specimens three from each of three sides not containing a weld .
f. The final percent shear area shall be an average of the two sides having the highest average shear value .
g. The minimum average shear area shall be .
h. If any ASTM E test averages between and shear the manufacturer will be permitted to retest the heat .
For each original heat test three sets of nine specimens shall be retested .
For the heat to be accepted each set must show a minimum average shear of for the two best sides .
b Structural Carbon Steel .
Structural carbon steel for anchor plates shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M MM Grade Grade or ASTM A A M. Structural carbon steel for angles and splice plates shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M MM Grade Grade or ASTM A A M. c Bolts Nuts and Washers .
Bolts nuts and washers for railing and railtopost connections shall conform to the requirements of Subsection ..
Lock washers shall be highcarbon heattreated spring steel conforming to the requirements of ASME D .. d Anchor Bolts Nuts and Washers .
Anchor bolts nuts and washers shall conform to the requirements of Subsection .. . STEEL BEAM BRIDGE RAILING .
a Beam Guardrail .
Beam guardrail for bridge railing shall conform to the requirements of Subsection ..
The beam guardrail shall be Class B type .
b Steel Posts and Components .
Posts baseplates offset blocks brackets washers and other steel components shall be structural carbon steel conforming to the requirements of the following Standards AASHTO M MM Grade W Grade W ASTM A A M ASTM A A M Grade Grade or AASHTO M MM Grade Grade .
c Steel Pipe .
Steel pipe for anchor bolt sleeves shall conform to the requirements of Subsection .. d Anchor Bolts Nuts and Washers .
Anchor bolts nuts and washers shall conform to the requirements of Subsection ..
SECTION INSULATING MATERIALS .
POLYSTYRENE INSULATION BOARD .
Polystyrene insulation board shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M . It shall be furnished in nominal foot x foot boards and shall be of the thickness compressive strength and density as shown on the Plans . .
BLANKET INSULATION MATERIAL .
Blanket insulation material shall consist of mats of fiberglass rock wool balsam wool or other approved insulating materials completely enclosed on all sides within weatherproof facings of reinforced coated Kraft paper or polyethylene sheeting .
The thermal conductivity of the blanket insulation material shall not exceed .
BTUinch per hour per square foot per degree Fahrenheit at a mean temperature of F. SECTION WATER LINES AND APPURTENANCES .
PLASTIC PIPE FLEXIBLE .
Flexible plastic pipe shall be polyethylene plastic pipe suitable for the transportation of potable water and shall conform to the requirements of AWWA C . The material grade selected shall be capable of withstanding a minimum sustained water pressure of psi at F. The pipe shall be insidediameter controlled .
Fittings may be either nylon copper or bronze .
Clamps shall be stainless steel . .
PLASTIC PIPE RIGID PVC .
Rigid PVC plastic pipe shall be suitable for the transportation of potable water and shall conform to the requirements of ANSIAWWA C . The material grade selected shall be capable of withstanding a minimum sustained water pressure of psi at F. Fittings shall be PVC plastic conforming to the requirements of AWWA C . . COPPER TUBE SEAMLESS .
Seamless copper water tube shall conform to the requirements of ASTM B and ASTM B M Type K. . STEEL PIPE GALVANIZED .
Galvanized steel pipe shall be suitable for the transportation of potable water and shall be the standard weight class conforming to the requirements of ASTM A A M. .
THIS SUBSECTION RESERVED. . DUCTILE IRON PIPE CEMENT LINED .
Ductile iron pipe shall be cementlined and centrifugally cast in metal or sandlined molds .
The pipe shall conform to the requirements of ANSIAWWA C A . and the cement mortar lining shall conform to the requirements of AWWA C A ..
The class of pipe shall be as specified in the Contract . .
PIPE INSULATION .
Thermal insulation for pipes shall be preformed to fit standard pipe sizes and may be supplied as either hollow cylindrical shapes split in half lengthwise or as curved segments .
Insulation shall include all accessories complete with proper jackets or facings as required by the conditions .
Multilayer insulation is acceptable provided the inside and outside diameters of each layer will ensure proper nesting .
The thermal conductivity of the insulation material shall not exceed .
BTUinch per hour per square foot per degree Fahrenheit at a mean temperature of F as determined in accordance with the requirements of ASTM C or ASTM C . The thickness and jackets shall be as specified in the Contract .
Pipe insulation used as bond breakers for structures shall meet the requirements of ASTM C C M. .
THIS SUBSECTION RESERVED . .
THIS SUBSECTION RESERVED . .
THIS SUBSECTION RESERVED . .
THIS SUBSECTION RESERVED . .
THIS SUBSECTION RESERVED . .
THIS SUBSECTION RESERVED .
SECTION THIS SECTION RESERVED SECTION DISINFECTANTS .
CHLORINE SOLUTION .
Chlorine solution used for disinfecting springs wells and other water systems shall consist of a solution of water and liquid chlorine sodium hypochlorite calcium hypochlorite or chloride of lime .
Liquid forms of chlorine or sodium hypochlorite and powder forms of calcium hypochlorite or chloride of lime shall be used according to the instructions supplied by the manufacturer and as recommended by the Vermont Department of Health .
If sodium hypochlorite is already in solution as a laundry bleach containing .
sodium hypochlorite it shall be used at the rate of one part per parts of water to be disinfected .
The dosage should be sufficient to produce a chlorine taste in the water. . SPACE DEODORIZER .
Space deodorizer shall consist of a commercial liquid concentrate that when applied at the dilution ratio recommended by the manufacturer will suppress the obnoxious odors produced by the material to which it is applied .
The deodorizer shall be nontoxic and nonirritating .
It shall be approved by the Engineer before use .
SECTION WATER .
WATER .
All water used shall be clear and free of harmful amounts of oil salt acids alkalis sugar organic matter or other substances injurious to the finished product plant life or the establishment of vegetation .
Where the source of water is relatively shallow the intake shall be maintained at such a depth and so enclosed as to exclude silt mud grass and other foreign materials .
No formal tests of water will be made unless the Engineer questions the quality of the water .
Water known to be of potable quality may be used without tests .
Mixing water for concrete or mortar shall meet the requirements of ASTM C C M. SECTION CALCIUM CHLORIDE .
CALCIUM CHLORIDE .
Calcium chloride shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M . Calcium chloride Type S Grade Type S Grade or Type L brine as defined in ASTM D may be used .
SECTION THIS SECTION RESERVED SECTION TRAFFIC SIGNS .
SIGN POSTS .
a Steel Posts and Anchors .
Steel posts and anchors shall conform to the following requirements Structural steel tubing shall conform to the requirements of Subsection .. Steel posts consisting of standard rolled steel structural shapes shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M MM Grade Grade .
After fabrication these posts shall be galvanized in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO M MM .
Steel posts consisting of flanged channels shall conform to the mechanical requirements of ASTM A Grade and the chemical requirements of ASTM A to lbsyard Rail Class .
Steel posts shall conform to the details indicated on the plans as to size shape weight hole punching hole drilling and other details .
After fabrication these posts shall be galvanized in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO M MM .
Steel posts and anchors consisting of welded mechanical square tubes formed from hot rolled carbon steel sheet shall conform to the mechanical and chemical requirements of ASTM A A M Grade Grade or Grade Grade .
They shall conform to the details indicated on the Plans as to size shape weight hole punching hole drilling strength and other details .
The posts shall be fabricated in accordance with the requirements of ASTM A A M Type and shall be galvanized with a G Coating in accordance with the requirements of ASTM A A M. Alternatively the posts shall be fabricated in accordance with the requirements of ASTM A A M Type and shall be galvanized in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO M MM .
b Aluminum Posts .
Aluminum posts shall conform to the requirements of ASTM B B M Alloy T for structural shapes rolled or extruded and ASTM B and ASTM B M for extruded tubes .
They shall conform to the details shown on the Plans as to size shape and mass weight and they shall be punched or drilled as shown on the Plans .
c Wood Posts .
Wood posts shall be seasoned straight and sound sawn timber comprised of either Oak Cedar Spruce Western Fir or other approved wood .
The posts shall conform to the dimensions and grade shown on the Plans or requirements specified in the Contract Documents .
All wood posts shall be pressuretreated with preservative as specified in Subsection .. All cut ends or notches shall be fieldtreated in in accordance with the requirements of AWPA M. Depending on size and location wood posts may have to be drilled as shown on the Plans .
d Sleeves .
Sleeves for sign posts consisting of structural tubing shall conform to the requirements of ASTM A A M. They shall conform to the details shown on the Plans as to size shape and mass weight and they shall be punched or drilled as shown on the Plans .
After fabrication all steel sleeves shall be galvanized in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO M MM . . EXTRUDED ALUMINUM PANELS .
Extruded aluminum panels shall conform to the requirements of ASTM B and ASTM B M. Alloy T shall be used when reflective sheeting is to be applied to the face of the sign. . FLAT SHEET ALUMINUM .
Flat sheet aluminum shall conform to the requirements of ASTM B B M for either Alloy T or Alloy H. Aluminum components shall not be in direct contact with treated wood posts. . GALVANIZED FLAT SHEET STEEL .
Galvanized flat sheet steel shall conform to the requirements of ASTM A A M. Structural steel shapes and welded sections shall conform to the requirements of ASTM A A M. The steel shall be galvanized in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO M MM and ASTM A A M. The galvanized steel shall be given a light and tight phosphate coating by continuous mill process having not less than milligrams per square foot of area . .
FORMED GALVANIZED STEEL PANELS .
Formed galvanized steel panels shall conform to the requirements of ASTM A A M or ASTM A A M and ASTM A A M Grade Grade .
The panels shall be galvanized in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO M MM .
The galvanized panels shall be given a light and tight phosphate coating by continuous mill process having not less than milligrams per square foot of surface area . .
THIS SUBSECTION RESERVED . .
THIS SUBSECTION RESERVED. . RETROREFLECTIVE SHEETING .
Retroreflective sheeting shall conform to the applicable requirements of AASHTO M with the following exceptions a Packaging Requirements .
Retroreflective sheeting shall be furnished in both rolls and sheets .
The packaging in which the sheeting is shipped shall protect the sheeting from damage andor distortion in accordance with commercially acceptable standards and shall be suitable for storing the sheeting until it is used .
When retroreflective sheeting is furnished in continuous rolls the material shall have a maximum of three splices in any yards of length .
Splices shall be butted or overlapped and shall be suitable for continuous application .
When stored under normal conditions the retroreflective sheeting shall be suitable for use for a period of at least one year after purchase .
b Classification .
Retroreflective sheeting white or colored shall meet the requirements of AASHTO M and the ASTM D classifications below .
TYPE III .
A highintensity retroreflective sheeting typically referred to as high intensity .
TYPE IV .
A highintensity retroreflective sheeting typically referred to as micro prismatic retroreflective element material .
TYPE V. A superhighintensity retroreflective sheeting .
TYPE VI .
An elastomeric highintensity retroreflective sheeting without adhesive .
This is a vinyl material commonly used for traffic cone collars post bands etc .
TYPE VII .
A superhighintensity retroreflective sheeting having the highest retroreflectivity characteristics at long and medium road distances .
This sheeting is typically an unmetallized microprismatic retroreflective element material .
TYPE VIII .
A superhighintensity retroreflective sheeting having the highest retroreflectivity characteristics at long and medium road distances .
TYPE IX .
A veryhighintensity retroreflective sheeting having highest retroreflectivity characteristics at short road distances .
c Retroreflective Requirements .
Retroreflective sheeting shall meet or exceed the minimum brightness and color requirements of AASHTO M . d Color .
Silver is an acceptable designation for white .
e Physical Requirements .
Retroreflective sheeting shall meet the physical requirements of AASHTO M . . DEMOUNTABLE CHARACTERS .
Individual letters digits symbols and borders as shown on the Plans for the text of the sign shall be shaped from sheet aluminum with a thickness of .
inch conforming to the requirements of ASTM B and ASTM B M Alloy H. All characters with a stroke width of inch or less shall be supplied with sealed edges . .
PLASTIC LETTERING FILM .
Plastic lettering film and precoated adhesive shall be fabricated in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO M . . EXTRUDED ALUMINUM MOLDING .
Extruded aluminum molding to be used with extruded aluminum panel signs shall conform to the requirements of ASTM B and ASTM B M Alloy T. Moldings shall be finished with bakedon enamel or sheeting of the color shown on the Plans for the background of the sign .
The molding shall be extruded in the standard commercial form to fit the type of extruded aluminum panel used . .
ASSEMBLY HARDWARE .
Unless otherwise shown on the Plans the assembly hardware used to fasten and support traffic sign components shall conform to the designs and sizes used in standard commercial practices for the materials involved .
a Bolts Nuts and Washers .
Bolts and washers shall be stainless steel conforming to the requirements of ASTM F Alloy Group Condition AF Alloy and its supplementary requirements for S. Nuts shall be stainless steel conforming to the requirements of ASTM F Alloy Group Condition AF Alloy and its supplementary requirements for S. b Rivets .
Rivets shall be of aluminum conforming to the requirements of ASTM B B M Alloy T. c Clips .
Clips used to fasten extruded aluminum panels to the supporting posts shall be of aluminum conforming to the requirements of ASTM B B M Alloy T. Clips used to fasten formed galvanized steel panels to the supporting posts shall be of aluminum conforming to the requirements of ASTM B and ASTM B M Alloy T. Clips may also be fabricated from steel conforming to the requirements of ASTM A and then galvanized in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO M MM and ASTM A A M. SECTION DELINEATORS .
DELINEATOR POSTS .
a Steel Posts and Anchors .
Steel posts anchors and sleeves shall be galvanized in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO M MM after fabrication and shall conform to the following additional requirements Steel posts fabricated as flanged channels shall conform to the mechanical requirements of ASTM A Grade and the chemical requirements of ASTM A to lbsyard Rail Class .
Steel posts and anchors fabricated as welded mechanical square tubes formed from hot rolled carbon steel sheet shall conform to the mechanical and chemical requirements of ASTM A A M Grade Grade or Grade Grade .
The posts may be fabricated in accordance with the requirements of ASTM A A M Type and galvanized with a G Coating in accordance with the requirements of ASTM A A M. Alternatively the posts may be fabricated in accordance with the requirements of ASTM A A M Type .
b Flexible Delineators .
Flexible delineators shall be listed on the Agencys Approved Products List and conform to the types shown on the Plans .
c Sleeves .
Sleeves for sign posts consisting of structural tubing shall conform to the requirements of ASTM A A M. .
THIS SUBSECTION RESERVED . .
THIS SUBSECTION RESERVED . .
THIS SUBSECTION RESERVED . .
THIS SUBSECTION RESERVED . .
ASSEMBLY HARDWARE .
Unless otherwise shown on the Plans the assembly hardware used for connecting the components of the housing and for fastening delineators and plaques to posts shall conform to the following requirements a Bolts and Nuts .
Bolts and nuts shall be fabricated from aluminum conforming to the requirements of ASTM B and ASTM B M Alloy T. Both bolts and nuts shall be given another coating at least .
mil in thickness with dichromate or boiling water seal .
b Washers .
Washers shall be fabricated from aluminum conforming to the requirements of ASTM B and ASTM B M Alloy T. .
THIS SUBSECTION RESERVED. . DETECTABLE WARNING SURFACE .
Acceptable detectable warning surfaces shall be those detectable warning surface products included on the Agencys Approved Products List .
SECTION TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNALS .
PEDESTAL POSTS AND BASES .
Steel posts shall utilize cast iron bases aluminum posts shall utilize cast aluminum bases .
a Pedestal Posts .
Steel Posts .
Steel posts shall consist of inch outside diameter galvanized steel pipe conforming to the dimensional requirements of ASTM A A M or ASTM A A M Type S Grade B Standard Weight .
Galvanizing shall be in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO M MM and ASTM A A M. The post shall have no taper and shall be threaded at the lower end to fit the base .
Aluminum Posts .
Aluminum posts shall consist of inch outside diameter aluminum structural pipe conforming to the requirements of ASTM B B M Alloy T. Posts shall have no taper and shall be threaded at the lower end to fit the base .
b Bases .
Cast Iron Bases .
Cast iron bases shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M Class or higher .
Galvanized cast iron bases shall conform to the requirements of ASTM A Class A. Galvanizing shall be in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO M MM and ASTM A A M. Bases shall be galvanized by the same procedure used for steel posts and may be galvanized with the posts .
Cast Aluminum Bases .
Cast aluminum bases shall conform to the requirements of ASTM B B M or ASTM B B M Alloy SGAT. . STRAIN POLES .
a Wood Poles .
Wood poles for span wiremounted signal heads shall be either Douglas Fir Southern Pine or Western Red Cedar .
The poles to be used shall be Class and shall be a minimum of feet in length unless otherwise specified .
Wood poles shall meet the requirements of ANSI .
Wood Poles Specifications and Dimensions .
Quality .
Outer bark shall be completely removed from all poles .
No patch or inner bark more than inch wide and inches long shall be left on the pole surface between the top and inches below the groundline .
All poles shall be neatly sawed at the top and at the butt along a plane which shall not be out of square with the axis of the pole by more than one unit per six units of diameter of the sawed surface .
Beveling of not more than .
of the butt diameter in width is permitted at the edge of the sawed butt surface or an equivalent area asymmetrically located .
Completely overgrown knots rising more than inch above the pole surface branch stubs and partially overgrown knots shall be trimmed close .
Completely overgrown knots less than inch high need not be trimmed .
Trimming may be done by a shaving machine or by hand .
Dimensions .
The dimensions for the poles required shall be not more than inches shorter or more than inches longer than the nominal length .
The lengths shall be measured between the extreme ends of the pole .
The minimum circumference at feet from the butt shall be inches for Western Red Cedar and inches for Douglas Fir and Southern Pine .
The minimum circumference at the top of the pole shall be inches for both Western Red Cedar and Southern Pine .
The circumference at feet from the butt of the pole shall be not more than inches larger than the specified minimum .
The top circumference requirements shall remain inches at a point corresponding to the minimum length permitted for the pole .
The true circumference class shall be determined as follows Measure the circumference at feet from the butt .
This dimension will determine the true class provided its top measured at the minimum length point is large enough .
Otherwise the circumference at the top will determine the true class provided the circumference at feet from the butt does not exceed the specified minimum by more than inches .
Preservative Treatment .
All wood posts shall be treated over their full length in accordance with the requirements of Subsection .
using Type I II III or IV preservatives .
b Steel Poles and Baseplates .
Steel poles shall consist of tapered tubular shafts or a series of two to three different diameter pipes welded together with baseplates .
The shafts shall conform to the requirements of ASTM A A M Grade B .
The metal thickness shall be not less than inch for tapered poles and not less than .
inch for the bottom section of multiple pipes .
The steel poles shall withstand the stringing tension of the span wire with its signal load without exceeding a deflection of inches and a bending stress limit of of yield strength .
The tapered shafts shall be formed welded and longitudinally coldrolled under sufficient pressure to flatten the weld and form a smooth tapered tube .
A reinforced hand hole at least inches inches complete with cover shall be provided in the pole approximately inches above the base and located at to the span wire on the side away from approaching traffic .
A lip shall be provided around the handhole opening to prevent the cover from tipping and falling inside the hole .
Stainless steel machine screws shall be provided for attaching the handhole cover .
A steel cap shall be provided for the top of each pole with provision for an overhead wire entrance when needed .
Stainless steel machine screws shall be provided for securely fastening the cap to the top of the pole .
A inch blind halfcoupling shall be welded through the side of the shaft to inches below the span wire attachment height .
A grounding nut shall be located inside the shaft easily accessible from the handhole .
Each steel strain pole and the neutral or common grounding electrode conductor shall be bonded to a softdrawn bare copper wire with a crosssectional area of No .
AWG .
The No .
AWG softdrawn bare copper wire shall be connected to grounding electrodes which will be driven at each strain pole or steel pole with mast arms location .
The baseplate shall be of adequate shape and size to carry the full bending moment of the pole at its yield point and shall consist of a heattreated cast steel conforming to the requirements of AASHTO M MM and ASTM A A M or steel plate conforming to the requirements of ASTM A A M. The baseplate shall be attached to the shaft by two continuous electric welds one inside the base at the end of the shaft and the other on the outside at the top of the base .
The design shall be such that the welded connection shall develop the full strength of the adjacent shaft section .
After fabrication the shaft and baseplates shall be galvanized in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO M MM and ASTM A A M and shall have a flat black powder coat finish in accordance with the requirements of Subsection .
unless otherwise specified .
Pole diameter height yield strength and wall thickness shall be stamped on a metal tag attached near the hand hole .
If stepped poles are used the stamping shall indicate the equivalent tapered pole. . TRAFFIC SIGNAL POLES WITH MAST ARMS OR BRACKET ARMS .
a Steel Poles and Baseplates .
Steel poles shall be fabricated from tapered tubular shafts with baseplates and shall conform to the requirements of ASTM A A M Grade A or ASTM A A M Grade .
The minimum wall thickness shall be not less than .
inch gauge .
b Cantilever Mast Arms .
Material for the mast arms shall conform to the requirements of Subsection .b fabricated either as a tapered tube or multidiameter pipe with a minimum metal thickness of .
inch gauge .
Both types shall have a flange plate welded on the large end for attaching to the vertical pole .
A removable cap shall be attached to the far end .
Wire outlets with rubber grommets shall be provided for each indicated signal or related equipment location .
c Aluminum Poles Bases and Mast Arms .
Aluminum poles with anchor bases and mast arms shall conform to the requirements of Subsection .. d Luminaire Bracket Arms .
Luminaire bracket arms shall be the same type of material as the upright support .
Luminaire Bracket Arms shall conform to the requirements of Subsection ..
The bracket arms shall be either truss or tapered tubes as shown on the Plans .
The main member of a trusstype arm shall be an oval shaped tapered tube securely joined by means of vertical struts to its companion member .
e Identification .
Pole and mast arm diameter heightlength yield strength and wall thickness shall be stamped on a metal tag attached near the hand hole .
Cantilever arm dimensions length and diameterwall thickness shall also be included on the tag .
If stepped poles are used the stamping shall also indicate the equivalent tapered polearm. . SPAN WIRE .
Span wire shall consist of inch diameter galvanized steel cable conforming to the requirements of ASTM A Class A Coating seven wire strand utilities grade .
The signal cable shall be attached to the span wire with a stainless alloy gauge lashing spinning wire. . TRAFFIC SIGNAL HEADS .
Traffic signal heads shall be selfcontained assemblies that are expandable and adjustable .
The signal heads may contain one or more signal faces as shown on the Plans .
All traffic signal lenses shall be inches in diameter unless otherwise shown on the Plans .
Each traffic signal face shall consist of a specific number of signal sections rigidly fastened together in such a manner as to be watertight and dustproof .
It shall be possible to assemble one or more signal faces into a multidirectional traffic signal head .
The components of the signal head consisting of housings doors visors optical units lenses reflectors lamp sockets and lamps wiring trunnions and brackets shall conform to the latest requirements of the ITE Technical Report Adjustable Face Traffic Control Signal Head Standards .
Standard hour traffic signal lamps shall be used unless otherwise specified .
The Contractor shall use W lamps in inch units unless otherwise specified .
Lamp socket lead wires shall be stranded .
The Contractor shall use W lamps with internal reflector and rated initial lumen output for those faces having arrow lenses .
The components of the signal head shall be rigidly constructed of a diecast aluminum alloy in accordance with the requirements of ASTM B B M Alloys SA SB SCA SCB or SGB or polycarbonate with a smooth outer surface and shall be capable of holding the optical units securely in place .
a Polycarbonate Signal Heads .
When a polycarbonate signal head is utilized it shall conform to the following requirements Housing .
The housing of each section shall be a onepiece polycarbonate resin material with front sides top and bottom integrally molded .
Two sets of internal bosses shall be provided in each section for mounting of terminal strip facilities .
The terminal bosses shall have threaded inserts sonically welded into each boss .
Signal housings shall be flat black unless otherwise noted in the Plans .
The housing door of each signal section shall be of the same material and color as the housing .
Housing Door .
The housing door of each signal section shall be of the same material as the housing .
b Aluminum or Polycarbonate Traffic Signals .
For either aluminum or polycarbonate traffic signals all requirements of the ITE Technical Report Adjustable Face Vehicular Traffic Control Signal Heads Standards shall be met as well as the following additional requirements Optical System .
The optical system shall be an LED with a polycarbonate lens red yellow or green with a nominal size of or inches unless otherwise noted in the Plans .
The optical system shall include dimming capabilities and shall comply with the current version of the applicable ITE or pedestrian LED Signal Supplement or Module .
The manufacturers name trademark serial number and other necessary identification shall be permanently marked on the back of the module .
A label shall also be placed on the module certifying compliance with these Specifications .
Wiring .
Terminal blocks shall be placed in the center of a threesection signal unless otherwise specified and shall be a fiveposition tenterminal barriertype strip with the following terminal designations clearly marked RAGRCAC .
The terminal blocks shall be secured on both ends .
Visors .
Each signal door shall be equipped with a tunnel or cutawaytype polycarbonate resin visor duralocked at four points to the door .
The type shall be as shown on the Plans .
Visors shall be painted or colored flat black unless otherwise noted on the Plans .
Traffic Signal Backplates .
All backplates shall be louvered and painted or colored flat black. . TRAFFIC SIGNAL CONTROLLERS AND CABINETS .
a General .
To prevent the State from becoming a testing ground for newly developed traffic signal equipment it is required that the manufacturer provide certification that the particular type and model of traffic signal controller to be used shall have been in actual field operation at a minimum of five locations for no less than one year each prior to its introduction in Vermont .
This requirement does not apply to minor software updates of an existing unit .
Each traffic signal controller shall be designated to operate on V AC Hz singlephase and shall be delivered completely wired and enclosed in a weatherproof housing .
Controllers shall be of the same type and manufacture conforming to the standard used by the town city or village when extensions or improvements of existing traffic control facilities are contracted .
Prior to bench testing the Contractor shall provide the proposed traffic signal controller settings for approval .
Each controller shall be benchtested with a NEMA test board that simulates all possible sequencing of signal intervals corresponding to those for which the controller is to be used for at least seven continuous calendar days prior to installation .
The manufacturer or distributor shall have such bench testing performed by an independent testing company which shall certify that such test has been made and that the traffic signal controller functions properly .
Copies of all test results and descriptions of all changes and repairs shall be submitted with the certification .
A copy of the controller settings used for the test shall be included in the bench test results .
These settings shall be retained in the controller through shipment and installation .
A representative of the manufacturer shall be on the Project site for turnon of the units .
The controller shall be bench tested after it has been completely installed in its cabinet and all wiring internal to the cabinet has been completed .
The bench test results shall include actual test results for all functions that the Plans require the controller to be able to perform .
Failure to test any required function will result in rejection of the controller without exception .
Rejected controllers will not be permitted to remain on the Project and rejected controllers shall not be reworked and subsequently reinstalled on the Project .
The controller shall not be shipped until the manufacturer has received full written approval of all the bench tests results from the Agency .
Shipment of the controller prior to receipt of full written approval for all bench test results will result in the suspension of all payments for the traffic control signal items in the Contract until a fully approved controller is completely installed inplace and is functioning properly .
Traffic signal equipment design and performance shall meet or exceed all requirements of the latest NEMA standards for traffic control systems .
Performance of the equipment shall be consistent with the MUTCD .
The controller along with all auxiliary equipment shall be capable of producing the timing plans and coordination shown on the Plans .
b ControllerAuxiliary Equipment .
All traffic signal controllers shall be actuated solidstate menu driven and with keyboard entry .
They shall have a minimum of sixteen phases with dual maximum capabilities and an internal timebased coordinator capable of providing at least four cycle lengths with multiple programs per cycle .
All controllers shall have all necessary hardwaresoftware for Ethernet communications .
Controllers on a coordinated system with hardwire telemetry or radio interconnect shall have remote communications capability unless otherwise specified on the plans .
Each installation shall include the following Malfunction Management Unit .
Sixteenchannel malfunction management unit MMU with stoptiming function liquid crystal display and the recording storage capacity for at least nine events .
The MMU and the controller shall be wired to ensure that the events logged by MMU and the controller indications at the time of failure can be uploaded directly to a computer .
Switches and Relays .
Sufficient load switches and flash transfer relays for all sixteen phases .
Load Switches .
LEDdisplay load switches on the input side and labeled on the cabinet wall .
Remote Flasher .
Remote flasher .
Vehicle Detector Amplifiers .
Vehicle detector amplifiers if applicable shall be rack mounted units .
Cabinets .
The controller and all auxiliary equipment shall be enclosed within a prewired rainproof NEMA R controller cabinet with a police door .
The cabinet shall have a finish as specified on the Plans .
The cabinet shall be sized to provide ample space for housing all equipment necessary to provide the timings shown on the Plans .
The cabinet shall have a main door within which an auxiliary door shall be placed .
The auxiliary door police door shall house a compartment with the following switches Flash Automatic Power OnOff and Signal OnOff .
A metal plaque listing ownership and emergency telephone numbers shall be attached to the outside of the cabinet .
The design and configuration of the plaque shall be as shown in the Plans .
Each cabinet shall have a weatherproof plastic envelope of sufficient size at least inches inches to store wiring diagrams program manuals etc .
The cabinet shall contain a suitably designed vent fan and thermostat with a range of F to F. The thermostat shall be set initially to F. The controller cabinet shall contain a strong mounting table sliding track hinged adjustable fixed or a folding support of such construction that it will permit the controller or other equipment to be withdrawn from the cabinet for inspection or maintenance without breaking any electrical connection or interrupting normal operation of the controller .
A flexiblearm LED lamp receptacle capable of illuminating all areas of the cabinet two convenience outlets ground fault interruption protection and surge protection shall be provided .
Four nonground fault outlets for equipment power shall be provided on the left side of the cabinet to be fed from the load side of the main breaker .
A wiring panel shall be included in each cabinet mounted in such a way to provide visibility and accessibility .
The lowest row of terminals shall be at least inches from the bottom of the cabinet .
The main door lock of the cabinet shall be a tumblertype lock as recommended by the manufacturer of the equipment .
A policetype lock shall be provided for the auxiliary door .
An intersection layout drawing at a scale of inch equals feet shall be taped to the inside of the door in the proper orientation and covered with plastic .
It shall indicate numbers for the vehicle heads phases load switches detectors loops and any other pertinent information .
The Contractor shall indicate on the inside of the door the date and time of signal turnon for new installations or switchover for replacement installations .
The door marking shall be permanent .
Spare Equipment .
In addition to equipment furnished to provide a functional signal system the Contractor shall supply one of each of the following spare parts in each cabinet a. Flasher unit independent of the controller .
b .
Transfer relay .
c. Flash drive USB .
or later .
d. Cabinet lamp LED .
e. Filter for ventilation system .
f. Flash transfer relay .
g. Bus interface unit BIU in a protected container .
This equipment may be used during the construction period to replace malfunctioning equipment but must be replaced and maintained in the cabinet prior to acceptance .
Wiring .
All panel wiring shall be neat and firm and ULapproved circuit breakers shall be provided .
All field terminals shall be suitably identified .
The electrical connections from the controller and other accessory equipment to the outgoing and incoming circuits shall be made either by standard multiple plugs or jacks .
The outgoing traffic control signal circuits shall be of the same polarity as the line side of the power supply and the common return of the signal circuits shall be of the same polarity as the ground side of the power supply .
The ground side of the power supply shall be grounded to the controller cabinet in an approved manner .
All signals shall be wired such that no more than two through faces northsouth andor eastwest are wired into one load switch even though the two approaches may time during the same phase .
Contacts .
All contacts used in connection with interval indications shall be of pure coin silver or its equivalent and shall be capable of breaking and carrying A at V AC .
All contacts shall be readily accessible and capable of being replaced in the controller without the use of any tools other than pliers and screwdrivers .
Mercury tube contacts will not be accepted for use .
Relays .
Relays shall not be used in connection with any automatic nonflashing red yellow or green indications without the approval of the Engineer .
All relays shall be jack mounted .
Motor and Lamp Leads .
All motor and lamp leads shall be moisture and heatresistant type of flexible stranded copper V wire meeting the requirements of the National Electrical Code .
Snap Switch .
Each controller shall be equipped with a snap switch that will disconnect the timing mechanism and signal lights from all outside sources of electrical power .
Lightning Arrester .
Each controller shall be equipped with a suitable effective lightning arrester that filters lightning or high voltages to ground protecting internal components of the controller .
Radio and Television Interference .
Electrical equipment shall be protected against interfering with radio and television reception .
Wiring Diagram .
Two internal connection wiring diagrams for all apparatus as well as mounting and operating instructions shall be furnished .
Flasher .
Each controller shall be equipped with a flashing mechanism capable of providing flashing operation at a rate of not less than or more than flashes per minute part of which may be yellow and part red or all red as directed by the Engineer .
The illuminated period of each flash shall be not less than or more than of the total cycle .
Such flashing mechanisms shall be in an encapsulated cube style configuration shall be adequately housed and protected from the weather and shall be of such design as to be accessible for inspection cleaning and adjustment without disconnecting any part .
The flasher shall be capable of flashing two inductive or tungsten loads and shall operate within a line voltage range of to V AC .
Alternately a NEMA flasher meeting the same operational requirements may be provided .
A mercury tube contact will not be accepted for flashing indications .
The flashing operation shall begin automatically if the controller malfunctions and when called for by the timing plan .
In addition flashing shall be capable of being manually controlled by a switch in the police door .
The controller itself need not be present to operate the signals in flashing mode .
Interconnection .
All controllers installed in areas where other signalized intersections are nearby and there is likelihood of future coordination shall be capable of future interconnect either by cable connection telemetry spread spectrum radio or the use of timebased coordination .
Such modifications shall not require return of the controller to the manufacturer .
Semiactuated Controllers .
For semiactuated controllers in the absence of actuation the RightofWay shall return to and remain on the nonactuated approach or as shown on the Plans .
Fullyactuated Controllers .
For fullyactuated controllers in the absence of actuation the RightofWay shall remain on the last actuated phase or as specified . .
FLASHING BEACONS .
a General Requirements .
The applicable portions of Subsection .
shall apply in addition to the specific functional requirements described below .
b Flasher .
The controller shall be equipped with a flashing mechanism capable of providing flashing operation at a rate of not less than or more than flashes per minute part of which may be yellow and part red or all red as directed by the Engineer .
The illuminated period of each flash shall be not less than and not more than of the total cycle .
The flashing mechanism shall be adequately housed and protected from the weather and shall be designed to be accessible for inspection cleaning and adjustment without disconnecting any part .
A mercury tube contact will not be accepted for flashing indications .
Time cycle variations shall not occur due to any change in outside temperature between the limits of F and F. A heater unit may be activated if required to keep the unit functioning at temperatures lower than F. Solid state flasher units shall meet or exceed all requirements of the latest NEMA standards .
The flashing mechanism shall be protected against interfering with radio and television reception using a radio and television interference filter .
c Cabinets .
The complete flashing mechanism and related interference filters shall be enclosed within a rainproof NEMA R cast aluminum cabinet or a glass meter socket housing whichever is shown on the Plans .
The cabinet shall be sized to provide ample space for housing the flashing mechanism filters and fuse panel .
The cabinet shall have a main door and lock .
The lock shall be a tumbler type lock as recommended by the manufacturer of the equipment .
Two keys shall be furnished for the lock .
The cabinet shall contain a suitably designed vent .
The mounting of the cabinet shall be as shown on the Plans .
d Flashing Beacon Signal Heads .
Flashing beacon signal heads shall be selfcontained assemblies that are expandable adjustable and may contain one or more signal faces as shown on the Plans .
The components of the signal head consisting of housings doors visors optical units consisting of lenses reflectors lamp sockets and lamps wiring trunnions and brackets shall conform to the latest requirements of the ITE Technical Report Adjustable Face Traffic Control Signal Head Standards and the applicable portions of Subsection .
unless otherwise specified. . ELECTRICAL CONDUIT .
Electrical conduit shall conform to the following requirements a Rigid Polyvinyl Chloride PVC Electrical Conduit .
Rigid PVC electrical conduit shall be Schedule and shall meet or exceed the Specifications of ASTM D . b Polyethylene Plastic Pipe and Fittings HDPE Electrical Conduit .
Polyethylene plastic pipe and fittings HDPE electrical conduit shall be Schedule and shall meet or exceed the Specifications of ASTM D . c PlasticCoated Galvanized Steel Rigid Metallic Electrical Conduit .
Plasticcoated galvanized steel rigid metallic electrical conduit shall be hotdip galvanized and shall have a plastic coating of at least mils in thickness intimately bonded to both inside and outside galvanized surfaces .
The conduit shall meet the requirements of ASTM A A M. . TRAFFIC SIGNAL CONDUCTOR CABLE .
a PolyethyleneInsulated Polyvinyl Chloride PVC Jacketed Signal Cable .
Polyethyleneinsulated PVCjacketed signal cable for use in underground conduits or as an aerial cable supported by a span wire shall conform to the latest requirements of International Municipal Signal Association Inc. IMSA Specification No. . b PolyethyleneInsulated PolyethyleneJacketed Communication Cable .
Polyethyleneinsulated Polyethylene jacketed communication cable for use in underground conduits or as an aerial cable supported by a span wire shall conform to the latest requirements of IMSA Specification No. . c PolyethyleneInsulated Polyvinyl Chloride PVC Jacketed Integral Messenger Signal Cable .
Polyethyleneinsulated PVC jacketed signal cable with integral supporting span wire for aerial installation shall conform to the latest requirements of IMSA Specification No. . d PolyethyleneInsulated PolyethyleneJacketed Integral Messenger Communication Cable .
Polyethyleneinsulated polyethylenejacketed communication cable with integral supporting span wire for aerial installation shall conform to the requirements of the latest edition of IMSA Specification No .
. .
DETECTORS .
Vehicle detectors used for actuating traffic signal controllers shall be of the inductive loop type or as shown on the Plans .
Inductive loop detectors shall meet or exceed all requirements of the latest NEMA standards for traffic control systems .
Each detector unit shall be capable of serving up to four loops .
The wire loops shall consist of No .
gauge AWG minimum size Type TW stranded wire with V insulation .
Loop feeder wire shall be in accordance with the loop detector manufacturers recommendations .
Loop feeder length capability shall be at least feet for one loop or a combined total feeder length capability of at least feet for multiple loops .
A single conductor shall consist of sevenstrand tinned copper .
The configurations and installation of the wire loops and loop feeder wires shall be in accordance with the loop detector manufacturers recommendations andor as shown on the Plans .
The loops shall be located as shown on the Plans .
Vehicle detector feeder wire leadins shall be enclosed in a nonmetallic conduit for underground travel from the curb to the controller . .
VEHICLE DETECTOR SLOT SEALANT .
Vehicle detector slot sealant material shall be a standard of the trade for this purpose and it shall have the approval of the Engineer prior to being used . .
PULL BOXES AND JUNCTION BOXES .
a Pull Boxes .
Pull boxes shall be constructed of Concrete Class B .
Pull box frames and covers shall be steel plate and conform to the requirements of ASTM A A M. Where the cover is exposed to vehicle or pedestrian traffic it shall have an approved nonskid surface such as diamond plate .
Frames and covers shall be galvanized in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO M MM .
Pull boxes shall be designed and constructed to support at least an AASHTO HS Loading .
b Junction Boxes .
Junction boxes shall be constructed of fiberglass high density polyethylene HDPE or acrylonitrilebutadienestyrene ABS and shall be highimpactresistant at temperatures ranging from F to F ultravioletstabilized and fireretardant .
The side wall shall be ribbed for strength .
The cover shall be nonskid and shall be held down with recessed hexhead bolts .
The junction box shall be capable of withstanding a loading of kips over any inch inch area on the cover .
The size of the box shall be as specified in the Contract . .
ACCESSIBLE PEDESTRIAN SIGNALS .
Accessible Pedestrian Signals APS shall meet the standards of the American with Disabilities Act ADA and the most current edition of the MUTCD .
a Wiring .
The APS shall interface and be coordinated with the other features of a traffic control signal .
b Audible Features .
The APS shall include an audible indication of the Walk interval by either tone or voice and shall be audible from the near side of the associated crosswalk .
If the tone for the Walk interval is the same as the locator tone of the pushbutton it shall have a faster repetition rate than the associated locator tone .
The volume of the audible features shall have automatic volume adjustment based on the ambient noise levels .
Audible features shall be no more than dB louder than ambient sound up to a maximum volume of dB measured at inches from the device .
When voice messages are used they shall include a clear message that the walk interval is in effect and shall indicate to which crossing it applies .
Audible features may be integral to the Pedestrian Pushbutton Assembly or through a separate speaker housing. . PEDESTRIAN PUSHBUTTON ASSEMBLIES .
Pedestrian pushbutton assemblies shall meet all ADA requirements .
The plunger head shall have a minimum diameter of inches and the force required to operate the plunger shall not exceed pounds .
The pushbutton shall activate both the Walk interval and the APS if one is provided .
a Color .
The color of the pushbutton shall contrast visually with the housing or mounting .
b Audible Features .
The pushbutton assembly shall include an integral locator tone .
The locator tone shall have a duration of .
seconds or less and shall repeat at second intervals .
The locator tone shall be dB minimum and dB maximum above ambient noise levels and shall be responsive to ambient noise levels .
c Tactile Features .
The pushbutton assembly shall incorporate a raised arrow .
The arrow shall be raised a minimum of inch and shall have a minimum length of inches .
The arrow color shall contrast with the background .
The pushbutton shall vibrate to indicate that the walk interval is in effect. . GROUNDING ELECTRODES .
Grounding electrodes shall include grounding rods and grounding conductors .
a Grounding Rods .
Grounding rods shall be copperclad steel rods with a diameter of inch and a minimum length of feet conforming to the requirements of UL No .
and ANSI C .. b Grounding Conductors .
Grounding conductors shall be installed throughout the system back to the power source .
The earth shall not be used as the sole equipmentgrounding conductor .
Grounding conductors shall be AWG No .
soft copper or stranded copper conductors .
SECTION HIGHWAY ILLUMINATION .
LIGHT POLE FOUNDATIONS .
a Concrete .
Concrete shall conform to the requirements of Section for Concrete Class B. b Reinforcing Steel .
Reinforcing steel for light pole bases shall conform to the requirements of Section for Reinforcing Steel Level I. c Electrical Conduit .
Electrical conduit for light pole bases shall conform to the requirements of Subsection .a .
d Anchor Bolts .
Anchor bolts for light pole bases shall be per the transformer base manufacturers recommendation and conform to the requirements of Subsection .. e Grounding Electrodes .
Grounding electrodes for light pole bases shall conform to the requirements of Subsection .. . TRANSFORMER BASES .
a Transformer Bases .
Transformer bases and transformer base doors shall consist of a onepiece aluminum casting conforming to the requirements of ASTM B B M or ASTM B B M Alloy SGAT T. Galvanized bolts nuts washers and other hardware shall be provided to attach the transformer base to the anchor base of the light pole .
Galvanizing for bolts nuts washers and other hardware shall conform to the requirements of Subsection .. b Mounting Hardware .
Hardware for mounting the transformer base door to the transformer base shall be stainless steel. . LIGHT POLES .
a Anchor Bases .
Anchor bases shall consist of a onepiece aluminum casting conforming to the requirements of ASTM B B M or ASTM B B M Alloy SGAT T. b Pole Shafts .
Pole shafts shall be fabricated from tapered onepiece seamless aluminum tubes conforming to the requirements of ASTM B and ASTM B M Alloy T T or T. The minimum wall thickness shall be .
inch for mounting heights of less than feet and .
inch for mounting heights of feet or more .
c Pole Caps .
Pole Caps shall consist of a onepiece aluminum casting conforming to the requirements of ASTM B B M or ASTM B B M Alloy SGAT T. .
BRACKET ARMS .
Single bracket elliptical arms and the main member of trusstype arms shall be seamless tube conforming to the requirements of ASTM B and ASTM B M Alloy T or Alloy T. Other members of trusstype arms shall conform to the requirements of ASTM B and ASTM B M Alloy T. All screws nuts bolts and other hardware for mounting bracket arms to the light pole shall be stainless steel unless otherwise specified .
Bracket Arms shall be able to withstand a vertical load of pounds and a horizontal load of pounds without fracture or permanent deformation. . LUMINAIRES .
All luminaires shall be V unless otherwise specified in the Plans. . HIGHWAY ILLUMINATION CONDUCTOR CABLE .
Highway illumination conductor cables shall be conductors of stranded softdrawn copper with a moisture and heat resistant thermoplastic insulation .
Cables shall be rated for V service at F for either dry or wet locations .
The single conductors shall conform to the requirements of the National Electrical Code for the intended wire use and existing field conditions .
Wire size shall be such that no more than a voltage drop will occur anywhere in the secondary circuit .
All wiring shall be colorcoded .
All conductors within the streetlight pole and bracket arm shall be No .
AWG stranded copper wire .
Street lighting conductors within strain poles or mast arm poles shall also be No .
AWG stranded copper wire .
UF cable is allowed in the bottom of the pole below the handhole . .
FINISH OF HIGHWAY ILLUMINATION COMPONENTS .
a Powder Coating .
Powder coating shall be a polyester powder coat in the manufacturers standard black finish .
Powder coatings shall be salt sprayresistant in accordance with the requirements of ASTM B . Powder coating shall exhibit no discoloration cracking or other visible defects when tested for accelerated weathering as described in ASTM D Cycle No .
for continuous hours .
The chemical composition of powder coatings shall provide a highly durable UV and salt spray resistant finish in accordance with the requirements of ASTM B and shall be humidityproof in accordance with the requirements of ASTM D . b Anodized Aluminum .
Anodized aluminum coatings shall be in accordance with the requirements of ASTM B ASTM B ASTM B Type A or B and ASTM B . .
THIS SUBSECTION RESERVED . .
THIS SUBSECTION RESERVED . .
THIS SUBSECTION RESERVED . .
THIS SUBSECTION RESERVED . .
THIS SUBSECTION RESERVED . .
THIS SUBSECTION RESERVED .
SECTION LANDSCAPING MATERIALS .
LANDSCAPE BACKFILL .
The landscape backfill material shall be premixed consisting of approximately topsoil compost and native soil as approved by the Engineer .
In cases where native soil meets the topsoil Specification the proportions of native soil may be adjusted to up to as approved by the Engineer. . TOPSOIL .
Topsoil shall be a natural workable soil free of refuse roots stones brush weeds or other material that would be detrimental to the proper development of plant growth .
Topsoil shall be screened loose and friable free of subsoil roots noxious weeds stones larger than inch and other debris .
Topsoil shall be reasonably freedraining have a clay content of less than and have an organic matter content including woody plant materials of to as determined by the requirements of AASHTO T . Topsoil for lawn areas shall have an organic matter content of at least .
Salinity electrical conductivity shall be less than .
Siemens per meter as determined by the requirements of AASHTO T . The acidity range of the topsoil shall be pH .
to .
when tested in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO T . Topsoil shall be obtained from a source that has been approved by the Engineer and has demonstrated by a healthy growth of grass cultivated crops or wild vegetation that it is of good quality .
At least Calendar Days prior to delivery and use the Contractor shall provide at least one soil analysis for every cubic yards of topsoil used on the Project to the Engineer .
The analysis shall be performed by a Laboratory accredited in the given test method by a nationally recognized accrediting body such as AASHTO .
Testing shall be on dry material that has passed the No. . mm sieve with the gradation specified in Table .A .
TABLE .A GRADATION OF TOPSOIL Sieve Designation Percentage by Mass Weight Passing Square Mesh Sieves No. . mm No. . mm No. . mm No. . mm Soil analysis shall show recommendations for soil additives to correct soil deficiencies and for additives necessary to accomplish the particular planting objectives noted .
Soil amendments shall be incorporated thoroughly into the topsoil to meet the specified requirements for topsoil prior to delivering the material to the site. . SOD .
Sod shall be live fresh and of suitable character for the soil in which it is placed .
Sod shall be of a firm even texture show good root development be reasonably free from noxious weeds and shall have a compact growth of vigorous dark green grass .
The sod shall have a minimum content of Kentucky Bluegrass Poa pratensis improved variety and Red Fescue Festuca rubra improved variety .
The sod shall be approved by the Engineer prior to being cut and again before it is laid . .
SEED .
Seed shall be furnished in new clean sealed and properly labeled containers either separately or mixed as appropriate and shall conform to the seed formula shown on the Plans .
Seed that has become wet moldy or otherwise damaged shall not be accepted .
a Testing .
The seed shall conform to all State and Federal regulations .
b Labels .
Labels shall conform to all State and Federal regulations and shall be clearly marked with the following information Seed name Lot number Germination Purity Weed seed content .
COMPOST .
Compost shall be free of weed seeds and comply with EPA requirements for compost .
The compost shall have a loose and granular texture with the following characteristics or properties as specified in Table .A .
TABLE .A EPA COMPOST MATERIAL REQUIREMENTS Physical Property Material Requirements Organic matter content Total Kjeldahl nitrogen content . . pH . .
Maximum particle size inch Soluble salt content mmhoscm Human inerts by dry mass .
Moisture content Compost shall generally comprise of the backfill material unless otherwise specified .
The compost shall possess no objectionable odors and shall not resemble the raw material from which it was derived .
The compost must meet CFR also known as U.S. EPA Part exceptional quality concentration limits for trace elements and heavy metals .
At least days prior to delivery and use the Contractor shall provide a compost analysis to the Engineer .
The analysis shall be performed by a facility employing the latest Test Method for the Examination of Composting and Compost TMECC . .
FERTILIZER .
Fertilizer if specified shall be a standard commercial grade dry fertilizer and shall conform to the requirements of all State and Federal regulations and to the standards of the Association of Official Agricultural Chemists .
Fertilizer shall contain not less than the minimum percentage of nitrogen phosphoric acid and potash shown on the Plans .
a Packaging .
The fertilizer shall be furnished in new clean sealed and properly labeled bags not weighing more than pounds each .
Caked or otherwise damaged fertilizer shall not be accepted .
Labels shall be clearly marked with the following information Manufacturers name Type Mass weight Guaranteed analysis Unless otherwise specified the fertilizer shall contain available Nitrogen N available Phosphoric Acid P and available Potassium K. Of the available Nitrogen shall be in a slowrelease form as is found in certain urea form products or natural organic forms or a combination of both. . MYCORRHIZAL FUNGI PRODUCT .
Mycorrhizal fungi product if specified on the Plans and details shall be of granular form and shall include mycorrhizae spores to enhance root growth nutrient uptake and reduce transplant shock .
All mycorrhizal fungi products shall be administered per manufacturers recommendations .
Mycorrhizal fungi shall be one of the mycorrhizal fungi listed Agencys Approved Products List . .
AGRICULTURAL LIMESTONE .
Agricultural limestone shall be a calcitic or dolomitic ground limestone containing not less than of total calcium or magnesium carbonates .
The limestone shall conform to the requirements of all State and Federal regulations and to the standards of the Association of Official Agricultural Chemists .
a Packaging .
The limestone shall be furnished in new clean sealed and properly labeled bags not weighing more than pounds each .
Caked or otherwise damaged limestone shall not be accepted .
Labels shall be clearly marked with the following information Manufacturers name Type Mass weight Guaranteed analysis b Sieve Analysis .
Limestone shall meet the following sieve analysis shall pass the No. . mm sieve with a minimum of passing the No. . mm sieve . .
LIQUID LIME .
Liquid lime shall be a commercially formulated calcium carbonate lime mixture .
a Packaging .
Labels shall be clearly marked with the following information Manufacturers name Type Mass weight Guaranteed analysis .
MULCH MATERIALS .
Mulch materials shall conform to the following requirements a Hay Mulch .
Hay mulch shall consist of mowed and properly cured grass or legume mowings reasonably free from swamp grass weeds twigs debris or other deleterious material and free from rot or mold .
It shall be in an airdry condition suitable for placing with mulch blower equipment and shall be acceptable to the Engineer .
b Wood Chip Mulch .
Wood chip mulch shall consist of hardwood chips to inch nominal thickness with having an area of not less than square inch or more than square inches .
All wood chip mulch shall be reasonably free from deleterious materials that are injurious to plant growth .
Wood chip mulch may be used only for temporary applications for erosion prevention and tree protection during construction .
c Bark Mulch .
Mulch material used for landscape plantings shall consist of well composted shredded Cedar Pine or Spruce bark to inch nominal thickness with having an area of not less than square inch or more than square inches .
All bark mulch shall be reasonably free from leaves twigs shavings insect pests eggs larvae or other deleterious material that is injurious to plant growth and approved by the Engineer .
The same type of material shall be used in all areas to provide visual uniformity .
Bark Mulch shall be applied as detailed in the Contract Plans and on the landscape detail sheets .
d Fiber Mulch .
Fiber mulch shall be produced from natural or recycled pulp fiber such as wood chips or similar wood materials or from newsprint chipboard corrugated cardboard or a combination of these processed materials .
Fiber mulch shall be free of synthetic or plastic materials weed seed and growth or germination inhibiting substances and shall be nontoxic to plant or animal life .
Fiber mulch shall have a waterholding capacity by mass of not less than and shall be of such character that the fiber will disperse into a uniform slurry when mixed with water .
Water content of the fiber before mixing into slurry shall not exceed of the dry mass of the fiber .
The moisture content of the fiber shall be marked on the package .
Fiber mulch shall be colored to contrast with the area on which it is to be applied and shall not stain concrete or painted surfaces .
Acceptable Fiber Mulch shall be one of the fiber mulch products listed the Agencys Approved Products List .
e Hydraulic Matrix .
The hydraulic matrix shall consist of a mix of long strand residual wood fibers and a highstrength bonding agent .
The matrix shall be biodegradable over time nontoxic to fish and wildlife and it shall not contain any synthetic fibers .
The hydraulic matrix shall be colored to contrast with the area on which it is to be applied and shall not stain concrete or painted surfaces .
Acceptable Hydraulic Matrix shall be one of the Hydraulic Matrices listed on the Agencys Approved Products List .
f Tackifier .
Tackifier for hay mulch may be guar based organic tackifier starch basedagricultural tackifier or another type of mulch binder as approved by the Engineer .
Tackifier for stabilization of bare soils without mulch or other fiber incorporated shall use materials and quantities specified by the manufacturer based on the results of soils water and site assessment .
Tackifiers shall be nontoxic to plant or animal life and nonstaining to concrete or painted surfaces .
Tackifiers must be water soluble linear and noncrosslinked .
Tackifiers shall be noncombustible and shall not change soil pH .
Acceptable Tackifier shall be one of the tackifier products listed on the Agencys Approved Products List .
g Straw Mulch .
Straw mulch shall consist of threshed plant residue of oats wheat barley rye or rice from which the grain has been removed .
The material shall be free of noxious weeds undesirable grasses and plants and rot or mold and shall be approved by the Engineer prior to use . .
ROLLED EROSION CONTROL PRODUCT .
a Rolled Erosion Control Product Type I .
Temporary erosion matting shall conform to one of the following Specifications and corresponding properties found in Table .A .
Temporary erosion matting shall be used in applications where natural vegetation will provide permanent erosion protection .
Mulch Control Netting .
A temporary biodegradable rolled erosion control product RECP composed of planar woven natural fiber .
Erosion Control Blanket .
A temporary allnatural biodegradable rolled erosion control product composed of processed fibers mechanically bound together to form a continuous matrix .
For use where natural vegetation will provide permanent erosion protection Rolled Erosion Control Product Type I shall be specified as shown in Table .A .
TABLE .A ROLLED EROSION CONTROL PRODUCT TYPE I SPECIFICATIONS Product Description Material Composition Longevity months Slope Applications Channel Applications Min .
Tensile Strength lbsft Max .
Gradient VH C Factor Max .
Shear Stress lbsft Mulch Control Nets Allnatural biodegradable mesh or woven netting . . . . . . Netless Rolled Erosion Control Blankets Allnatural biodegradable fibers mechanically interlocked together to form a continuous matrix . . . . SingleNet Erosion Control Blankets Allnatural processed biodegradable fibers mechanically bound together by a single net of yarn or twine woven into a continuous matrix . . . . DoubleNet Erosion Control Blankets Allnatural processed biodegradable fibers mechanically bound together between two nets of yarn or twine woven into a continuous matrix .
. . . . . . . .
Minimum Average Roll Values machine direction using Erosion Control Technology Council ECTC Mod .
ASTM D . The C Factor is calculated as ratio of soil loss from RECP protected slope tested at specified or greater gradient VH to the ratio of soil loss from the unprotected control plot in largescale testing .
These performance test values should be supported by periodic bench scale testing under similar test conditions using ECTC Test Method .
Required minimum shear stress RECP unvegetated can sustain without physical damage or excess erosion .
in soil loss during a minute flow event in largescale testing .
These performance test values should be supported by periodic bench scale testing under similar test conditions and failure criteria using ECTC Test Method .
The permissible shear stress levels established for each performance category are based on historical experience with products characterized by Mannings roughness coefficients in the range of .
..
Acceptable largescale test methods may include ASTM D ECTC Test Method or other independent testing deemed acceptable by the Engineer .
Per the Engineers discretion .
The recommended acceptable largescale testing protocol may include ASTM D ECTC Test Method or other independent testing deemed acceptable by the Engineer .
The C factor and shear stress for mulch control nettings must be obtained with netting used in conjunction with preapplied mulch material .
b Rolled Erosion Control Product Type II .
Permanent erosion matting shall be a longterm non degradable rolled erosion control product composed of ultraviolet stabilized nondegradable synthetic fibers filaments nettings andor wire mesh processed into threedimensional reinforcement matrices conforming to one of the Specifications and corresponding properties found in Table .B .
Permanent erosion matting shall be used in applications where vegetation alone will not provide sufficient longterm erosion protection .
All categories of Turf Reinforcement Mat TRM must have a minimum thickness of .
inch and meet the requirements of ASTM D D M. TRM shall also have an ultraviolet stability of per the requirements of ASTM D D M for hours of exposure .
For use where vegetation alone will not provide sufficient longterm erosion protection Rolled Erosion Control Product Type II shall be specified as shown in Table .B .
TABLE .B ROLLED EROSION CONTROL PRODUCT TYPE II SPECIFICATIONS Type Product Description Material Composition Slope Applications Channel Applications Minimum Tensile Strength lbsft Max .
Gradient VH Maximum Shear Stress lbsft A TRM Nondegradable synthetic fibers filaments nets wire mesh andor other elements processed into a permanent threedimensional matrix of sufficient thickness . . B TRM . . C TRM . . For Turf Reinforcement Mats TRMs containing degradable components all property values must be obtained on the nondegradable portion of the matting alone .
Minimum Average Roll Values machine direction only for tensile strength determination using ASTM D Supersedes Mod .
ASTM D for RECPs .
Field conditions with high loading andor high survivability requirements may warrant the use of a TRM with a tensile strength of lbsft or greater .
Required minimum shear stress TRM fully vegetated can sustain without physical damage or excess erosion .
in .
soil loss during a minute flow event in large scale testing .
These performance test values should be supported by periodic bench scale testing under similar test conditions and failure criteria using ECTC Test Method .
Acceptable largescale testing protocol may include ASTM D ECTC Test Method or other independent testing deemed acceptable by the Engineer .
TRMs which may be supplemented with degradable components are designed to impart immediate erosion protection enhance vegetation establishment and provide longterm functionality by permanently reinforcing vegetation during and after maturation .
Note TRMs are typically used in hydraulic applications such as highflow ditches and channels steep slopes stream banks and shorelines where erosive forces may exceed the limits of natural unreinforced vegetation or in areas where limited vegetation establishment is anticipated. . PLANT MATERIALS .
Plant materials shall conform to the following requirements a Quality of Plant Material .
All plants shall be firstclass representatives of their normal species or varieties unless otherwise specified as extra heavy or clump according to the particular exception .
All plant materials shall be nursery grown stock that have been transplanted or roottrimmed two or more times according to the kind and size of plants .
They shall have average or normal well developed branches together with vigorous root systems .
Plant materials shall be free of insects disease sun scald injuries abrasions of the bark knots dead or dry wood broken terminal growth or other objectionable disfigurements .
Thin weak plants shall not be acceptable .
Plant materials shall display the appearance of normal health and vigor in strict accordance with these Specifications .
Each shipment shall be accompanied by a description of all the included plant materials or an itemized bill of lading .
All plant materials furnished by the Contractor shall be grown within hardiness Zones through as established by The Arnold Arboretum Jamaica Plain MA and the plant suppliers shall certify that the stock has been grown under Zone or hardier conditions .
Plants that are not certified to have been grown under the designated hardiness zone conditions will not be accepted .
b Plant Names .
All scientific and common plant names of the items specified shall conform to the latest edition of Standard Plant Names as adopted by the American Joint Committee on Horticultural Nomenclature .
All plant materials delivered shall be true to name and legibly tagged with the names and sizes of materials .
Should it be necessary to substitute a plant or plants of a different variety than the plant material specified it will be necessary for the Contractor to secure written approval from the Engineer for the proposed substitution prior to digging the plants .
An approved substitute plant shall be of a value at least equal to the specified plant for which the substitution is being made and then only when sufficient evidence is shown that the plant specified can not be obtained .
c Grading Standards .
Grading of plant materials shall be accomplished according to the requirements of ANSI Z. American Standard for Nursery Stock as approved by ANSI and published by the American Association of Nurserymen Inc. All plant measurements shall be made in conformance with the standard measurement methods in ANSI Z ..
If balled and burlapped trees and shrubs are not available container grown trees and shrubs may be supplied in accordance with the requirements and limitations of ANSI Z. however all plants supplied shall be of the minimum size listed on the quantity sheet .
Unless designated multistemmed the trunk of each tree shall be a single trunk growing from a single unmutilated crown of roots .
The tree trunks shall be free from sunscald frost cracks or wounds resulting from abrasions fire or other causes .
No pruning wounds shall be present having a diameter exceeding inches and all allowable pruning wounds must show vigorous bark on all edges .
Trees shall not be pruned prior to delivery .
No trees with doubleleaders or twinheads shall be acceptable without the written approval of the Engineer .
The Contractor shall reject such plants at time of delivery by the nurserysupplier unless such plants were previously selected by the Engineer as marked by tags and seals .
The height and spread of each shrub shall correspond to the Specifications for Type through Type as referenced in ANSI Z ..
Single stemmed or thin plants will not be accepted .
The side branches shall be generous welltwigged and the plant as a whole wellbranched to the ground .
The plants shall be in a moist vigorous condition free from dead wood bruises or other root or branch injuries .
Plants shall not be pruned prior to delivery .
Vines and ground cover plants shall be of the size age and condition listed in the quantity sheet .
Plants shall be healthy and free of insects and diseases .
Ground cover plants shall be potted or in soil .
Container grown stock shall have been grown in a container long enough for the root system to have developed sufficiently to hold its soil together firm and whole .
No plants shall be loose in the container .
No plants shall be rootbound in the container .
Such plants shall be rejected at delivery by the Contractor .
Plants delivered by truck and plants requiring storage onsite shall be properly wrapped and covered to prevent winddrying and desiccation of branches leaves or buds .
Plant balls shall be firmly bound unbroken and reasonably moist to indicate watering prior to delivery and during storage .
Tree trunks shall be free from fresh scars and damage in handling .
No plant material from cold storage will be accepted .
Evergreens shall be quality evergreens with a wellbalanced form complying with the relationship requirements of ANSI Z .. d Nursery Inspection and Plant Quarantine .
All plant materials shall be free from plant diseases and insect pests .
All shipments of plants shall comply with all nursery inspection and plant quarantine regulations of the State of origin and the State of Vermont as well as with Federal regulations governing interstate movement of nursery stock .
A certificate of inspection shall accompany each package box bale or carload of plant materials delivered and shall be provided to the Engineer .
e Balled and Burlapped Plants BB .
Balled and burlapped plants shall be dug to retain as many fibrous roots as possible and shall come from soil which will form a firm ball .
The soil in the ball shall be the original and undisturbed soil in which the plant has been grown .
The plant shall be dug wrapped transported and handled in such manner that the soil in the ball will not be so loosened that it would cause stripping of small and fine feeding roots or cause the soil to drop away from such roots .
All plants shall be moved with the root systems as solid units with balls of earth firmly wrapped with untreated burlap Class ounces per yard firmly held in place by a stout cord or wire .
The diameter and depth of the balls of earth shall be sufficient to encompass the fibrous and root feeding system necessary for the healthy development of the plant and in accordance with the requirements of ANSI Z .. No plant shall be accepted when the ball of earth surrounding its roots has been badly cracked or broken preparatory to the process of planting or after the burlap staves ropes or platform required in connection with its transplanting have been removed .
The plants and balls shall remain intact during all operations .
All plants that can not be planted at once shall be heeled in by setting in the ground and covering the balls with soil and then watering them .
Any BB designated plant material arriving at the Project with broken or loose balls or balls manufactured on the root will not be acceptable and shall be rejected at delivery by the Contractor .
f Plant Certification .
The plants shall be certified to have been grown under Zone or hardier conditions unless otherwise specified .
A copy of this certification shall accompany each shipment of plant material to the Project .
The certifications shall be identified in such a manner as to be directly traceable to the individual shipments. . ANTIDESICCANT .
Antidesiccant shall be an approved emulsion that will provide a film over plant surfaces permeable enough to permit transpiration .
An antidesiccant shall be used only after its use has been approved by the Engineer . .
THIS SUBSECTION RESERVED . .
THIS SUBSECTION RESERVED. . TREE WATERING BAGS .
Tree watering bags are available in varying sizes and can be used together to accommodate tree trunk diameters .
These waterproof bags are made of reinforced UV treated polyethylene reinforced with nylon webbing and are secured to the tree using heavy duty zippers located on each side of the bag .
The adjustable drip holes at the base allow for water to flow at varying rates for specific needs .
Approved tree watering bags shall be one of the tree watering bags are listed on the Agencys Approved Products List . .
EROSION LOGS .
Erosion logs are available in varying diameters .
The Contractor shall follow the manufacturers recommendations for the material type and size based on the intended use .
Erosion logs shall be composed of weedseedfree coir straw excelsior compost or other biodegradable filtering medium encased in a biodegradable netting or mesh .
Netting shall have openings of inch to inch except for compost filled logs which should be inch to inch or as recommended by the manufacturer and accepted by the Engineer .
Anchors for erosion logs shall be wooden stakes U shaped wire or earth anchors or rebar stakes the size and length shall be as recommended by the manufacturer .
Compost shall meet the requirements of Table .A with the exception that of the particle size shall be inches or less and a maximum of shall be less than inch . .
THIS SUBSECTION RESERVED . .
THIS SUBSECTION RESERVED . .
THIS SUBSECTION RESERVED .
SECTION CONCRETE REPAIR MATERIALS .
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS .
Concrete repair materials shall be those found on the Agencys Approved Products List .
a Packaging .
The manufacturers product designation and recommendations for surface preparation mixing placing finishing and curing shall be clearly outlined on the product packaging .
Handling precautions and toxicity warnings shall be printed on all containers .
The expiration date and a lot number shall appear on each package of material delivered to the Project site .
Liquid components which have been frozen shall not be used . .
OVERHEAD AND VERTICAL CONCRETE REPAIR MATERIAL .
Overhead and vertical concrete repair material shall be a prepackaged material to be used for patching spalled areas of concrete that are either on vertical or overhead surfaces .
Its use shall be limited to patches with layer thickness within the manufacturers specified limits .
Products listed on the Agencys Approved Products List shall meet the following requirements a Compressive Strength .
The neat material shall exhibit a minimum day compressive strength of psi and a minimum day strength of psi when tested in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO T MT or AASHTO T . b Direct Tension Pulloff .
The material shall exhibit a minimum bond strength of psi when tested in accordance with the requirements of ASTM C C M. c FreezeThaw Durability .
Resistance to rapid freezing and thawing shall be determined in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO T Procedure A .
The material shall exhibit a durability factor of at least after cycles .
d Volume Stability .
The material shall meet the performance requirements of ASTM C C M when tested in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO T . e Chloride Ion Penetrability .
The material shall exhibit a chloride ion penetrability level of Low when tested in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO T . .
RAPID SETTING CONCRETE REPAIR MATERIAL .
Rapid setting concrete material shall be a prepackaged material to be used for patching horizontal concrete surfaces where rapid return of the structure to service is necessitated .
Products listed on the APL shall meet the following requirements a Compressive Strength .
The neat material shall exhibit a minimum hour compressive strength of psi and a day compressive strength of psi when tested in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO T MT or AASHTO T . b FreezeThaw Durability .
Resistance to rapid freezing and thawing shall be determined in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO T Procedure A .
The material shall exhibit a durability factor of at least after cycles .
c Volume Stability .
The material shall meet the performance requirements of ASTM C C M when tested in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO T . d Direct Tension Pulloff .
The material shall exhibit a minimum bond strength of psi when tested in accordance with the requirements of ASTM C C M. e Chloride Ion Penetrability .
The material shall exhibit a chloride ion penetrability level of Low when tested in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO T . .
RAPID SETTING CONCRETE REPAIR MATERIAL WITH COARSE AGGREGATE .
Rapid setting concrete material to contain coarse aggregate shall be a prepackaged material to be used for patching horizontal concrete surfaces where rapid return of the structure to service is necessitated .
This material shall be formulated for the optional addition of inch coarse aggregate to produce a rapid setting concrete mixture .
In addition to the material requirements of Subsection .
the product shall meet the following requirements a Compressive Strength .
The neat material plus coarse aggregate shall exhibit a minimum hour compressive strength of psi a day compressive strength of psi and a day compressive strength of psi when tested in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO T . . POLYMER CONCRETE REPAIR MATERIAL .
Products listed on the APL shall meet the following requirements a Compressive Strength .
The neat material shall exhibit a minimum hour compressive strength of psi and a day compressive strength of psi when tested in accordance with the requirements of ASTM C . b Volume Stability .
The material shall not exceed .
linear shrinkage when tested in accordance with the requirements of ASTM C . c Direct Tension Pulloff .
The material shall exhibit a minimum bond strength of psi when tested in accordance with the requirements of ASTM C . d Chloride Ion Penetrability .
The material shall exhibit a chloride ion penetrability level of Low when tested in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO T . Index I ALPHABETICAL INDEX OF PAY ITEMS Item No .
Pay Item Name Pay Unit . .
Inch White Line Linear Foot . .
Inch Yellow Line Linear Foot .
Inch Magnetic Information Plaque Each . .
Inch White Line Linear Foot . .
Inch Yellow Line Linear Foot . .
Inch White Line Linear Foot . .
Inch Yellow Line Linear Foot . .
Inch White Line Linear Foot . .
Inch Yellow Line Linear Foot . .
Inch Stop Bar Linear Foot .
Adjust Elevation of Valve Box Each .
Adjust Height of Guardrail Linear Foot .
Aggregate Shoulders Ton .
Aggregate Shoulders RAP Ton .
Aggregate Shoulders RAP with RAS Ton .
Aggregate Surface Course Cubic Yard .
Agricultural Limestone Ton .
Air Voids Pay Adjustment N.A.B.I .
Lump Unit .
All Purpose Excavator Rental Type I Hour .
All Purpose Excavator Rental Type II Hour .
Anchor for Cable Rail Each .
Anchor for Steel Beam Rail Each .
Anchor for Steel to Box Beam Transition Each Index I Item No .
Pay Item Name Pay Unit .
Barrier Fence Linear Foot .
Bearing Device Assembly Elastomeric Pad wExternal Load Plates Each .
Bearing Device Assembly High Load MultiRotational Each .
Bearing Device Assembly Plain Elastomeric Pad Each .
Bearing Device Assembly Steel Reinforced Elastomeric Pad Each .
Bituminous Concrete Curb Type A Linear Foot .
Bituminous Concrete Curb Type B Linear Foot .
Bituminous Concrete Gutters and Traffic Islands Ton .
Bituminous Concrete Pavement Surface Preparation Ton .
Bituminous Concrete Sidewalk Ton .
Bituminous Crack Sealing Pound .
Bituminous Crack Sealing Blow and Go Method Pound .
Bollards Each .
Bonded Wearing Course Square Yard .
Boundary Markers Each .
Box Beam Guardrail Linear Foot .
Bracing Assembly for ChainLink Fence Feet Each .
Bracing Assembly for ChainLink Fence Feet Each .
Bracing Assembly for ChainLink Fence Feet Each .
Bracket Arm Each .
Bridge Expansion Joint Asphaltic Plug Linear Foot .
Bridge Expansion Joint Finger Plate Linear Foot .
Bridge Expansion Joint Vermont Linear Foot .
Bridge Railing Repair Type I Linear Foot .
Bridge Railing Repair Type II Linear Foot .
Bridge Railing Repair Type III Linear Foot .
Bridge Railing Concrete FShape Linear Foot .
Bridge Railing Galvanized Rail Box Beam Linear Foot .
Bridge Railing Galvanized Rail Box Beam Linear Foot .
Bridge Railing Galvanized Rail Box Beam Linear Foot .
Bridge Railing Galvanized HD Steel BeamFascia Mounted Linear Foot .
Bridge Railing Galvanized HDSBFascia MountedSteel Tubing Linear Foot Index I Item No .
Pay Item Name Pay Unit .
Bridge Railing Galvanized Steel TubingConcrete Combination Linear Foot .
Bulldozer Rental Type I Hour .
Bulldozer Rental Type II Hour .
Business Directional Sign Square Foot . . CAAP Linear Foot . . CAAP Elbow Each . . CAAPSL Linear Foot . . CAAPA Linear Foot . . CAAPASL Linear Foot . . CAAPAES Each . . CAAPES Each .
Cable Guardrail Linear Foot .
Cable Guardrail Hook Bolt Galvanized Each .
Cable Guardrail Splice Unit Each .
Cap Drop Inlet Each .
Cast Iron Cover with Frame Each .
Cast Iron Cover with Frame Sewer Each .
Cast Iron Grate with Frame Type A Each .
Cast Iron Grate with Frame Type B Each .
Cast Iron Grate with Frame Type D Each .
Cast Iron Grate with Frame Type E Each .
Cast Iron Grate Type C Each .
CastinPlace Concrete Curb Type A Linear Foot .
CastinPlace Concrete Curb Type B Linear Foot .
Cement Masonry Cubic Yard .
ChainLink Fence Feet Linear Foot Index I Item No .
Pay Item Name Pay Unit .
ChainLink Fence Feet Linear Foot .
ChainLink Fence Feet Linear Foot .
Changing Elevation of Drop Inlets Catch Basins or Manholes Each .
Changing Elevation of Sewer Manholes Each .
Channel Excavation of Earth Cubic Yard .
Channel Excavation of Rock Cubic Yard .
Check Dam Type I Cubic Yard .
Check Dam Type II Cubic Yard .
Check Dam Type III Each .
Cleaning Culv .
Pipe InPlace to In .
Incl .
Linear Foot .
Cleaning Culv .
Pipe InPlace Greater than In .
Linear Foot .
Clearing and Grubbing Including Individual Trees and Stumps Lump Sum .
Clearing and Grubbing Including Individual Trees and Stumps Acre .
CoarseMilling Bituminous Pavement Square Yard .
Cofferdam Lump Sum .
Cofferdam Excavation Earth Cubic Yard .
Cofferdam Excavation Rock Cubic Yard .
Cold Mixed Recycled Bituminous Pavement Square Yard .
Common Excavation Cubic Yard .
Concrete Catch Basin with Cast Iron Grate Each .
Concrete Manhole with Cast Iron Cover Each .
Concrete Class A Cubic Yard .
Concrete Class AA Cubic Yard .
Concrete Class AA Overlay Square Yard .
Concrete Class B Cubic Yard .
Concrete Class C Cubic Yard .
Concrete Class D Cubic Yard .
Concrete Class LW Cubic Yard .
ContractorFabricated Precast Concrete Structure Lump Sum .
Controlled Density Flowable Fill Cubic Yard .
Corporation Stop Each Index I Item No .
Pay Item Name Pay Unit . . CPEP Linear Foot . . CPEP Elbow Each . . CPEPSL Linear Foot . . CPEPES Each .
CPM Schedule Each . . CPPP Elbow Each . . CPPPES Each . . CPPPSL Linear Foot . . Crosswalk Marking Each .
Crushed Stone Bedding Ton . . CSP Linear Foot . . CSP Elbow Each . . CSPSL Linear Foot . . CSPA Linear Foot . . CSPASL Linear Foot . . CSPAES Each . . CSPES Each .
Deciduous Seedlings Each .
Deciduous Shrubs Each .
Deciduous Trees Each Index I Item No .
Pay Item Name Pay Unit .
Decommission Drop Inlet Each .
Delineator with Flexible Post Each .
Delineator with Steel Post Each .
Demolition and Disposal of Building Each .
Detectable Warning Surface Square Foot .
Drilling and Blasting of Solid Rock Linear Foot .
Drilling and Blasting of Solid Rock Subgrade Square Yard .
Drilling and Grouting Dowels Linear Foot .
Drive Gate for Woven Wire Fence Each .
Dry Masonry Cubic Yard .
Ductile Iron Sewer Pipe CementLined Linear Foot .
Ductile Iron Water Pipe CementLined Linear Foot . .
Durable Inch White Line Linear Foot . .
Durable Inch Yellow Line Linear Foot . .
Durable Inch White Line Linear Foot . .
Durable Inch Yellow Line Linear Foot . .
Durable Inch White Line Linear Foot . .
Durable Inch Yellow Line Linear Foot . .
Durable Inch White Line Linear Foot . .
Durable Inch Yellow Line Linear Foot . .
Durable Inch Stop Bar Linear Foot . .
Durable Crosswalk Marking Linear Foot . .
Durable Letter or Symbol Each Index I Item No .
Pay Item Name Pay Unit . .
Durable Railroad Crossing Symbol Each .
Dust and Ice Control with Calcium Chloride Ton .
Dust Control with Water MGAL .
Dynamic Pile Loading Test Each .
Earth Borrow Cubic Yard .
Electrical Conduit Linear Foot .
Electrical Conduit Sleeve Linear Foot .
Electrical Wiring Linear Foot .
Employee Traineeship Hour .
Emulsified Asphalt CWT .
Emulsified Asphalt Cold Mix CWT .
Energy Absorption Attenuator Permanent Each .
Energy Absorption Attenuator Temporary Each .
EPSC Plan Lump Sum .
Erosion Log Linear Foot .
Evergreen Seedlings Each .
Evergreen Shrubs Each .
Evergreen Trees Each .
Excavation of Surfaces and Pavements Cubic Yard .
Expansion Assembly Each .
Extension Service Box and Curb Stop Each .
Fertilizer Pound .
Field Office Communications N.A.B.I .
Dollar .
Field Office Engineers Lump Sum .
Field Office Soils and Materials Lump Sum .
Filter Bag Each .
FineMilling Bituminous Pavement Square Yard .
Flaggers Hour .
Flashing Beacon Aerial Mounted Each .
Flashing Beacon Ground Mounted Each .
Foundation for Tubular Steel Post Each Index I Item No .
Pay Item Name Pay Unit .
Foundation for WShape Steel Post Inch Diameter Each .
Foundation for WShape Steel Post Inch Diameter Each .
Full Depth Reclamation FDR Square Yard .
Furnishing Equipment for Driving Piling Lump Sum .
Gate for ChainLink Fence Feet Linear Foot .
Gate for ChainLink Fence Feet Linear Foot .
Gate for ChainLink Fence Feet Linear Foot .
Gate Valve Each .
Gate Valve with Valve Box Each .
Geotextile for Filter Curtain Square Yard .
Geotextile for Roadbed Separator Square Yard .
Geotextile for Underdrain Trench Lining Square Yard .
Geotextile Under Railroad Ballast Square Yard .
Geotextile Under Stone Fill Square Yard .
Granite Slope Edging Linear Foot .
Granular Backfill for Structures Cubic Yard .
Granular Borrow Cubic Yard .
Gravel Filter for Slope Stabilization Cubic Yard .
Ground Covers and Vines Each .
Grouting Shear Keys Linear Foot .
Grubbing Material Square Yard .
Guardrail Approach Section to Concrete Bridge Railing TL Each .
Guardrail Approach Section to Concrete Bridge Railing TL Each .
Guardrail Approach Section to Conc .
Comb .
Bridge Railing TL Each .
Guardrail Approach Section Galvanized Rail Box Beam Each .
Guardrail Approach Section Galvanized Rail Box Beam Each .
Guardrail Approach Section Galvanized Rail Box Beam Each .
Guardrail Approach Section Galvanized HD Steel Beam Each .
Guardrail Approach Section Galv .
HD Steel Beam w Feet Posts Each .
Guardrail Approach Section Galvanized Type I Each .
Guardrail Approach Section Galvanized Type II Each .
Guide Posts Each Index I Item No .
Pay Item Name Pay Unit .
HandPlaced Bituminous Concrete Pavement Drives Square Yard .
Hay Mulch Ton .
HD Steel Beam Guardrail Galvanized Linear Foot .
HD Steel Beam Guardrail Galvanized w Feet Posts Linear Foot .
HD Steel Beam Guardrail GalvanizedNested Linear Foot .
HD Steel Beam Guardrail GalvanizedNested w Feet Posts Linear Foot .
High Performance Concrete Class PCD Cubic Yard .
High Performance Concrete Class PCS Cubic Yard .
High Performance Concrete Class SCC Cubic Yard .
Hydrant Each .
Hydraulic Mulch Gallon .
Inlet Protection Device Type I Each .
Inlet Protection Device Type II Each .
Inlet Protection Device Type III Cubic Yard .
Insulation Board MFBM .
Interconnecting Cable Linear Foot .
Joint Sealer Cold Poured Gallon .
Joint Sealer Cold Poured Linear Foot .
Joint Sealer Hot Poured Gallon .
Joint Sealer Hot Poured Linear Foot .
Joint Sealer Polyurethane Gallon .
Joint Sealer Polyurethane Linear Foot .
Junction Box Each .
Landscape Backfill Truck Measurement Cubic Yard .
Landscape Watering MGAL . . Letter or Symbol Each .
Line Striping Targets Each .
Loader Rental Type I Hour .
Longitudinal Deck Grooving Square Yard .
Longitudinal Joint Compaction Pay Adjustment N.A.B.I .
Lump Unit .
Luminaire Each Index I Item No .
Pay Item Name Pay Unit .
Maintenance of EPSC Plan N.A.B.I .
Lump Unit .
Maintenance of Structures and Approaches Lump Sum .
Manufactured Terminal Section Flared Each .
Manufactured Terminal Section Tangent Each .
Marshall Bituminous Concrete Pavement Ton .
Mat Density Pay Adjustment N.A.B.I .
Lump Unit .
Material Transfer Vehicle Ton .
Material Transfer Vehicle Cold Mix Ton .
Mechanical Bar Connector Each .
Medium Duty Marshall Bituminous Concrete Pavement Ton .
Membrane Waterproofing Spray Applied Square Yard .
Meter Pit Each .
Milled Rumble Strips Linear Foot .
MobilizationDemobilization Lump Sum .
Monitoring EPSC Plan Hour .
Mortar Type I Cubic Yard .
Mortar Type IV Cubic Yard .
Muck Excavation Cubic Yard .
Nonstructural Lumber Treated MFBM .
Nonstructural Lumber Untreated MFBM .
OneWay Temporary Bridge Lump Sum .
Overhead and Vertical Concrete Repair Material Cubic Foot .
Overhead Traffic Sign Support Cantilever Each .
Overhead Traffic Sign Support Cantilever with Lighting Each .
Overhead Traffic Sign Support MultiSupport Each .
Overhead Traffic Sign Support MultiSupport with Lighting Each .
Overlay for Travel Information Sign Each .
Painted Curb Linear Foot .
Painted Island Square Foot .
Partial Removal and Modification of Bridge Joint Linear Foot .
Partial Removal of Structure Each .
Pavement Marking Mask Square Foot Index I Item No .
Pay Item Name Pay Unit . . PCCSP Linear Foot . . PCCSP Elbow Each . . PCCSP Elbow PI Each . . PCCSPPI Linear Foot . . PCCSPSL Linear Foot . . PCCSPA Linear Foot . . PCCSPAPI Linear Foot . . PCCSPASL Linear Foot .
Perennials Each .
Permanent Steel Sheet Piling Square Foot .
Plank Rail Fence Linear Foot .
Plastic Water Pipe Flexible Linear Foot .
Plastic Water Pipe Rigid Linear Foot .
Polymer Concrete Repair Material Cubic Foot .
PolymerModified Emulsified Asphalt CWT .
Portable Arrow Board Each .
Portable Arrow Board Rental Day .
Portable Changeable Message Sign Each .
Portable Changeable Message Sign Rental Day .
Portland Cement Concrete Sidewalk Inch Square Yard .
Portland Cement Concrete Sidewalk Inch Square Yard .
Power Broom Rental Type I Hour .
Power Broom Rental Type II Hour .
Power Broom Rental Type III Hour .
Power Drop Stanchion Street Lighting Each Index I Item No .
Pay Item Name Pay Unit .
Power Grader Rental Hour .
Precast Concrete Structure Lump Sum .
Precast Reinforced Concrete Catch Basin with Cast Iron Grate Each .
Precast Reinforced Concrete Curb DI with Cast Iron Grate Each .
Precast Reinforced Concrete Curb Type A Linear Foot .
Precast Reinforced Concrete Curb Type B Linear Foot .
Precast Reinforced Concrete Drop Inlet with Cast Iron Grate Each .
Precast Reinforced Concrete Manhole with Cast Iron Cover Each .
Precast Reinforced Concrete Pipe DI with Cast Iron Grate Each .
Precast Reinforced Concrete Pipe DI with Concrete Cover Each .
PreExcavation of Abutment Piles Earth Linear Foot .
PreExcavation of Abutment Piles Rock Linear Foot .
Prefabricated Bridge Unit Superstructure Linear Foot .
Prestressed Concrete Box Beams Linear Foot .
Prestressed Concrete Girders Linear Foot .
Prestressed Concrete NEXT D Beams Linear Foot .
Prestressed Concrete Solid Slabs Linear Foot .
Prestressed Concrete Voided Slabs Linear Foot .
Price Adjustment Asphalt Cement N.A.B.I .
Lump Unit .
Project Demarcation Fence Linear Foot .
Pull Box Double Each .
Pull Box Standard Each .
PVC Sewer Pipe Linear Foot . . Railroad Crossing Symbol Each .
Railroad Flaggers N.A.B.I .
Dollar .
Raised Pavement Markers Type II Each .
Rapid Setting Concrete Repair Material Cubic Foot .
Rapid Setting Concrete Repair Material with Coarse Aggregate Cubic Foot . . RCP Linear Foot Index I Item No .
Pay Item Name Pay Unit . . RCPES Each .
Rebuilt Stone Masonry Cubic Yard .
Rehab .
Drop Inlets Catch Basins or Manholes Class I Each .
Rehab .
Drop Inlets Catch Basins or Manholes Class II Each .
Rehab .
Drop Inlets Catch Basins or Manholes Class III Each .
Reinforcing Steel Level I Pound .
Reinforcing Steel Level II Pound .
Reinforcing Steel Level III Pound .
ReLaying Pipe Culverts Linear Foot .
ReLaying Sewer Pipe Linear Foot .
Relocate Hydrant Each .
Relocate Information Plaza Each .
Removal and Disposal of Guardrail Linear Foot .
Removal and Disposal of Guide Posts Each .
Removal of Bridge Pavement Square Yard .
Removal of Concrete or Masonry Cubic Yard .
Removal of Concrete or Masonry Square Yard .
Removal of Existing Bridge Railing Linear Foot .
Removal of Existing Curb Linear Foot .
Removal of Existing Delineator and Post Each .
Removal of Existing Fence Linear Foot .
Removal of Existing Pavement Markings Square Foot .
Removal of Existing Traffic Control Signal System Each .
Removal of Structure Each .
Remove and Replace Delineator Each .
Remove and Replace Existing Anchor Bolt Each .
Remove and Replace Mailbox Multiple Support Each .
Remove and Replace Mailbox Single Support Each .
Remove and Reset Guardrail Linear Foot .
Remove and Reset Light Pole Each .
Remove and Reset Mailbox Multiple Support Each Index I Item No .
Pay Item Name Pay Unit .
Remove and Reset Mailbox Single Support Each .
Remove and Reset Overhead Traffic Sign Support Each .
Remove and Reset Temporary Traffic Barrier Linear Foot .
Remove Existing Overhead Sign Assembly Cantilever Each .
Remove Existing Overhead Sign Assembly MultiSupport Each .
Remove Hydrant Each .
Remove Street Light Assembly Each .
Removing and Resetting Curb Linear Foot .
Removing and Resetting Fence Linear Foot .
Removing and Resetting Property Markers Each .
Removing Large Stumps Each .
Removing Large Trees Each .
Removing Medium Stumps Each .
Removing Medium Trees Each .
Removing Signs Each .
Repair of Concrete Substructure Surface Class I Square Yard .
Repair of Concrete Substructure Surface Class II Square Yard .
Repair of Concrete Substructure Surface Class III Cubic Yard .
Repair of Concrete Superstructure Surface Class I Square Yard .
Repair of Concrete Superstructure Surface Class II Square Yard .
Repair of Concrete Superstructure Surface Class III Cubic Yard .
Repairing Stone Masonry Square Yard .
Replace Guardrail Beam Unit Each .
Replace Guardrail Post Assembly Each .
Replacement of Guardrail Cable Linear Foot .
Repointing Granite Bridge Curb Gallon .
Repointing Masonry Square Yard .
Reset Existing Bridge Railing Linear Foot .
Resetting Signs Each .
Riprap Heavy Type Cubic Yard .
Riprap Light Type Cubic Yard .
Roadway Patrol Maintenance Hour Index I Item No .
Pay Item Name Pay Unit .
Rock Borrow Cubic Yard .
Rolled Erosion Control Product Type I Square Yard .
Rolled Erosion Control Product Type II Square Yard .
Sand Borrow Cubic Yard .
Sanitary Sewer Manhole Each .
Seamless Copper Water Tube Linear Foot .
Seed Pound .
Seed Winter Rye Pound .
Setting Salvaged Posts Each .
Shear Connectors Lump Sum .
Sheet Membrane Waterproofing Torch Applied Square Yard .
Shoring Superstructure Lump Sum .
Shoring Superstructure Bearings Each .
Shoulder Berm Removal Linear Foot .
Silt Fence Type I Linear Foot .
Silt Fence Type II Linear Foot .
Sleeves for Utilities Linear Foot .
Snow Barrier Fence Linear Foot .
Sodding Square Yard .
Soil Bearing Slip Base Each .
Solid Rock Excavation Cubic Yard .
Square Tube Sign Post and Anchor Linear Foot .
Stabilized Construction Entrance Cubic Yard .
Steel Backed Timber Guardrail Linear Foot .
Steel Beam Guardrail Offset Block Each .
Steel Beam Guardrail Galvanized Linear Foot .
Steel Beam Guardrail Galvanized w Feet Posts Linear Foot .
Steel Beam Guardrail GalvanizedNested Linear Foot .
Steel Beam Guardrail GalvanizedNested w Feet Posts Linear Foot .
Steel Brace for Woven Wire Fence Each .
Steel Piling HP Linear Foot Index I Item No .
Pay Item Name Pay Unit .
Steel Piling HP Linear Foot .
Steel Piling HP Linear Foot .
Steel Piling HP Linear Foot .
Steel Piling HP Linear Foot .
Steel Piling HP Linear Foot .
Steel Piling HP Linear Foot .
Steel Piling HP Linear Foot .
Steel Piling HP Linear Foot .
Steel Piling HP Linear Foot .
Stone Fill Culvert Lining Cubic Yard .
Stone Fill Stream Bed Material Cubic Yard .
Stone Fill Type I Cubic Yard .
Stone Fill Type II Cubic Yard .
Stone Fill Type III Cubic Yard .
Stone Fill Type IV Cubic Yard .
Stone Masonry Facing Square Yard .
Straw Mulch Ton .
Street Light Assembly Each .
Street Lighting Control Device Each .
Structural Glued Laminated Timber Lump Sum .
Structural Lumber and Timber Treated MFBM .
Structural Lumber and Timber Untreated MFBM .
Structural Steel Pound .
Structural Steel Lump Sum .
Structural Steel Curved Plate Girder Pound .
Structural Steel Plate Girder Pound .
Structural Steel Rolled Beam Pound .
Structural Steel Truss Pound .
Structure Excavation Cubic Yard .
Subbase of Crushed Gravel Coarse Graded Cubic Yard .
Subbase of Crushed Gravel Fine Graded Cubic Yard Index I Item No .
Pay Item Name Pay Unit .
Subbase of Crushed Gravel Fine Graded Ton .
Subbase of Dense Graded Crushed Stone Cubic Yard .
Subbase of Gravel Cubic Yard .
Subbase RAP Ton .
Superpave Bituminous Concrete Pavement Ton .
Superpave Bituminous Concrete Pavement Type IVB Ton .
Surface Preparation for Membrane Square Foot .
Surface Tolerance Pay Adjustment N.A.B.I .
Lump Unit .
Tapping Sleeve and Valve with Valve Box Each . .
Temporary Inch White Line Linear Foot . .
Temporary Inch Yellow Line Linear Foot . .
Temporary Inch White Line Linear Foot . .
Temporary Inch Yellow Line Linear Foot . .
Temporary Inch White Line Linear Foot . .
Temporary Inch Yellow Line Linear Foot . .
Temporary Inch White Line Linear Foot . .
Temporary Inch Yellow Line Linear Foot . .
Temporary Inch Stop Bar Linear Foot . .
Temporary Crosswalk Marking Linear Foot .
Temporary Detector Each .
Temporary Flashing Beacon Each . .
Temporary Letter or Symbol Each .
Temporary Pedestrian Bridge Lump Sum Index I Item No .
Pay Item Name Pay Unit . .
Temporary Railroad Crossing Symbol Each .
Temporary Traffic Barrier Linear Foot .
Temporary Traffic Signal System Each .
Terminal Connector for Steel Beam Guardrail Each .
Test Borings Linear Foot .
Testing Equipment Bituminous Lump Sum .
Testing Equipment Concrete Lump Sum .
Testing Equipment Grout Lump Sum .
Testing Equipment Protective Coatings Lump Sum .
Thinning and Trimming Acre .
Thinning and Trimming for Signs Each .
Thrie Beam Guardrail Linear Foot .
Topsoil Cubic Yard .
Traffic Barrier Delineator Each .
Traffic Control Lump Sum .
Traffic Control Signal System Intersection Each .
Traffic Control AllInclusive Lump Sum .
Traffic Sign Type A Square Foot .
Traffic Sign Type B Square Foot .
Transfer to New System Sanitary Sewer Lump Sum .
Transfer to New System Water System Lump Sum .
Transplanting Groundcover Square Yard .
Transplanting Shrubs Each .
Transplanting Trees Each .
Travel Information Plaza Each .
Travel Information Sign Square Foot .
Travel Information Symbol Each .
Treated Timber Curb Linear Foot .
Tree Protection Lump Sum .
Trench Excavation of Earth Cubic Yard .
Trench Excavation of Earth Exploratory N.A.B.I .
Cubic Yard Index I Item No .
Pay Item Name Pay Unit .
Trench Excavation of Rock Cubic Yard .
TruckMounted Attenuator Hour .
TruckMounted Attenuator AWVPV Hour .
Truck Rental Hour .
Tubular Aluminum Sign Post Pound .
Tubular Steel Sign Post Pound .
TwoWay Temporary Bridge Lump Sum .
Unclassified Channel Excavation Cubic Yard .
Unclassified Excavation Cubic Yard .
Underdrain Carrier Pipe Inches Linear Foot .
Underdrain Carrier Pipe Inches Linear Foot .
Underdrain Carrier Pipe Inches Linear Foot .
Underdrain Flushing Basin Each .
Underdrain Pipe Inches Linear Foot .
Underdrain Pipe Inches Linear Foot .
Underdrain Pipe Inches Linear Foot .
Uniformed Traffic Officers Hour .
Vehicle Loop Detector Linear Foot .
Vertical Granite Curb Linear Foot .
Vertical Granite Curb Mountable Linear Foot .
Water Repellent Silane Gallon .
Wildflower Seed Pound .
Wired Conduit Linear Foot .
Wood Brace for Woven Wire Fence Each .
Wood Marker Posts Each .
Woven Wire Fence with Steel Posts Linear Foot .
Woven Wire Fence with Wood Posts Linear Foot .
WShape Steel Sign Post Pound .
Yielding Marker Posts Each One National Life Drive Montpelier VT
