T h e C o m m o n w e a l t h o f M a s s a c h u s e t t s M a s s a c h u s e t t s H i g h w a y D e p a r t m e n t Metric Edition Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges i PREFACE Introduction The Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges uses the metric system exclusively for all measurements .
This change is in response to the Federal Government mandate that all highway construction contracts receiving Federalaid funding and advertized after September have Plans Specifications and Estimates PSEs prepared exclusively in metric units .
Therefore any project designed by any state agencyauthority andor which involves Federal andor Massachusetts Highway Department MHD funding and scheduled for advertising after September must be prepared in metric units .
Legal Basis for Highway Conversion The use of the metric system has been established over the past two decades by the Federal Government in a series of acts regulations and orders the most important of which are summarized below .
The intent of these initiatives is to have the United States adopt a measurement system that is simpler to use uses only one unit for measuring each physical quantity and provides industry the opportunity to rethink their designs and to incorporate efficient practices .
It also brings the United States into line with the rest of the world which now is virtually all metric .
Metric Conversion Act of The Act U.S.C .
declared a national policy of coordinating and encouraging the increased use of the metric system .
The Act required that the conversion be led by industry and the key word was voluntary .
Although conversion activities were somewhat increased there was no widespread support from industry for complete metrication .
The American Association of State Highway Officials AASHTO decided at that time to defer further activity on conversion until national legislation was adopted .
Omnibus Trade and Competitiveness Act of Section b of the Trade and Competitiveness Act Public Law amended the Metric Conversion Act of to declare that the metric system is the preferred system of weights and measures for U.S. trade and commerce .
Further it requires each Federal agency to convert to the metric system to the extent feasible by September for all procurements grants and businessrelated activities .
The obvious intent of this Act was to use the substantial buying power of the Federal government to lead the country to the metric system .
U.S .
DOT Metric Conversion Planning Guidelines On May the U.S. Department of Transportation U.S .
DOT issued order .C which established policy and administrative procedures for the transition .
The U.S .
DOT Order requires agencies to develop plans for metric conversion to the extent practical including specific dates for changeover to metric in all procurements grants and other businessrelated activities .
In response to this Order the Federal Highway Administration FHWA developed an approved conversion plan and a timetable which is intended to lead to complete metric implementation by September .
Executive Order On July President Bush issued Executive Order Metric Usage in Federal Government Programs .
The intent of this Order is clear .
Federal Agencies are to convert to metric and they are to do so within a fixed period of time .
The Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges ii The Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges has undergone an extensive review during its preparation and conversion to the metric system .
Users of this document should note the following .
Metric measurements noted herein have been developed based on information available at the time this document was published and generally accepted metric conversion practices .
Some measurements have been soft converted while other measurements have been hard converted .
In soft conversion an inchpound measurement is mathematically converted to its exact or nearly exact metric equivalent .
With hard conversion a new rounded rationalized metric number is created that is convenient to work with and remember. . As the transition to the metric system continues in the United States it is inevitable that changes to some metric measurements noted herein will be modified particularly as more products become hard converted . .
In addition to the exclusive use of metric units in the Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges there have also been changes to various sections and new sections added that are not in the edition of this document .
It is therefore necessary to use only the appropriate document for a particular project .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges iii TABLE OF CONTENTS DIVISION I GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND COVENANTS SECTION .
Definition of Terms Section .
Definition of TermsI .
SECTION .
Proposal Requirements and Conditions .
Proposal Forms and Plans I. .
Interpretation of Basic Estimate of QuantitiesI . .
Examination of Plans Specifications Special Provisions and Site of the WorkI . .
Preparation of ProposalsI .
A .
Bid PricesI .
B. SignaturesI .
C. Affidavits I. .
Delivery of Proposals I. . Proposal Guaranty RequiredI. . Withdrawal of Proposals I. . Public Opening of Proposals I. .
Rejection of ProposalsI. . Disqualification of BiddersI . .
Determination of Lowest Bid I. . Material GuarantyI .
SECTION .
Award and Execution of Contract .
Consideration of ProposalsI. . Award of ContractI . .
Retention of Proposal Guaranty I. . Contract Bonds Required I. .
Execution of ContractI. . Failure to Execute ContractI .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges iv SECTION .
Scope of Work Section Page .
Intent of ContractI. . Alterations I. .
Extra Work Also see Subsection I. . Changed Conditions I. . Validity of Extra WorkI . .
Increased or Decreased Contract QuantitiesI . .
Maintenance of Detours I. .
Removal and Disposal of Structures and ObstructionsI. . Rights in the Use of Materials Found on the Work I. .
Final Cleaning UpI .
SECTION .
Control of Work .
Authority of EngineerI. . Plans and Detail Drawings I. . Conformity with Plans and SpecificationsI . .
Coordination of Special Provisions Plans Supplemental Specifications and Standard SpecificationsI. . Cooperation by Contractor I. .
Adjacent Contracts I. . Construction Stakes StakingsI. . Authority and Duties of Engineers Assistants I. .
Inspection of WorkI . .
Removal of Defective or Unauthorized WorkI . .
Final Acceptance Also See Subsection .
and .
I .
SECTION .
Control of Materials .
Source of Supply and QualityI . .
Samples and Tests I. .
Delivery and Storage of MaterialsI . .
Defective Materials I .
SECTION .
Legal Relations and Responsibility to Public .
Laws to be Observed I. Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges v Air Pollution Control I .
Prevention of Water Pollution See Subsection I .
Plant Pest Control I .
Section Page .
Prevention of Water PollutionSanitary ProvisionsI . .
Permits and Licenses I. . Motor VehiclesI. . Insurance Requirements I .
A. Workmens Compensation InsuranceI .
B .
Public Liability Insurance I. C. GeneralI. . Patented Devices Materials and Processes I. .
Restoration of Surfaces Opened by PermitI. . Federal Participation I. . Public Safety and Convenience I. . Barricades and Warning Signs I. . Traffic Officers and Railroad Flagging ServiceI. . Use of ExplosivesI. . Protection and Restoration of Property I. . Responsibility for Damage ClaimsI. . Claims Against Contractors for Payment of Labor Materials and Other PurposesI. . Claims of Contractor for CompensationI. . Traffic AccommodationsI . .
Contractors Responsibility for the WorkI . .
Personal Liability of Public Officials I. . No Waiver of Legal RightsI . .
Preference in Employment of LaborI. . Labor Lodging Board Maximum Hours of Employment Weekly Payment Keeping of Payroll RecordsI. . Archeological and Paleontological Discoveries I .
SECTION .
Prosecution and Progress .
Subletting or Assignment of ContractI . .
Schedule of OperationsI . .
Prosecution of WorkI . .
Removal or Demolition of Buildings and Land TakingsI. . Claims for Delay or Suspension of the Work I. .
Limitations of OperationsI . .
Character of Workmen Methods and Equipment I. . Preservation of Roadside GrowthI. . Delay and Suspension of Work I. .
Determination and Extension of Contract Time for CompletionI. . Failure to Complete Work on TimeI . .
Default Termination I. .
Convenience TerminationI .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges vi SECTION .
Measurement and Payment Section Page .
Measurement of QuantitiesI . .
Scope of Payments I. . Payment for Extra WorkI . .
Partial PaymentsI . .
Final Acceptance and Final PaymentI .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges vii DIVISION II CONSTRUCTION DETAILS SECTION Earthwork Grading Demolition Rodent Control and Borings Section Page Clearing and Grubbing II .
Demolition of Buildings Structures and Bridges II .
Control of Rodents II .
Excavation II .
Excavation for Structures II .
Dredging II .
Embankment II .
Grading II .
Borings II .
SECTION Drainage Basins Manholes and Inlets II .
Adjustment Rebuilding and Remodeling of Drainage Structures II .
Culverts Storm Drains and Sewer Pipes II .
Stone for Pipe Ends II .
Crushed Stone for Bleeders II .
Subdrains II .
Pipes Removed and Relaid or Stacked II .
Waterways II .
SECTION Water Systems Water Systems II .
SECTION Subbase Base Courses Shoulders Pavements and Berms Gravel Subbase II .
Dense Graded Crushed Stone for Subbase II .
Reclaimed Base Course II .
Reclaimed Pavement Borrow Material for Base Course II .
Gravel Base Course II .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges viii Section Page Class I Bituminous Concrete Base Course Type I II .
Cement Concrete Base Course II .
Roadway Dust Control II .
Shoulders II .
Class I Bituminous Concrete Pavement Type I II .
Stress Absorbing Membrane Interlayer II .
Peastone Cover for Bituminous Concrete Paved Shoulders II .
Class I Bituminous Concrete Berms II .
Bituminous Concrete for Patching II .
Cement Concrete Pavement II .
Granite Rubble Block Pavement II .
SECTION Curb and Edging Curb Curb Inlets Curb Corners and Edging II .
Curb or Edging Removed and Reset Removed and Stacked or Removed and Discarded II .
SECTION Highway Guard Fences and Walls Highway Guard II .
Permanent Impact Attenuators II .
Concrete Barrier II .
Highway Guard Removed and Reset Removed and Stacked II .
Chain Link Fence and Gates II .
Metal Pipe Rail II .
Fences and Gates Removed and Reset Removed and Stacked II .
Field Stone Masonry II .
Walls Removed and Rebuilt II .
SECTION Incidental Work Sidewalks Wheelchair Ramps and Driveways II .
Bounds II .
Rural Mail Boxes Removed and Reset II .
Metal BinType Retaining Wall II .
Engineers Field Office and Materials Laboratory Each with Pertinent Equipment II .
Transportation Vehicle II .
Mobilization II .
Loam Borrow Plantable Soil Borrow Processing Planting Material or TopSoil Rehandled and Spread II .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges ix Section Page Impervious Soil Borrow II .
Seeding II .
Refertilization II .
Mulching Seed for Erosion Control II .
Pavement Milling Under Gaurd Rail II .
Sodding II .
Planting Trees Shrubs and Groundcover II .
SECTION Traffic Control Devices Conduit Manholes Handholes Pull Boxes and Foundations II .
Wiring Grounding and Service Connections II .
Traffic Control Signals II .
Highway Lighting II .
Flashing Beacons Illuminated Warning Signs and Lighted Barrier Arrows II .
Traffic Signs II .
Sign Supports II .
Traffic Controls for Construction and Maintenance Operations II .
Reflectorized Pavement Markings II .
SECTION Structures Cement Concrete Masonry II .
Prestressed Concrete Beams II .
Driven Piles II .
Sheeting II .
Treated Timber II .
Structural Steel II .
Membrane Waterproofing and Protective Course for Bridge Decks II .
Membrane Waterproofing and Protective Course for Abutements and Wingwalls II .
Bituminous Dampproofing II .
Metal Bridge Railings II .
Revetment II .
Bridge Structure II .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges x DIVISION III MATERIALS SPECIFICATIONS SECTION M Materials Section Page M Soils and Borrow MaterialsIII .
M Aggregates and Related MaterialsIII .
M Bituminous Materials III .
M Cement and Cement Concrete Materials III .
M Pipe Culvert Sections and ConduitIII .
M Roadside Development MaterialsIII .
M Paints and Protective Coatings III .
M Metals and Related MaterialsIII .
M Miscellaneous MaterialsIII .
APPENDIXES APPENDIX A Numerical Listing of Contract Pay ItemsA .
APPENDIX B Contract Allowance Payment Items B .
APPENDIX C General Index C. APPENDIX D Materials IndexD .
APPENDIX E Metric Units Terms Symbols and Conversion Factors E. I. Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges DIVISION I GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND COVENANTS SECTION .
DEFINITION OF TERMS SECTION .
PROPOSAL REQUIREMENTS AND CONDITIONS SECTION .
AWARD AND EXECUTION OF CONTRACT SECTION .
SCOPE OF WORK SECTION .
CONTROL OF WORK SECTION .
CONTROL OF MATERIALS SECTION .
LEGAL RELATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITY TO PUBLIC SECTION .
PROSECUTION AND PROGRESS SECTION .
MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges This page intentionally blank .
I. Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND COVENANTS SECTION .
DEFINITION OF TERMS .
Definition of Terms .
Wherever in these specifications or other contract documents the following terms or pronouns in place of them are used the intent and meaning shall be interpreted as follows .
Abbreviations Wherever the following abbreviations are used in these specifications or on the plans they are to be construed the same as the respective expressions represented AAN American Association of Nurserymen AAR Association of American Railroads AASHTO American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials AGC Associated General Contractors of America AIA American Institute of Architects ANSI American National Standards Institute ARA American Railway Association AREA American Railway Engineering Association ASCE American Society of Civil Engineers ASLA American Society of Landscape Architects ASTM American Society of Testing and Materials AWPA American Wood Preservers Association AWWA American Water Works Association AWS American Welding Society DEP Department of Environmental Protection EIA Electronics Industry Association EIS Environmental Impact Statement EPA Environmental Protection Agency FHWA Federal Highway Administration FSS Federal Specifications and Standards GSA General Services Administration IES Illumination Engineering Society IMSA International Municipal Signal Association ITE Institute of Traffic Engineers MEC Massachusetts Electrical Code MUTCD Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices NEC National Electrical Code NEMA National Electrical Manufacturers Association OSHA Occupational Safety and Health Administration SAE Society of Automotive Engineers UL Underwriters Laboratories USAS United States of America Standards .
Advertisement The notice as required by law inviting bids proposals for work to be I. Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges performed or materials to be furnished. . Alteration A change or substitution in the form character or detail of the work done or to be done within the original scope of the Contract at unit prices stated in the Contract which alteration makes a change in the item originally contracted for or a substitution from that item to a similar item at the same unit price. . Award The acceptance by the Department of a bid proposal contemplating the execution and delivery of a contract. . Bid See Proposal .
Bid Informal as to form A bid which contains a minor deficiency or deviation from what is requested by the Department .
Bid Informal as to substance A bid which fails to comply with the requirements of the public bidding law . .
Bidder Proposer Any individual firm partnership corporation or joint venture submitting a Proposal for the work contemplated acting directly or through a duly authorized representative. . Bridge The term bridge shall apply to any structure whether single or multiple span construction that spans a body of water depression highway or railway and affords passage for pedestrians or vehicles of all kinds or any combination thereof having a total length of .
meters or more .
Length In general the length of a bridge is that distance measured horizontally along the centerline of roadway between extreme centerlines of bridge shoes or bearings or when shoes or bearings are not used the distance between vertical faces of abutments or spring lines of arches or extreme ends of openings for multiple reinforced concrete boxes .
Roadway Width The clear width measured at right angles to the longitudinal centerline of the bridge between the bottom of curbs or guard timbers or in the case of multiple height or curbs between the bottom of the lower risers. . Commission A commission of five members as specified in General Laws Chapter Section . . Commonwealth The Commonwealth of Massachusetts. . Contract The written agreement executed between the Party of the First Part and the Contractor setting forth the obligations of the Parties thereunder including but not limited to the performance of the work the furnishing of labor and materials and the basis of payment .
The Contract includes the Notice to Contractors proposal contract form I. Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges and contract bond specifications supplemental specifications special provisions general and detailed plans any extra work orders and agreements that are required to complete the construction of the work in an acceptable manner including authorized extensions thereof all of which constitute one instrument . .
Contractor The Party of the Second Part to the Contract acting directly or through an authorized lawful agent or employee. . Contract Item Pay Item A specifically described unit of work for which a price is provided in the contract. . Contract Time The number of days allowed for completion of the Contract .
In case a calendar date of completion is shown in the Proposal in lieu of the number of days the Contract shall be completed by that date. . Culvert A structure not classified as a bridge which provides an opening under the roadway. . Day Every day shown on the calendar Sundays and Holidays included. . Department The Department of Highways of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts . .
Differ substantially or materially When the character of the work encountered in exposing subsurface or latent physical conditions while the work is in progress is found to be essentially different in nature from that shown on the plans or indicated on the contract documents or from that ordinarily encountered and generally recognized as inherent in work of the character provided for in the plans and contract documents and are of such a nature as to cause an increase or decrease in the cost of performance of the work or a change in the construction methods required for the performance of the work resulting in any increase or decrease in the cost of the work . .
Engineer The Chief Engineer of the Department acting directly or through an authorized representative such representative acting within the scope of the particular duties entrusted to himher . .
Extra Work Work which .
was not originally anticipated andor contained in the contract and therefore .
is determined by the Engineer to be necessary for the proper completion of the project and .
bears a reasonable subsidiary relation to the full execution of the work originally described in the Contract . .
Extra Work Order An order in writing issued by the Engineer to the Contractor prior to performing the work setting forth the Extra Work to be done the basis of payment and time adjustments if any . .
Invitation for Bids The advertisement for Proposals for all work or materials on which bids I. Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges are required .
Such advertisement will indicate the approximate project value category of work and location of the work to be done and the time and place of the opening of Proposals . .
Latent Physical Conditions Actual physical conditions at the site that were indiscernible hidden not visible or apparent and which as a basis for a request for an equitable adjustment differ substantially and materially from those shown on the plans or indicated in the contract documents . .
Layout Plans Plans showing layout location lines property lines corner markers names of property owners access and nonaccess if Limited Access Highway points and the location of bounds . .
Location Lines Lines indicating the limits of the RightofWay. . Material Any substances specified for use in the construction of the project and its appurtenances. . Notice to Proceed A written communication issued by the Department to the Contractor authorizing himher to proceed with the work and establishing the date of commencement of the work. . Party of the First Part In contracts with the Department the Party of the First Part shall be the Department .
In contracts made by a municipality with a Contractor under the provisions of Chapter of the General Laws the Party of the First Part shall be the municipality town or city by its duly authorized officials .
In contracts made by a municipality with another party the Party of the First Part shall be the municipality town or city by its duly authorized officials. . Pavement Structure The combination of subbase base course and surface course placed on a subgrade to support the traffic load and distribute it to the subgrade. . Plans Approved contract drawings Department Standards working drawings supplemental drawings Detail Sheets or exact reproductions thereof which show the location character dimensions and details of the work to be done. . Project The specific section of the highway together with all appurtenances and construction to be performed thereon under the Contract. . Proposal The written offer of the Bidder on the prescribed form to perform the work and to furnish the labor and materials at the prices quoted. . Proposal Form The approved form on which the Department requires bids to be prepared and submitted for the work. . Reference Where reference is made in the Contract Documents to Publications or I. Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges Standards issued by Associations or Societies the intent shall be to specify the current edition of such Publications or Standards in effect on the date of the contract advertisement notwithstanding any reference to a particular date. . RightofWay That area which has been laid out or acquired for highway purposes. . Sieves All sieves referred to in the Specifications shall be standard woven wire cloth sieves and shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO Designation M . . Special Provisions The special agreements and provisions prepared for proposed work on a specific project .
These special provisions shall be included within the general term specifications and shall be made a part of the Contract with the express purpose that they shall prevail over all other specifications . .
Specifications The directions provisions and requirements contained herein designated as Standard Specifications together with all written agreements made or to be made pertaining to the method and manner of performing the work or the quantities and qualities of materials to be furnished under the Contract. . Subcontractor An individual firm partnership or joint venture to whom the contractor with prior written approval of the Engineer sublets any part of the Contract. . Subgrade The plane at the bottom of the subbase . .
Substantial Completion Shall mean either that the Work required by the Contract has been completed except for work having a contract price of less than one percent of the then adjusted total Contract Sum or substantially all of the Work has been completed and opened to public use except for minor incomplete or unsatisfactory work items that do not materially impair the usefulness of the Work required by the Contract .
Substantial Completion shall be conclusively determined by the Engineer after inspection of the Work . .
Supplemental Specifications Additions and revisions to the standard specifications that are issued prior to the opening of bids. . Unbalanced Bid An unrealistic bid price which is abnormally high or abnormally low for an item of work and does not reflect the actual cost of performing such item of work. . Work Work shall mean the furnishing of all labor materials equipment and other incidentals necessary for or convenient to the successful completion of the project and the carrying out of all the duties and obligations imposed by the Contract .
Work shall include in addition to work to be performed on the project location in the actual construction process necessary shop plans computations ordering of materials and equipment I. Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges fabrication of material parts and components etc . .
In order to avoid cumbersome and confusing repetition of expressions in these specifications it is provided that whenever anything is or is to be done if as or when or where contemplated required determined directed specified authorized ordered given designated indicated considered necessary deemed necessary permitted reserved suspended established approval approved disapproved acceptable unacceptable suitable accepted satisfactory unsatisfactory sufficient insufficient rejected or condemned it shall be understood as if the expression were followed by the words by the Engineer or to the Engineer .
I. Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges SECTION .
PROPOSAL REQUIREMENTS AND CONDITIONS .
Proposal Forms and Plans .
A. Prequalification Prior to Requesting Proposal Forms .
Subject to the requirements of Chapter Section B of the General Laws each prospective Bidder proposing to bid on any work excepting the construction reconstruction repair or alteration of buildings to be awarded by the Department or by a municipality under the provisions of Section of Chapter must be prequalified in accordance with CMR .
Prequalification of Contractors if the amount of the proposal added to the value of the uncompleted work already under contract with the Department will aggregate or more .
For work aggregating under prequalification is desirable but not required .
B .
Issuance of Proposal Forms and Plans .
All prospective Bidders who intend to bid on work to be awarded by the Department may obtain plans and specifications from the Department at the place specified in the Notice to Contractors .
For projects to be awarded under the provisions of Section Chapter of the General Laws bidders may obtain plans and specifications from the applicable municipality at the place specified in the Notice to Contractors .
Only a prequalified bidder shall be entitled to receive an officially numbered nontransferable Proposal Pamphlet along with a set of plans for the project if required .
Informational copies of plans and specifications are available to nonprequalified individuals and firms .
Payment of the specified fee is required prior to receipt of plans and specifications from the Department .
The amount will be refunded to only those who submit a formal bid for the project within the time stipulated on the proposal form furnished by the Department provided the Notice to Contractors so specifies and further provided that the plans are returned in good condition within one week from the date of bid opening or to a common carrier or the post office department not later than the Friday following bid opening for subsequent delivery to the Department .
Except for projects for which Prequalification is not required under CMR .
proposals for a project shall be limited to those bidders who have been Prequalified by the Prequalification Committee in the specified class of work on or before the time of bid opening and who have not exceeded the Aggregate Bonding Capacity established by the bidders surety company and who have if applicable a Single Project Limit in an amount equal to or in excess of the Proposal amount and who are otherwise in compliance with these regulations .
Official Proposal Books shall contain an officially numbered nontransferable itemized proposal form specifying the location and description of the contemplated work the approximate estimates of the various quantities of work to be performed and materials to be furnished the time in which the work must be completed and also a Notice to Contractors and Special Provisions or requirements for the particular project .
The prospective Bidder shall also be entitled to a set of project plans and profiles either full size or reduced size at the option of the Department a set of full size bridge plans and detail sheets showing the preliminary estimate of quantities with information pertinent thereto .
No municipality may award a contract until the Department has determined that the bidder was prequalified in the specified class of work on or before the time of bid opening and has not exceeded the Aggregate Bonding Capacity established by the bidders surety company and has if applicable a Single Project Limit in an amount equal to or in excess of the Proposal amount and is otherwise in compliance with CMR .
Prequalification of Contractors . .
Interpretation of Basic Estimate of Quantities .
A .
All bids will be compared on the estimate of quantities of work to be done as shown in the Proposal .
The parties expressly agree that these quantities are being set forth as a basis for the comparison of bids only and the parties also expressly agree that the actual amount of work may not correspond therewith .
The Department expressly reserves the right to adjust said quantities in accordance with actual conditions as found to exist during the course of work .
Bidders agree to submit their estimate upon the following express condition which shall apply to and become part of every bid received viz I. Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges An increase or decrease in the quantity for any item shall not be regarded as cause for an increase or decrease in the contract unit prices nor in the time allowed for the completion of the work except as provided in the Contract .
Also see Subsections .
and .. B .
The excavation masonry and other parts of the work have been divided into classes and items in order to enable the Bidder to bid on the different portions of the work in accordance with the Bidders estimate of their cost so that in the event of an increase or decrease in the quantities of any particular class of work the actual quantities executed shall be paid for that particular class of work except in structures bid as a lump sum item where the payment for an increase or decrease in the quantities of concrete will be adjusted as stipulated in Section . .
Examination of Plans Specifications Special Provisions and Site of Work .
The Department will prepare plans and specifications giving directions which will enable any competent mechanic or contractor to carry them out .
The Bidder is expected to examine carefully the site of the proposed work the proposal plans specifications supplemental specifications special provisions and contract forms before submitting a Proposal .
The submission of a bid shall be considered prima facie evidence that the Bidder has made such examination of the site of the proposed work plans proposal etc .
and is familiar with the conditions to be encountered in performing the work and as to the requirements of the plans specifications supplemental specifications special provisions and Contract . .
Preparation of Proposals .
A .
Bid Prices .
The Bidder shall submit hisher proposal upon the blank forms furnished by or approved by the Department .
The Bidder shall specify a unit price in both words and figures for each item for which a quantity is given and shall also show the products of the respective unit prices and quantities written in figures in the column provided for that purpose and the total amount of the proposal obtained by adding the amounts of the several items .
All words and figures shall be in ink .
In case of a discrepancy between the unit prices written in words and unit prices written in figures the written words shall govern .
In the event the bidder fails to enter a price for a particular bid item the Department will consider the amount bid to be zero .
When an item in the Proposal contains a choice to be made by the Bidder the Bidder shall indicate hisher choice in accordance with the specifications for that particular item and thereafter no further choice will be permitted .
The price for any item bid and contracted for unless otherwise noted or specified shall include full compensation for all materials equipment tools labor and incidental work necessary to complete the item to the satisfaction of the Engineer .
The prices without exception shall be net not subject to discount and shall include all royalties and costs arising from patents trade marks and copyrights in any way involved in the work .
B. Signatures .
All Proposals shall be signed correctly with ink in the proper place provided as follows If the Proposal is made by an individual the name and post office address shall be stated .
If the Proposal is made by a firm partnership or corporation it shall be signed by a person having such legal authority from the said firm partnership or corporation and the person so signing the Proposal shall give hisher own name and title if any in addition to the name and address of the firm partnership or corporation .
If the Proposal is made by a firm or partnership the names and addresses of the individual members shall be given .
If the Proposal is made by a corporation the name of the State under the Laws of which the corporation was chartered and the names titles and business addresses of the President Treasurer and Clerk shall be given .
If a Proposal is made by two or more individuals partnerships or corporations or any combination of these as a joint venture each party joining to make the Proposal shall submit attached to and made part of the Proposal all information and all signatures in compliance with the foregoing provisions applicable to an individual firm partnership or corporation .
In addition if any of the joint ventures are a corporation an attested copy of the vote of the corporation authorizing such joint venture shall be attached to the Proposal .
C. Affidavits .
The Bidder shall file a sworn statement executed by or on behalf of the person firm association or corporation submitting the bid certifying that such person firm association or corporation has not either directly or indirectly entered into an agreement participated in any collusion or otherwise taken any action in restraint of free competitive I. Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges bidding in connection with the submitted bid .
This sworn statement shall be in the form of an affidavit sworn to under the pains and penalties of perjury .
The required form for the affidavit will be provided with the Proposal .
Failure to submit the sworn statement on the required form as part of the bid approval package shall make the bid informal as to substance and not eligible for award consideration . .
Delivery of Proposals .
The Bidder shall submit prior to the time set for opening of the bid hisher Proposal properly sealed delivered or mailed in the envelopes furnished by the Department and in accordance with the instructions printed thereon .
A Proposal shall not be accepted unless it is submitted in the envelopes furnished by the Department. . Proposal Guaranty Required .
In order to insure the faithful fulfillment of its terms each Proposal shall be accompanied by a bid deposit in the amount of five percent of the bid .
The bid deposit shall be a bid bond in a form satisfactory to the Party of the First Part furnished by a surety company incorporated pursuant to Chapter Section of the General Laws or authorized to do business in the Commonwealth under Chapter Section of the General Laws and satisfactory to the Party of the First Part or cash or a certified check drawn on a responsible bank or trust company or a treasurers or cashiers check issued by such bank or trust company payable to the Party of the First Part .
The bid deposit should not be enclosed in the sealed envelope with the Proposal but shall be delivered to the Supervisor of Fiscal Management or hisher agent .
The bid deposit will be returned to the Bidder unless retained by the Party of the First Part under conditions hereinafter stipulated. . Withdrawal of Proposals .
A Bidder may withdraw hisher Proposal provided the request in writing is in the hands of the Engineer by the time set for opening Proposals .
When such proposal is reached during the opening of the bids it will be returned to the bidder unread .
A bidder may withdraw a bid on a clear showing to the satisfaction of the Department that the bid amount resulted from bona fide clerical or mechanical error of a substantial nature or from other similar unforeseen circumstances .
The Department will return the bid deposit. . Public Opening of Proposals .
Proposals will be opened and the total price of each bid read publicly at the time and place indicated in the Notice to Contractors .
Any person may at reasonable times and in the presence of the Engineer examine any or all Proposals after they have been opened and read . .
Rejection of Proposals .
Proposals which fail to meet the requirements of Subsections . . and .
or which are incomplete conditional or obscure or which contain additions not called for erasures alterations or irregularities of any kind or in which errors occur or which contain abnormally high or abnormally low prices for any class or item of work may be declared informal provided however that the Commission may if it deems it to be in the public interest waive any or all informalities as to form .
Informalities as to substance however shall not be waived .
More than one Proposal from the same Bidder whether or not the same or different names appear on the signature page will not be considered .
Reasonable proof for believing that any Bidder is so interested in more than one Proposal for the work contemplated will cause the rejection of all Proposals made by himher directly or indirectly .
Any Proposals will be rejected if there is reason for believing that collusion exist among the Bidders .
See Subsection ..
In accordance with CMR .
Proposals may also be rejected if i award of the contract would result in the Bidder exceeding the Aggregate Bonding Capacity established by its I. Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges Surety Company or the Bidders Proposal exceeds its single project limit or the Bidder was not prequalified in the specified class of work on or before the time of bid opening or ii the Bidder is presently debarred from performing work of any kind under the provisions of Massachusetts General Laws Chapter Section F or any other applicable debarment provisions of the Massachusetts General Laws or any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder or iii the Bidder is presently debarred from performing work of any kind under the laws of any state other than the Commonwealth of Massachusetts or by any Federal agency or authority or iv there is substantial reason to believe that the condition of the Bidders firm is less favorable than at the time of its last Application for Prequalification or v the Bidder does not have sufficient equipment or sufficient assets to provide necessary equipment either through purchase or lease agreements or vi the Bidders performance on past or current work with the Department or other awarding authorities is or has been unsatisfactory or vii on current projects of the Department or other public authorities the Bidder frequently fails or has failed to pay its subcontractors or material suppliers in a timely manner or that five or more subcontractors or material suppliers of the Contractor for a project currently under construction have filed demands for direct payment with the projects awarding authority in accordance with Massachusetts General Laws Chapter Section For viii the Bidder is not otherwise an eligible and responsible Bidder capable of performing the work. . Disqualification of Bidders .
Bidders whose Proposals have been rejected because of evidence of collusion may be subject to debarment under applicable provisions of state and federal law . .
Determination of Lowest Bid .
The lowest bid shall be determined by the Department on the basis of the total price for which the entire work will be performed arrived at by a correct computation of all the items specified in the Proposal at their estimated quantities and the unit prices submitted therefor. . Material Guaranty .
Before any Contract is awarded the Bidder may be required to furnish without expense to the Department a complete statement of the origin composition and manufacture of any or all materials proposed to be used in the construction of the work together with samples which may be subjected to the tests required by the Department to determine the quality and fitness of the material .
I. Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges SECTION .
AWARD AND EXECUTION OF CONTRACT .
Consideration of Proposals .
The Party of the First Part reserves the right to reject any and all bids or any bid item to advertise for new Proposals for the project to waive technicalities to waive informalities as to form or to proceed to do the work otherwise as may be deemed to be in the best interest of the Department .
Nothing herein shall be construed as depriving the Highway Commission of the right to reject any bid when such bid does not fully comply with the specifications for the project or the applicable public bidding law or regulations or the Contractor is otherwise not eligible or responsible to receive award of the contract .
A proposal will be considered irregular and will be rejected if it is determined that any of the unit prices are materially unbalanced to the detriment of the Department .
The bidder will be required to justify in writing the price or prices bid for the work in question before the Department decides to award the contract or reject the bid. . Award of Contract .
Subject to the reservations in Subsection .
the Contract will be awarded to the lowest eligible and responsible Bidder .
It is anticipated that the Contract will be awarded within days after the opening of bids or for projects requiring concurrence by the FHWA or other Agencies within days after the opening of bids .
The successful bidder will be notified by mail or otherwise that the bid has been accepted and that the bidder has been awarded the Contract . .
Retention of Proposal Guaranty .
The two lowest Bidders shall keep their bids open for at least days after the opening of bids or for projects requiring concurrence by the FHWA or other Agencies for at least days after the opening of bids .
The Proposal guaranties of the two lowest Bidders will be retained until after execution of the Contract prior to which however either Bidder may substitute a bid bond cash or certified check or cashiers or treasurers check all as described in Subsection .
for the guaranty already deposited with the Supervisor of Fiscal Management of the Department .
The Department will endeavor to return the Proposal guaranties of all Bidders other than the two lowest Bidders within three days after the opening of bids .
After the bid has been kept open for the required number of days the low Bidder may withdraw hisher bid and request the return of hisher proposal guaranty in which case the guaranty of both the two lowest Bidders will be returned and the second lowest Bidders Proposal shall not be considered for award .
After the bid has been kept open for the required number of days the second lowest Bidder may withdraw hisher bid and request the return of his proposal guaranty in which case only the proposal guaranty of the second lowest Bidder will be returned. . Contract Bonds Required .
A .
A Performance Bond in the full amount of the Contract will be required by the Party of the First Part to ensure the faithful performance of the Contract including Subsection .. B .
A Payment Bond in an amount of the contract price will be required to be furnished by the Contractor to the Party of the First Part as security for payment by the Contractor and Subcontractors for labor materials rental equipment and for such other purposes as are more specifically set forth in General Laws Chapter Section and Chapter Section A and all amendments thereto .
The payment bond referred to in Chapter Section and Chapter Section A is the sole security under said sections for payment by the Contractor and Subcontractor for labor performed or furnished and materials used or employed therein said security to remain in force until the validity of all such claims shall be established and I. Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges finally determined and if determined and established as valid all such claims shall be paid by the surety .
The Performance Bond and the Payment Bond shall be in a form satisfactory to the Party of the First Part furnished by a surety company incorporated pursuant to Chapter Section of the General Laws or authorized to do business in the Commonwealth under Chapter Section of the General Laws and satisfactory to the awarding authority .
The name of the agency or agent writing these bonds shall be identified with or on the bond .
All alterations extensions of time extra work and any other changes authorized under these specifications or under any part of the Contract may be made without obtaining the consent of the surety or sureties on the contract bonds . .
Execution of Contract .
The prepared Contract forms bond forms and certificate of insurance forms will be sent with the notification of award to the successful Bidder who shall execute and deliver the Contract and furnish the required surety to the Department within days after the date of the notice of award .
The Contract shall be in writing .
When the Party of the First Part is the Commonwealth the Contract shall be executed in duplicate one of which duplicates shall be kept by the Department and one delivered to the Contractor .
When the Party of the First Part is a municipality it shall be executed in triplicate one of which triplicates shall be kept by the municipality one delivered to the Department and one delivered to the Contractor. . Failure to Execute Contract .
Should the successful bidder fail to execute the contract and furnish the bonds and certificate of insurance within the time stipulated the Party of the First Part may at its option determine that the Bidder has abandoned the Contract and thereupon the Proposal and acceptance shall be null and void .
In accordance with Massachusetts General Laws Chapter Section M the guaranty accompanying the Proposal may be retained and collected by the Party of the First Part as liquidated damages for the delay and expense caused by the abandonment of the Contract .
I. Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges SECTION .
SCOPE OF WORK .
Intent of the Contract .
The intent of the Contract is to prescribe the complete work or improvement .
The Contractor shall perform all the items of work stipulated in the Proposal in accordance with the lines grades typical cross sections and dimensions shown on the plans or supplemental plans standards or modifications of them as required by change conditions in the field and as authorized or directed .
The Contractor shall do all clearing and grubbing make all excavations and embankments do all shaping and surfacing construct all drainage structures bridges and other appurtenant structures as indicated in the Contract remove all obstructions from within the lines of the improvement and shall do such additional extra and incidental work as may be considered necessary to complete the work in a substantial and acceptable manner and when it is so completed the Contractor shall leave the work in a neat and finished condition .
The Contractor shall do all the work and furnish all the materials tools and appliances except as otherwise specified necessary or proper for performing and completing the work required by the Contract in the manner and within the time specified .
The Contractor shall complete the entire work to the satisfaction of the Engineer and in accordance with the specifications and drawings for the work at the prices agreed upon .
All the work labor and materials to be done and furnished under the Contract shall be done and furnished pursuant to and in conformity with the specifications and the drawings for the work which said specifications and drawings shall form part of the Contract .
Further the Contractor shall follow the directions of the Engineer as given from time to time during the progress of the work under the terms of the Contract .
The Contract shall include grading outside the rightofway together with the work of loaming surfaces constructing walks driveways drains and other miscellaneous work as shown on the plans and as directed .
The Contract shall at the discretion of the Party of the First Part be extended when the safety and convenience of the public necessitates the construction of access roads or approaches to existing roadways or bridges and the nature of such additional work bears a reasonable subsidiary relation to the original Contract .
Copies of all ASTM and AASHTO Specifications will be available for reference at the office of the Engineer. . Alterations .
Should it be found desirable by the Engineer to make alterations in the form character or detail of any of the work done or to be done the Engineer may order such alterations to be made defining them in writing supplemented by drawings when in the judgment of the Engineer it is necessary and the alterations shall be made accordingly .
The Contractor shall accept as full compensation for work performed under an alteration order the contract unit prices stipulated in the Contract for the actual quantity of work performed in an acceptable manner . .
Extra Work Also see Subsection ..
The Contractor shall do any work not herein otherwise provided for when and as ordered in writing by the Engineer such written order to contain particular reference to this Subsection and to designate the work to be done as Extra Work .
Unless specifically noted in the Extra Work Order Extra Work will not extend the time of completion of the Contract as stipulated in Subsection .
Part F. The determination of the Engineer shall be final upon all questions concerning the amount and value of Extra Work except as provided in Subsection .. Payment for Extra Work will be provided in Subsection .. . Changed Conditions .
In accordance with Chapter Section N of the General Laws as amended the following paragraph is included in its entirety I. Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges If during the progress of the work the Contractor or the awarding authority discovers that the actual subsurface or latent physical conditions encountered at the site differ substantially or materially from those shown on the plans or indicated in the contract documents either the Contractor or the contracting authority may request an equitable adjustment in the contract price of the Contract applying to work affected by the differing site conditions .
A request for such an adjustment shall be in writing and shall be delivered by the party making such claim to the other party as soon as possible after such conditions are discovered .
Upon receipt of such a claim from a Contractor or upon its own initiative the contracting authority shall make an investigation of such physical conditions and if they differ substantially or materially from those shown on the plans or indicated in the contract documents or from those ordinarily encountered and generally recognized as inherent in work of the character provided for in the plans and contract documents and are of such a nature as to cause an increase or decrease in the cost of performance of the work or a change in the cost of performance of the work or a change in the construction methods required for the performance of the work which results in an increase or decrease in the cost of the work the contracting authority shall make an equitable adjustment in the contract price and the Contract shall be modified in writing accordingly .
The filing investigation and settlement of all claims made under said Chapter and Section shall be as follows a The Contractor shall promptly and before such conditions are disturbed notify the Engineer in writing describing in full detail the subsurface or latent physical conditions at the site which the Contractor maintains differ substantially or materially from those shown on the plans or indicated in the contract documents .
The Engineer shall promptly investigate the conditions and shall promptly submit a written report of hisher findings and determinations to the Commission with a copy of the same to the Contractor and if the Contractor finds that such conditions as have been described in detail by the Contractor do exist and in fact do so differ materially or substantially an equitable adjustment shall be made and the Contract modified in writing accordingly .
No such claim of the Contractor shall be allowed unless the Contractor has given the detailed notice specified nor shall it be allowed if such conditions are disturbed prior to their investigation by the Engineer .
b No adjustment or allowance of any kind except as provided in Subsection .
will be made to the Contractor on account of any delay or suspension of work or any portion thereof where the actual subsurface or latent physical conditions encountered at the site differ substantially and materially from those shown on the plans or indicated in the contract documents .
c No claim will be approved or any adjustment or allowance made on account of encountering subsurface or latent physical conditions at that site that differ substantially and materially from those shown on the plans or indicated in the contract documents unless such conditions were in existence at the time of the award of the Contract .
d Any dispute concerning a question of fact under this Subsection which is not disposed of by agreement shall be decided by the Chief Engineer .
e If as provided in a of this Subsection an equitable adjustment is to be made or contemplated the Contractor shall submit promptly in writing to the Engineer an itemized statement of the details and amount of work together with hisher estimated costs for the same and the Engineer shall require the Contractor to keep actual costs and certify the same to the Department in writing .
If the Contractor and the Department fail to agree on an equitable adjustment to be made under this Subsection then the Contractor shall accept as full payment for the work in dispute an amount equal to the following The actual cost for direct labor materials and use of equipment plus percent of this total for overhead .
Plus actual cost of Workmens Compensation and Liability Insurance Health Welfare and Pension benefits Social Security deductions Employment Security Benefits and such additional fringe benefits which the Contractor is required to pay as a result of Union Labor Agreements andor is required by authorized governmental agencies .
Plus percent of the total of and .
Plus the estimated proportionate cost of surety bonds .
For work performed by a Subcontractor the Contractor shall accept as full payment therefor an amount equal to the actual cost to the Contractor of such work as determined by the Engineer plus percent of such cost .
No allowance shall be made for general superintendence and the use of small tools and manual equipment .
The Contractor shall when requested by the Engineer furnish itemized statements of the cost of the work ordered and give the Engineer access to all accounts bills and vouchers relating thereto and unless the Contractor shall furnish all such itemized statements access to all accounts bills and vouchers the Contractor shall not be entitled to payment for any items of extra work for which such information is sought by the Engineer .
Pending final decision of any dispute hereunder unless otherwise ordered by the Chief Engineer the Contractor I. Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges shall proceed diligently with the performance of the Contract and in accordance with the Chief Engineers decision .
The Contract shall be considered modified in writing by the processing of an Extra Work Order .
The Contractor shall be estopped to rely on and deemed to waive under said Section N and this Subsection hisher right to have an equitable adjustment of a unit price bid by himher which in the opinion of the Chief Engineer is an unrealistic unit price abnormally low for the unit item priced and which does not reflect the actual cost of performing such unit item of work .
It shall be the obligation of the Chief Engineer to notify the Contractor prior to award of the Contract of any unit price that has been determined to be abnormally low for the unit item priced and that the unrealistic low unit price not reflecting the actual cost of performing such unit item of work would bar the Contractor from an equitable adjustment under said Section N and this Subsection .
Any unit item price determined by the Chief Engineer to be an unrealistically high unit price not reflecting the actual cost of performing such unit item of work is subject to the provisions of said Section N and this Subsection .
The provisions of Section N of Chapter of the General Laws as amended do not apply to Construction Contracts entered into on behalf of the Commonwealth which provide that payments for the work be made on a lump sum basis .
Construction Contracts entered into on behalf of a municipality under the provisions of Section Chapter of the General Laws. . Validity of Extra Work .
The Engineer shall be authorized to issue Extra Work Orders for such additional work outside the scope of the original Contract as in hisher judgment is reasonably necessary for the satisfactory completion of the project provided that the work to be done under such an Extra Work Order either standing alone or in conjunction with any previously authorized Extra Work Order shall not result in a change of such magnitude as to be incompatible with the provisions of Chapter Section A and Chapter Section J of the General Laws . .
Increased or Decreased Contract Quantities .
The Department reserves the right to increase or decrease the quantity of any particular item of Work .
Where the quantity of a Unit Price pay item in this Contact is an estimated quantity and where the actual quantity of such pay item varies more than twentyfive percent above or below the estimated quantity stated in this Contract an equitable adjustment in the Contract Price for that pay item shall be negotiated upon demand of either party .
The equitable adjustment shall be strictly based upon any increase or decrease due solely to the variation above one hundred twentyfive percent or below seventyfive percent of the estimated quantity .
In this regard no allowances will be made for loss of anticipated profits suffered or claimed by the Contractor resulting directly or indirectly from such increased or decreased quantities or from unbalanced allocation among the contract items from any other cause . .
Maintenance of Detours .
A .
Where the Department authorizes or directs general traffic from a travelled way to be detoured over Town or City streets the Department will be responsible for maintenance of such detours and placing them in the equivalent condition they were in prior to general traffic being detoured over same .
The Contractor shall do all work required hereunder as directed by the Engineer .
Payment for such work shall be made as specified in Subsection .
Payment for Extra Work .
B .
Where a Contractor uses public roads or streets as haul roads unless the road is properly posted for tonnage limitations the Contractor has a legal right to use such roads or streets if hisher vehicles are properly registered .
C. Inferred or alleged overloading causing either excessive mass beyond registered capacity or spillage is a Police matter for the local authorities .
D. Where a Contractor uses a private way for hauling it is a matter between the Contractor and the owners of the private way .
E. It shall be the Contractors responsibility to ascertain whether haul routes are over accepted public or private ways prior to using same for hauling purposes and it is hisher further responsibility to ascertain if any have posted legal mass limitations or other restrictions and to abide by them .
I. Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges .
Removal and Disposal of Structures and Obstructions .
Existing structures such as bridges culverts or drainage pipes found within the location lines which are to be replaced or rendered useless by new construction shall be removed by the Contractor at hisher own expense unless otherwise provided in these specifications or in the Special Provisions .
When their location is such as not to interfere with the work the removal shall not be done until the new structures replacing them are ready for traffic or other purpose for which the replaced structures are designed or until the Engineer shall permit .
All material in the above mentioned types of existing structures requiring removal shall remain the property of the owner .
The material shall be removed without damage in sections which will permit easy handling and disposal to locations within the limits of the project and convenient for their subsequent removal by the owner or as directed by the Engineer .
Unless otherwise provided the material from any existing structure may be used temporarily by the Contractor during construction .
Such material may not be cut bent broken or otherwise damaged .
All discarded material rubbish or debris shall be removed from the work and disposed of as directed .
No foreign material or debris shall be permitted to remain or move in a waterway. . Rights in the Use of Materials Found on the Work .
The Contractor with the prior written approval of the Engineer may take suitable ledge gravel sand loam clay or other material from within the location lines of the project under construction and use it on the same project for other purposes than for forming embankments .
If such use necessitates securing additional material for forming embankments the Contractor shall replace at hisher own expense material of a satisfactory quality .
See Section .
The Contractor shall not excavate or remove any material which is not within the excavation as indicated by the slope stakes and grade lines without written approval .
No excavated material for use shall be wasted unless otherwise directed .
Nothing in the Contract shall be construed as vesting in the Contractor any right of property in the materials used after they have been attached or affixed to the work or the soil but all such materials shall upon being so attached or affixed become the property of the Party of the First Part . .
Final Cleaning Up .
Upon completion of the work and before acceptance and final payment the Contractor shall remove and dispose of in an approved manner at hisher own expense from the rightofway construction site dredging site and adjoining property all temporary structures and all surplus materials and rubbish which the Contractor may have accumulated during the prosecution of the work and shall leave the areas in a neat and orderly condition .
No equipment or material shall be left within any of the aforementioned areas after acceptance of the Contract without the written permission of the Engineer .
The Contractor shall not abandon any material at or near the site regardless of whether or not it has any value .
I. Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges SECTION .
CONTROL OF WORK .
Authority of the Engineer .
The Engineer shall decide all questions which may arise as to the interpretation of the plans and specifications and the Engineer may alter adjust and approve same when necessary all questions which may arise as to the quality quantity value and acceptability of materials furnished or to be furnished and work performed or to be performed all questions which may arise as to the progress of the work and need for and manner of correcting same and also the need for and terms of delays and suspensions all questions relating to the need for and terms of extra work all questions relating to the supervision control and direction of work on the site and the use thereof all questions as to the acceptable fulfillment of the Contract on the part of the Contractor. . Plans and Detail Drawings .
Approved plans profiles and sections on file in the office of the Department will show the location details and dimensions of the highway bridges and other work contemplated and all work shall be in conformity therewith and with the specifications .
Supplemental plans and detail drawings as required in the specifications and furnished by the Contractor or the Department shall upon approval become part of the complete plans .
Supplemental plans for temporary structures steel sheeting cofferdams sign and traffic supports etc .
the original design for which is the responsibility of the Contractor shall bear the seal of a Professional Engineer registered in Massachusetts .
Such approval by the Engineer of supplemental plans or detail drawings however shall not operate to relieve the Contractor of any of hisher responsibility under the Contract nor for errors in dimensions details or quantities or for nonconformance with details of the original approved design .
Any work done or materials ordered for the structures involved prior to the approval of supplemental plans and detail drawings shall be at the Contractors own risk .
Nothing in the above shall be construed to hold the Contractor liable for the design of any of the permanent structures .
When submitting detail drawings for approval complete sets of prints as directed shall be furnished the Engineer who will return one set either approved or with corrections marked thereon .
Finally the Contractor shall furnish the Engineer with complete sets of prints as directed of the corrected and approved detail drawings .
No changes shall be made in the approved drawing without the written consent of the Engineer .
All computations shop drawings design plans and other criteria submitted to the Department for review and approval shall be stamped by a Professional Engineer registered in Massachusetts .
The shop drawings other than Department Standards which do not contain original design shall be stamped by a Professional Engineer registered in Massachusetts as an indication of compliance with the design or appropriate standards but shall not be construed as indicating any responsibility for the original design .
Detail drawings will not be accepted from other than approved suppliers as noted in Subsection ..
The Contractor upon completion of the work shall submit to the Engineer a mm microfilm copy of each structural steel detail drawing which shall become the property of the Department .
For all overhead and cantilever sign structures and all steel mast arm assemblies the Contractor shall submit to the Engineer one silver master aperture card and one diazo duplicate of each shop drawing .
All microfilm shall be prepared in accordance with the instructions of the Departments Microfilm section .
The contract prices shall include the cost of furnishing all detail drawings and microfilms and the Contractor will be allowed no extra compensation therefor. . Conformity with Plans and Specifications .
I. Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges Attention is directed to Chapter Section I which provides that no wilful and substantial deviation from plans and specifications shall be made unless authorized in writing by the awarding authority or by the Engineer in charge of the work who is duly authorized by the awarding authority to approve such deviation .
This act further provides that in order to avoid delays in the prosecution of the work such deviation may be authorized by a written order of the awarding authority or such Engineer as is authorized to approve such deviation and that within days thereafter such written order shall be confirmed by a certificate of the awarding authority .
All work performed and all materials furnished shall be in reasonably close conformity with the lines grades cross sections dimensions details gradations physical and chemical characteristics of materials and other specific requirements of the Contract .
Where the terms in conformity with in agreement with in compliance with or terms of like exactness occur in these specifications they shall be construed to mean in reasonably close conformity with .
Where definite tolerances are specified in the Contract such tolerances shall fix the limits of reasonably close conformity .
Where tolerances are not specified in the Contract the Engineer will determine the limits of reasonably close conformity in each individual case and hisher decision shall be final and conclusive and mutually accepted by all parties .
In the event the Engineer finds the materials or the finished product in which the materials are used not within reasonably close conformity with the plans and specifications but that reasonably acceptable work has been produced the Engineer shall then make a determination if the work shall be accepted and remain in place .
In this event the Engineer will document the basis of acceptance by contract modification which will provide for an appropriate adjustment in the contract price for such work or materials as the Engineer deems necessary to conform to hisher determination based on engineering judgment and in accordance with current construction practices .
In the event the Engineer finds the materials or the finished product in which the materials are used or the work performed are not in reasonably close conformity with the plans and specifications and have resulted in an inferior or unsatisfactory product the work or materials shall be removed and replaced or otherwise corrected by and at the expense of the Contractor .
Deviations from the approved plans and working drawings that may be required by the need of the construction will be determined by the Engineer and authorized by the Engineer in writing . .
Coordination of Special Provisions Plans Supplemental Specifications and Standard Specifications .
The Special Provisions Plans including Departmental Standards Supplemental Specifications Standard Specifications and all supplementary documents are essential parts of the Contract and a requirement occurring in one is as binding as though occurring in all .
They are intended to be complementary and to describe and provide for a complete work .
In the event of any discrepancy between the drawing and figures written thereon the figures unless obviously incorrect are to govern over scaled dimensions .
In the case of any discrepancy between the plans and the specifications the plans are to govern .
If there is a discrepancy between these Standard Specifications and Supplemental Specifications the Supplemental Specifications are to govern .
Special Provisions shall govern over Supplemental Specifications plans and Standard Specifications .
The Contractor shall take no advantage of any apparent error or omission in the plans or specifications .
In the event the Contractor discovers such an error or omission the Contractor shall immediately notify the Engineer .
The Engineer will then make such corrections and interpretations as may be deemed necessary for fulfilling the intent of the Contract. . Cooperation by Contractor .
The Contractor will be given three copies of full size approved contract drawings detail sheets and contract specifications except Standard Specifications .
The Contractor shall purchase any required Standard Specifications from the Department .
The Contractor may request and the Engineer may approve furnishing additional copies of contract drawings either full or halfsize at the Contractors expense .
The Contractor shall have one copy of all such information and a copy of the Standard Specifications on the work site and available for reference at all times during the prosecution of the work .
The Contractor shall have on the work at all times as hisher agent a competent superintendent or foreman capable of I. Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges reading and thoroughly understanding the plans and specifications and thoroughly experienced in the type of work being performed authorized to receive orders and to act for himher .
Whenever the Contractor is not present on any part of the work if it is necessary or desirable that directions be given such directions or orders will be given by the Engineer and they shall be received and executed by the foreman or superintendent who is in charge of the particular work with reference to which the orders are given .
The Contractor shall provide all reasonable facilities to enable the Engineer to make necessary measurements and to inspect the workmanship and materials entering into the work .
The Contractor shall cooperate in the matter of setting and preserving stakes bench marks etc .
for controlling the work .
The Contractor shall so carry on hisher work under the direction of the Engineer that Public Service Corporations or Municipal Departments may enter on the work to make changes in their structures or to place new structures and connections therewith without interference and the Contractor shall have no claim for or on account of any delay which may be due to or result from said work of Public Service Corporations or Municipal Departments .
No allowance of any kind will be made except as provided in Subsection ..
Nothing contained herein shall be construed to hold the Contractor responsible for any acts or omissions by such Public Service Corporations Municipal Departments or their Contractors . .
Adjacent Contracts .
The Department reserves the right at any time to contract for and perform other or additional work on or near the work covered by the Contract .
The intent of this section is to provide for the cooperation of Contractors in cases where the Department deems it expedient or necessary and in the best interest of the Commonwealth to let a separate Contract for the performance of other work on or near the same project location as the work being performed under the Contract but it is not intended to indicate any intention on the part of the Department to let a separate Contract for any work within the scope of or necessary for the successful completion of the Contract .
When separate Contracts are let within the limits of any one project either prior to award of Contract or as specified in project proposal or as specified above each Contractor shall conduct hisher work so as not to interfere with or hinder the progress or completion of the work being performed by other Contractors .
Contractors working on the same project shall cooperate with each other as directed .
Each Contractor involved shall assume all liability financial or otherwise in connection with hisher Contract and shall protect and save harmless the Department from any and all damage or claims that may arise because of inconvenience delay or loss experienced by himher because of the presence and operations of other Contractors working within the limits of the same project .
No allowance of any kind will be made except as provided in Subsection ..
The Contractor shall arrange hisher work and shall place and dispose of the materials being used so as not to interfere with the operations of the other Contractors within the limits of the same project .
The Contractor shall join hisher work with that of the others in an acceptable manner and shall perform it in proper sequence to that of the others. . Construction Stakes Stakings .
The Department will furnish the following survey work A .
Establishment of base lines or centerlines of construction for main roadways ramps service roads side streets and other major dry land items .
Reproduction of base lines and centerlines or lines offset to them when roadway cuts and fills have been completed .
Levels may be taken on the points marking these lines .
B .
General bench mark control for the project .
C. Original grade stakes at meter intervals .
D. Preliminary and final surveys of pits if borrow is paid by pit measure and dredging areas semifinal cross sections on ledge peat loam etc .
E. Control for structure which shall consist of range lines on centerline of bearings or centerline of piers face of abutments and wingwalls horizontal and vertical control for beam seats along with bench marks close to structures for vertical control .
Structures shall include but shall not be limited to bridges culverts dams buildings and walls .
F. Control for alignment of curbing or edging on ramps and at other complicated locations .
G. Bound points and sideline stakes .
I. Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges H. All necessary stakes for pipes and head walls and establish all catch basin and manhole locations as to line and grade .
The Contractor shall employ qualified engineering personnel to insure adequate control and shall furnish and set stakes of the quality used by the Department for control staking .
Rough stakes may be used to denote top and bottom of slopes edge of pavement gutter lines etc .
The Contractor shall furnish and set at hisher own expense all remaining stakes such as batter boards slope stakes pins offset stakes etc .
required for the construction operations and the Contractor shall be solely responsible for the accuracy of the line and grade of all features of hishisher work .
The Contractor shall be held responsible for the preservation of all stakes and marks placed by the Engineer .
If any of such stakes or marks are disturbed or destroyed by the Contractor the cost of replacing them shall be deducted from the payment for the work as stipulated in Subsection .. . Authority and Duties of Engineers Assistants .
The Engineer may appoint such assistants and representatives as desired and they shall be authorized to inspect work and materials to give directions pertaining to the work or to the safety and convenience of the public to approve or reject materials to make measurements of quantities and to perform such other duties as may be designated by the Engineer .
In case of any dispute arising between the Contractor and the Engineers assistants as to materials furnished or the manner of performing the work the Engineers assistants shall have the authority to reject the materials or to suspend the work until the question at issue can be referred to and decided by the Engineer .
Engineers assistants are not authorized to revoke alter enlarge relax or release any requirements of these specifications nor to issue instructions contrary to the plans and specifications .
In no case shall the Engineers assistants act as foremen or perform other duties for the Contractor . .
Inspection of Work .
All materials and each part or detail of the work shall be subject to inspection by the Engineer .
The Engineer shall be allowed access to all parts of the work and shall be furnished with such information and assistance by the Contractor as is required to make a complete and detailed inspection such assistance may include furnishing labor boats tools equipment etc .
at no expense to the Department .
If the Engineer so requests the Contractor at any time before acceptance of the work shall remove or uncover such portions of the finished work as may be directed .
After examination the Contractor shall restore said portions of the work to the standard required by the specifications .
Should the work thus exposed or examined prove acceptable the uncovering or removing and the replacing of the covering or making good of the parts removed will be paid for as extra work but should the work so exposed or examined prove unacceptable the uncovering or removing and the replacing of the covering or making good of the parts removed will be at the Contractors expense .
Any work done or materials used without authorization by the Engineer may be ordered removed and replaced at the Contractors expense .
The Contractor shall furnish written information to the Engineer stating the original sources of supply of all materials manufactured away from the actual site of the work .
In order to insure a proper time sequence for required inspection and approval this information shall be furnished at least two weeks or as otherwise directed by the Engineer in advance of the incorporation in the work of any such materials .
The Department strongly encourages the use of recycled products provided the manufacturer of the product stipulates that such product meets or exceeds the performance standards for the intended use of said product .
The Contractor must identify wherever recycled products are to be used .
For the purpose of observing work that affects their respective properties inspectors for the municipalities public agencies and the utility companies shall be permitted access to the work but all official orders and directives to the Contractor will be issued by the Engineer .
Such inspection shall in no sense make any unit of government or political subdivision a party to this Contract and shall in no way interfere with the rights of either party hereunder .
The inspection of the work shall not relieve the Contractor of any of hisher obligations to fulfill the terms of the Contract as herein prescribed by the plans and specifications .
I. Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges Failure to reject any defective work or materials shall not in any way prevent later rejection when such defect is discovered nor obligate the Department to make final acceptance .
The Contractor shall give prior notice to the Engineer when work on the various items is to be performed by himher or hisher Subcontractors .
If work is suspended on any item prior notice shall be given to the Engineer before resumption of such work .
Except in case of an unforeseen emergency neither the Contractor nor any Subcontractor shall perform any work requiring inspection at hours other than during the normal work day without prior approval of the Engineer . .
Removal of Defective or Unauthorized Work .
All defective work shall be removed repaired or made good notwithstanding that such work has previously been inspected and approved or estimated for payment .
If the work or any part thereof shall be found defective at any time before the final acceptance of the whole work the Contractor shall at hisher own expense make good such defect in a satisfactory manner .
Any work done beyond the lines and grades shown on the plans or as given except as herein provided or any extra work done without authority shall be considered as unauthorized and at the expense of the Contractor .
Such work will not be measured nor compensation allowed therefor .
Work so done may be ordered removed at the Contractors expense .
Upon failure of the Contractor to remove and satisfactorily dispose of any or all defective or unauthorized work and to remedy the same after being so notified the Engineer may cause such defective work to be remedied removed and replaced and such unauthorized work to be removed and to deduct the costs therefor from any moneys due or to become due the Contractor . .
Final Acceptance Also see Subsections .
and .
Upon due notice from the Contractor by certified mail of presumptive completion of the entire project the Engineer will make an inspection .
If all construction provided for and contemplated by the Contract is found completed to hisher satisfaction that inspection shall constitute the final inspection and the Chief Engineer shall in writing make acceptance of the physical work which acceptance shall relieve the Contractor from further responsibility only with respect to the physical work .
Subsequent to the final acceptance of the physical work and upon compliance with the terms of the Contract relating to submission of contractually required reports or other documents the Engineer will recommend final acceptance of the Contract to the Board of Commissioners see Subsection ..
If the work or any part thereof is not acceptable to the Engineer at the time of the inspection the Contractor will be notified in writing of the particular defects or parts to be remedied before final acceptance .
If the Contractor has not arranged within a period of five days after the date of transmittal of such notice of nonacceptability to complete the work speedily as described by the Engineer the Engineer may without further notice and without in any way affecting the Contract make such other arrangements as may be considered necessary to insure the satisfactory completion of the project .
The cost of so completing the work shall be deducted from any moneys due or which may become due the Contractor under the Contract .
After the Contractor has finished installing the controller and all other associated traffic signal control equipment and after the Contractor has set the signal equipment to operate as specified in the contract documents the fine tuning adjusting and testing period shall begin .
During this period the Contractor under the direction of the Engineer and with the cooperation of the local community representatives if applicable will make necessary adjustments and tests to ensure safe and efficient operation of the equipment .
This period shall not last for more than days and the contract completion date has taken this testing period into consideration .
No request for final acceptance will be considered until successful completion of the testing period .
I. Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges SECTION .
CONTROL OF MATERIALS .
Source of Supply and Quality .
If the Engineer so desires materials may be approved at the source of supply before delivery is started .
The Department reserves the right to require approval of the source of supply for any material to be incorporated into the work prior to delivery or manufacture .
The Engineer reserves the right to prohibit the use of materials products or components which in hisher opinion may be supplied in a manner not reasonably consistent with contract requirements .
The determination of the Engineer shall be final upon all questions which pertain to supplier approval .
Fabricators of structural steel miscellaneous steel and aluminum products must be on the Departments approved fabricators list as noted in Subsection .
prior to the bid opening date .
Only approved fabricators will be allowed to perform work for the Department .
Unless otherwise stipulated in the Special Provisions the Contractor shall furnish all materials required for the work specified in the Contract and said materials shall meet the requirements of the specifications for the kind of work involving their use .
Chapter Section Clause of the General Laws as amended shall apply to the purchase by the Contractor of supplies and materials to be used in the execution of this Contract .
The rules referred to require a preference in the purchase of supplies and materials other considerations being equal in favor first of supplies and materials manufactured and sold within the Commonwealth and second of supplies and materials manufactured and sold within the United States .
On Federal Aid Projects the following shall also apply No requirements shall be imposed and no procedure shall be enforced by any State in connection with a project which may operate to require the use or provide a price differential in favor of articles or materials produced within the State or otherwise to prohibit restrict or discriminate against the use of articles or materials shipped from or prepared made or produced in any State territory or possession of the United States .
In Contracts requiring structural steel the Contractor shall furnish approved erection procedures to the inspector of structural materials at the source of supply or site of fabrication .
The inspector shall not stamp hisher approval or release material for shipment until such approved procedures are received .
Unless otherwise provided only new and first quality materials conforming to the requirements of these specifications and approved by the Engineer shall be used in the work except for material used by the Contractor for hisher convenience and which is not to be incorporated in the permanent work .
If after tests it is found that sources of supply which have been approved do not furnish a uniform product or if the product from such source proves unacceptable at any time the Contractor shall at hisher own expense take any and all steps necessary to furnish approved materials .
Where no inspection of materials is arranged for by the Party of the First Part and before such materials are incorporated into the work the Contractor shall submit to the Party of the First Part for approval three notarized copies of the Manufacturers or Suppliers statement for each kind of material furnished which shall certify compliance with the specifications and shall contain the following information .
Contract Number City or Town Name of Road and Federal Aid Number. . Name of the Contractor to which the material is supplied. . Kind of material supplied . .
Quantity of material represented by the certificate. . Means of identifying the consignment such as label marking seal number etc . .
Date and method of shipment . .
Statement to the effect that the material has been tested and found in conformity with the pertinent parts of the Contract . .
Results of all required tests including the chemical analysis in the case of metal or in lieu of furnishing the results a statement that results of all required tests pertinent to the certificate and not submitted shall be maintained available by the undersigned for a period of not less than three years from date of final acceptance or not less than three I. Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges years from date of final payment to the State from Federal Funds whichever period is the longest shall apply. . Signature of a person having legal authority to bind the supplier .
If the Contractor has new materials purchased for use on a previous Department Contract which have never been used and which comply with the specifications these materials may be furnished and used provided the Contractor submits hisher own sworn statement certifying that such materials were purchased for use on a previous Contract naming and identifying such Contract and that certificates of compliance were furnished for such materials on the previous Contract to which reference can be made .
Any cost involved in furnishing the certificate shall be borne by the Contractor . .
Samples and Tests .
The inspection and sampling of materials will be carried out ordinarily at the source or at the site of the Contract work in accordance with established policies and procedures of the Department but the Department will not assume any obligation for the inspection and sampling of materials at the source .
The responsibility of incorporating satisfactory material in the work rests entirely with the Contractor notwithstanding any prior inspection or test .
Tests of materials will be made by the Department or under its direction in accordance with the Standards of the test as designated .
The Contractor or hisher suppliers shall furnish such facilities as the Engineer may require for collecting and forwarding samples and shall not make use of nor incorporate in the work any material represented by the samples until the required tests have been made and the material accepted unless otherwise directed .
The Contractor in all cases shall furnish the required samples without charge .
Materials such as crushed stone gravel borrow ordinary borrow etc .
will be sampled at the source and approved for use .
However such preliminary approval by the Engineer does not relieve the Contractor of the responsibility for placing satisfactory material in the work as determined by subsequent samples taken at the source or on the project prior to the material being incorporated into the work and if the project samples test satisfactorily the material will be considered to meet the Contract requirements as to quality .
If such sampling and testing reveal that the material is unsatisfactory it will then be the responsibility of the Contractor to remove it from the work or blend it with such other materials so that an acceptable material will be produced .
The removal and blending of such material shall be done by the Contractor without additional compensation . .
Delivery and Storage of Materials .
Materials and equipment shall be progressively delivered at the site so that there will be neither delay in the progress of the work nor an accumulation of materials that is not to be used within a reasonable time .
Materials shall be so stored as to assure the preservation of their quality and fitness for the work .
Stored materials even though approved before storage may again be inspected prior to their use in the work .
Stored materials shall be located so as to facilitate their prompt inspection .
Approved portions of the rightofway may be used for storage purposes and for the placing of the Contractors plant and equipment but any additional space required therefor must be provided by the Contractor at hisher expense .
Private property shall not be used for storage purposes without written permission of the owner or lessee and if requested by the Engineer copies of such written permission shall be furnished to himher .
All storage sites shall be restored to their original condition by the Contractor at hisher expense .
This shall not apply to the stripping and storing of topsoil or to other materials salvaged from the work . .
Defective Materials .
Materials not conforming to these specifications shall be rejected and removed from the work by the Contractor as directed .
No rejected material the defects of which have been subsequently corrected shall be used except with the permission of the Engineer .
Should the Contractor fail to remove defective material within the time indicated in writing the Engineer shall have the authority to remove and replace the defective material and the cost of such removal and replacement will be deducted from any moneys due or to become due the Contractor .
I. Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges SECTION .
LEGAL RELATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITY TO PUBLIC .
Laws to be Observed .
A .
General .
The Contractor shall keep himself fully informed of all state and national laws and municipal ordinances and regulations in any manner affecting those engaged or employed in the work or the materials used in the work or in any way affecting the conduct of the work and of all orders and decrees of bodies or tribunals having any jurisdiction or authority over the same .
If any discrepancy or inconsistency is discovered in the Contract for the work in relation to any law ordinance regulation order or decree the Contractor shall forthwith report the same to the Engineer in writing .
The Contractor shall at all times observe and comply with and shall cause all hisher agents and employees to observe and comply with all existing laws ordinances regulations orders and decrees .
The Contractor if a foreign corporation a corporation established organized or chartered under laws other than those of the Commonwealth shall comply with the provisions of Sections and of Chapter of the General Laws as amended .
Section provides that the State Secretary shall be appointed for the service of legal process in the case of a foreign corporation doing business in this Commonwealth .
Section requires every such corporation to file with the said secretary copies of its charter certificate of incorporation a true copy of its bylaws and other information .
The Contractor shall file with the Department with each bid a certificate from the State Secretary stating that such corporation has complied with Sections and of Chapter and the date of such compliance .
Other outofstate business organizations such as individual proprietorship partnership etc .
shall appoint an agent in this Commonwealth for the service of legal process and furnish a copy of such appointment to the State Secretary prior to the issuance of a Contract by the Department .
It shall be the responsibility of the Contractor to observe and practice to the fullest extent practicable controls procedures and methods lending themselves to protection of the human and natural environment .
The Contractor shall at all times observe and comply with and shall cause all hisher agents and employees to observe and comply with all existing laws ordinances regulations orders and decrees especially in their relationship to the protection of the total environment .
The Contractor shall not otherwise than as provided by law for the proper discharge of official duty directly or indirectly give offer or promise anything of value to any present or former state employee for or because of any official act performed or to be performed by such employee or person selected to be such employee .
The phrase anything of value as used herein means any item of value including but not limited to invitations or tickets to sporting events social gatherings outings or parties or the provision of meals or lodging or the use of vehicles of any kind and any other item or thing of monetary value .
In the event that the Contractor breaches this provision the Department may take action against the Contractor including but not limited to the following a ordering the Contractor to cease the work or any part thereof b termination of the contract c requiring Contractors sureties to complete the work and d suspend or terminate the Contractors prequalification status .
Executive Order Anti Boycott Covenant The Contractor warrants represents and agrees that during the time this contract is in effect neither it nor any affiliated company as hereafter defined participates in or cooperates with an international boycott as defined in Section b and of the Internal Revenue Code of as amended or engages in conduct declared to be unlawful by Section of Chapter E Massachusetts General Laws .
If there shall be a breach in the warranty representation and agreement contained in this paragraph then without limiting such other rights as it may have the Commonwealth shall be entitled to rescind this contract .
As used herein an affiliated company shall be any business entity of which at least of the ownership interests are directly or indirectly owned by the Contractor or by a person or persons or business entity or entities directly or indirectly owning at least of the ownership interests of the Contractor or which directly or indirectly owns at least of the ownership interests of the Contractor .
Executive Order No .
In compliance with Executive Order No .
of the Governor of the Commonwealth the Governor or hisher I. Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges designee the Secretary of Administration and Finance and the State Auditor or his designee shall have the right at reasonable times and upon reasonable notice to examine the books records and other compilations of data of the contractor which pertain to the performance of the provisions and requirements of this contract .
Dump Truck Rates .
With regard to truck carriers including but not limited to dump trucks the Contractor shall comply with the provisions of Massachusetts General Laws Chapter Sections A E. The Contractor shall utilize only Department of Public Utilities dump truck rates and carriers licensed under the provisions of Massachusetts General Laws Chapter Section B for dump truck operations .
In accordance with the provisions of Massachusetts General Laws Chapter Section B the dump truck rates and transportation charges shall be the rate on file under provisions of Massachusetts General Laws Chapter B at the Department of Public Utilities .
The Contractor shall pay the transportation charges within fifteen calendar days of receipt of an invoice from the dump truck carrier .
The Contractors attention is directed to Massachusetts General Laws Chapter Section A and Chapter Section regarding security for payment of transportation charges .
B .
Air Pollution Control .
The Contractor shall comply with the provisions of Chapter as amended of the General Laws of the Commonwealth pertaining to and establishing the Air Pollution Control Districts in the Commonwealth .
The burning of trees brush etc .
will not be permitted .
The Contractor shall provide other satisfactory approved methods of disposal without additional compensation .
C. Prevention of Water Pollution See Subsection ..
Attention of the Contractor is directed to Section of the Massachusetts Clean Waters Act Chapter of the General Laws as amended .
D. Plant Pest Control .
The Contractors attention is directed to the provisions of The Federal Plant Quarantine Act of as amended U.S.C .
and The Terminal Inspection Act of March as amended U.S.C .
Organic Act of as amended U.S.C .
aajj Cooperation with States in Administration and Enforcement of Certain Federal Laws approved September U.S.C. . All soil moving equipment operating in regulated areas in Massachusetts will be subject to plant quarantine regulations .
In general these regulations require the thorough cleaning of soil from equipment by the Contractor before such equipment is moved from regulated areas within Massachusetts to uninfested areas either within or without the Commonwealth .
The cost of such cleaning shall be included in the contract prices and shall not be in addition thereto .
Complete information may be obtained from the Massachusetts Department of Agriculture Plant Pest Control Division Cambridge Street Boston Massachusetts .
For interstate movement of soil moving equipment the following should be contacted U.S. Department of Agriculture Plant Pest Control Division Trapelo Road Waltham Massachusetts .
Prevention of Water Pollution Sanitary Provisions .
A .
General .
The Contractor shall exercise every reasonable precaution to prevent or minimize the silting of rivers streams or water impoundments during actual construction and periods when the work may be temporarily suspended .
Similar precautionary measures shall be taken with respect to temporary roads and access roads to borrow pits .
This work shall also consist of temporary control measures ordered by the Engineer during the life of the Contract to control water pollution through use of berms dikes dams sediment basins crushed stone gravel mulches grasses waterways and other erosion control devices or methods .
The temporary pollution control provisions contained herein shall be coordinated with the permanent erosion control features specified elsewhere in the Contract to the extent practical to assure economical effective and continuous erosion control throughout the construction and postconstruction period .
B .
Schedule of Work .
At the preconstruction conference the Contractor shall submit for acceptance and approval hisher procedure I. Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges for the accomplishment of temporary erosion control work and hisher schedule for the accomplishment of permanent erosion control work for all applicable phases of construction .
Since circumstances may require that certain pollution control work be done as promptly as possible the Contractors procedure must indicate hisher ability with men equipment and material to take the necessary action .
C. Borrow Pits Haul Roads and Disposal Areas .
Prior to entering or constructing haul roads or opening any borrow pit or waste disposal area the Contractor shall submit hisher work plan for erosion control of such roads pits or disposal areas .
No work shall be started until the erosion control program and methods of operation have been accepted and are approved by the Engineer .
Wherever practicable so to do unless objection thereto is made by the borrow pit owner the Contractor shall save sufficient good topsoil from the excavated area and use it in establishing a vegetative cover which will blend the pit area into the surrounding landscape when the work on the project is completed .
Vegetative cover will be similarly established in areas where waste material is placed .
See also Subsection .
Borrow Pit Restrictions .
D. Construction Requirements .
The Engineer has the authority to limit the surface area of erodible earth material exposed by clearing and grubbing or excavation borrow and fill operations and to direct the Contractor to provide immediate permanent or temporary pollution control measures to prevent contamination of adjacent streams or other watercourses lakes ponds or areas of water impoundment .
Such work may involve the construction of temporary berms dikes dams sediment basins waterways and use of temporary mulches seeding or other control devices or methods as necessary to control erosion .
All slopes shall be seeded and mulched as the earthwork proceeds to the extent considered desirable as practicable .
Where erosion is likely to be a problem clearing and grubbing operations should be so scheduled and performed that grading operations and permanent erosion control features can follow immediately thereafter if the project conditions permit otherwise temporary erosion control measures will be required between successive construction stages .
The Engineer will limit the area of excavation borrow and embankment operations in progress commensurate with the Contractors capability in keeping the finish grading mulching seeding and other such permanent pollution control measures current in accordance with the accepted schedule .
Should seasonal limitations make such coordination unrealistic temporary erosion control measures shall be taken immediately to the extent feasible and justified .
If in the judgment of the Engineer the surface area of erodible earth material exposed has the potential for causing water pollution the Engineer shall direct the Contractor to cease the applicable operations until satisfactory temporary or permanent erosion control measures are taken .
In the event of conflict between these requirements and pollution control laws rules or regulations of other Federal or State or local agencies the more restrictive laws rules or regulations shall apply .
The Contractor will be required to incorporate all permanent erosion control features into the project at the earliest practicable time as outlined in hisher accepted schedule .
Temporary pollution control measures will be used to correct conditions that develop during construction that were not foreseen during the design stage that are needed prior to installation of permanent pollution control features or that are needed temporarily to control erosion that develops during normal construction practices but are not associated with permanent control features on the project .
The Contractor shall take reasonable precaution to prevent grass and brush fires within the work site thereby eliminating further sources of erosion due to burned over areas .
E. Work in or Near Streams Rivers and Impoundments .
The fording of streams with equipment shall be kept to a minimum .
Where frequent stream crossings are contemplated and where fording might create sediment detrimental to fish wildlife water supplies or irrigation systems temporary bridges or culverts shall be installed the cost of which shall be absorbed by the Contractor .
Unless otherwise approved in writing by the Engineer construction operations in rivers streams and impoundments shall be restricted to those areas where channel changes are shown on the plans and to those areas which must be entered for the construction of temporary or permanent structures .
Rivers streams and impoundments shall be promptly cleared of all falsework piling debris or other obstructions placed therein or caused by the construction operations .
Excavation from the roadway channel changes cofferdams etc .
shall not be deposited in or so near to rivers streams or impoundments that it will be washed away by high water or runoff .
When the Contractor uses water from natural sources for any of hisher operations intake methods shall be I. Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges such as to avoid contaminating the source of supply and maintain adequate downstream flow when the source is a stream .
Pollutants such as chemicals fuels lubricants bitumens raw sewage and other harmful waste shall not be discharged into or alongside of rivers streams impoundments or into natural or manmade channels leading thereto .
F. Sanitary Provisions .
The Contractor shall provide and maintain in a neat sanitary condition such accommodations for use of hisher employees as may be necessary to comply with the requirements of the Department of Public Health local health officials or other authorities having jurisdiction . .
Permits and Licenses .
The Contractor shall procure all required permits and licenses pay all charges fees and taxes and shall give all notices necessary and incidental to the due and lawful prosecution of the work .
The cost thereof shall be included in the prices bid for the various items listed in the Proposal .
Copies of all required permits and licenses shall be filed with the Engineer prior to the beginning of work .
The Contractors attention is directed to the provisions of General Laws Chapter Section as amended in which it is provided that earthmoving motor vehicles which exceed certain dimensions or mass limits as specified in said Act and which are used exclusively for building repair and maintenance of highways may be operated without registration for a distance not exceeding meters on any way adjacent to any highway or toll road being constructed relocated or improved provided a permit authorizing such use to be issued by the Commissioner of Public Works or by the Board or officer having charge of such way has been procured by the Contractor. . Motor Vehicles .
All motor vehicles except vehicles used solely for transporting employees to and from the project used wholly or in part within the Commonwealth by the Contractor or any Subcontractor or by any person directly or indirectly employed by them in the execution of the Contract shall be registered in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts and bear Massachusetts registration plates except as stipulated in Subsection .. Motor vehicles used solely for transporting employees to and from the project shall be registered as required under General Laws Chapter Section as amended .
No vehicle shall be driven on any way as defined in Section of Chapter of the General Laws unless such vehicle is constructed or loaded so as to prevent any of its load from dropping sifting leaking or otherwise escaping therefrom except that sand may be dropped for the purpose of securing traction or water or other substance may be sprinkled on such a way in cleaning or maintaining the same General Laws Chapter Section as amended. . Insurance Requirements .
A. Workmens Compensation Insurance .
The Contractor before commencing performance of the work required to be done under the Contract shall provide for the payment of the compensation provided by Massachusetts General Laws Chapter as amended to all persons to be employed by himher in connection with the said performance and the Contractor shall continue in full force and effect throughout the period required for the completion of the improvement such insurance as may be required under said chapter .
The persons for whom compensation is to be provided by such insurance shall include those reserve or special police officers employed by the Contractor for the purpose of directing or maintaining traffic or other similar purposes within the site of the improvement and paid directly by himher for such services they shall not include however any regular police officers employed for said purpose .
Failure to provide and continue in force such insurance as aforesaid shall be deemed a material breach of the Contract and shall operate as an immediate termination thereof .
Such insurance shall not be canceled or otherwise terminated until ten days after written notice of cancellation or termination is given by the party proposing cancellation to the other party or until notice has been received that the employer has secured insurance from another insurance company or has otherwise insured the payment I. Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges of compensation provided for by Massachusetts General Laws Chapter as amended .
Notice of cancellation sent to the party proposing cancellation by registered mail postage prepaid with a return receipt of the addressee requested shall be sufficient notice .
An affidavit of any officer agent or employee of the insurer or of the insured as the case may be duly authorized for the purpose that heshe has so sent such notice addressed as aforesaid shall be prima facie evidence of sending thereof as aforesaid .
This section shall apply to the legal representatives trustee in bankruptcy receiver assignee trustee and the successor in interest of any such Contractor .
The aforesaid insurance except that required for traffic officers shall be taken out and maintained with no compensation therefor other than that provided by the contract unit prices .
B .
Public Liability Insurance .
The Contractor shall take out and maintain insurance of the following kinds and amounts in addition to any other kinds or bonds required under other provisions of the Contract with no compensation therefor other than that provided by the contract unit prices . .
Contractors Public Liability and Property Damage Liability Insurance .
The Contractor shall furnish evidence to the Department that with respect to the operations the Contractor performs the Contractor carries regular Contractors Public Liability Insurance providing for a limit of not less than unless higher or lower limits are stipulated in the Special Provisions for all damages arising out of bodily injuries to or death of one person and subject to that limit for each person a total limit of unless higher or lower limits are stipulated in the Special Provisions for all damages arising out of bodily injuries to or death of two or more persons in any one accident and regular Contractors Property Damage Liability Insurance providing for a limit of not less than unless higher or lower limits are stipulated in the Special Provisions for all damages arising out of injury to or destruction of property in any one accident and subject to that limit per accident a total or aggregate limit of unless higher or lower limits are stipulated in the Special Provisions for all damages arising out of injury to or destruction of property during the policy period . .
Contractors Protective Public Liability and Property Damage Liability Insurance .
The Contractor shall furnish evidence to the Department that with respect to the operations performed for himher by Subcontractors the Contractor carries in hisher own behalf regular Contractors Protective Public Liability Insurance providing for a limit of not less than unless higher or lower limits are stipulated in the Special Provisions for all damages arising out of bodily injuries to or death of one person and subject to that limit for each person a total limit of unless higher or lower limits are stipulated in the Special Provisions for all damages arising out of bodily injuries to or death of two or more persons in any one accident and regular Contractors Protective Property Damage Liability Insurance providing for a limit of not less than unless higher or lower limits are stipulated in the Special Provisions for all damages arising out of injury to or destruction of property in any one accident and subject to that limit per accident a total or aggregate limit of unless higher or lower limits are stipulated in the Special Provisions for all damages arising out of injury or destruction of property during the policy period. . Railroads Protective Liability and Property Damage Liability Insurance .
In addition to the above the Contractor shall furnish evidence to the Department that with respect to the operation the Contractor or any of hisher Subcontractors perform the Contractor has provided for and in behalf of the Railroad Company affected by this Contract Regular Protective Liability Insurance providing for a limit of not less than the amount named in the Special Provisions for all damages arising out of bodily injuries to or death of one person and subject to that limit for each person a total limit of the amount named in the Special Provisions for all damages arising out of bodily injuries to or death of two or more persons in any one accident and Regular Protective Property Damage Liability Insurance for a limit of not less than the amount named in the Special Provisions for all damages arising out of injury to or destruction of property in any one accident and subject to that limit per accident a total or aggregate limit of the amount named in the Special Provisions for all damages arising out of injury to or destruction of property during the policy period .
C. General . .
The insurance requirements hereinbefore stipulated shall cover all damages to property whether above or below the ground shall apply to the entire project except that such insurance as may be required for the protection of a railroad shall apply only to that portion of the project which is in the immediate vicinity of the railroad property. . All insurance policies shall contain suitable stipulations providing for blasting operations if and when required . .
If any part of the work is sublet similar insurance to that required of the Contractor shall be provided by or I. Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges in behalf of the Subcontractors to cover their operations in accordance with the hereinbefore provisions of A .
Compensation Insurance and B .
Contractors Public Liability and Property Damage Liability Insurance with the same minimum limits as required of the Contractor or such lower minimum limits as the Engineer may approve. . All insurance required of the Contractor shall be carried until all work required to be performed under the terms of the Contract or Subcontracts has been satisfactorily completed .
In the case of the Contractor this shall be evidenced by the written acceptance of the physical work by the Chief Engineer. . Before the commencement of the performance of the Contract or of any Subcontract the Contractor shall furnish the Department two complete copies of the policies the Contractor has provided for and in behalf of the Railroad and the Contractor shall file with the Department suitable insurers certifications showing for each policy of all required insurance the following the name and address of the insurer and of the insured the policy period the details of coverage including limits of liability the rates and cost of such insurance and a statement that each policy is endorsed to provide that the insurance company shall notify all insured parties and the Department by registered mail at least days in advance of termination or any change in the policy. . Patented Devices Materials and Processes .
Whenever the Contractor desires to use any design device material or process covered by letters patent or copyright the right for such use shall be secured by suitable legal agreement with the patentee or owner and a copy of this agreement shall be filed with the Party of the First Part .
This article shall not be construed as imposing any obligation on the Party of the First Part to see that such agreements are secured or filed or complied with .
The Contractor shall be solely responsible for the use of any such design device material or process . .
Restoration of Surfaces Opened by Permit .
The Contractor shall not allow any party to make an opening in the highway for any purpose except upon the direction of the Engineer and the presentation of a duly authorized permit .
The holder of such a permit shall be considered in the same class as a Contractor on an adjacent project and the provisions of Subsections .
and .
shall apply. . Federal Participation Applicable only to Contracts where the cost of any portion thereof is paid out of Federal Funds .
Attention is directed to the provisions of the Federal Highway Act of November U.S .
Statutes at large page as modified and as extended and U.S .
Statutes at large U.S. Code Title and any other provisions of law or amendments thereto whereby such Federal Participation is authorized and any regulations properly and lawfully promulgated thereunder under which the United States shall aid the individual states in the construction of highways .
When the United States Government is to pay any portion of the cost of the project the above act of Congress provides that the construction work and labor in each State shall be done in accordance with the laws of that state and applicable Federal Laws .
The work embraced in this Contract will therefore be subject to such inspection by the Federal Highway Administration as may be necessary to meet the above requirements .
Such inspection shall however in no sense make the United States Government a party to this Contract and will in no way interfere with the rights of either party hereunder. . Public Safety and Convenience .
The Contractor shall at all times until written acceptance of the physical work by the Chief Engineer be responsible for the protection of the work and shall take all precautions for preventing injuries to persons or damage to property on or about the project .
If the Contractor constructs temporary bridges or provides temporary crossings of streams hisher responsibility for accidents shall include the roadway and sidewalk approaches as well as the structures of such crossings .
Where the Contract involves dredging excavation or other construction work in navigable waters the work shall be so conducted as to cause no unnecessary obstruction to the free passage of vessels .
The decision for routing traffic through or around the work and provisions for the control of same will be made I. Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges by the Engineer .
Whenever it is deemed advisable special detours will be provided for truck or bus traffic .
On major projects and projects in urban areas traffic patterns and schedules will be studied in the design stage and included in the Special Provisions .
Subject to the approval of the Engineer the Contractor shall schedule the temporary or permanent closing of highways to travel only after consultation with the Police Chief and Fire Chief of the municipality or municipalities concerned .
The temporary closing of highways shall be kept to a minimum .
When a road or portion thereof is under construction and is closed to through traffic and when detours around the work are provided on existing city or town ways the Contractor shall maintain such city or town ways as required in Subsection .
and be compensated as specified in Subsection .. Where the new construction coincides with the present traveled way the Contractor shall carry on hisher work in a manner acceptable to the Engineer so that a reasonably safe uninterrupted traffic flow is maintained through the project during the entire construction period over traffic lane patterns approved by the Engineer and the Contractor shall provide and maintain in a reasonably safe condition the temporary approaches and the crossings of intersecting highways .
When grading operations are in progress each level of excavation or fill shall be graded as near as practicable to an even surface so as to provide a satisfactory passageway for the use of traffic .
The Contractor shall maintain all temporary roadways in a manner which will provide reasonably safe and convenient travel .
When temporary roadways outside the project limits are abandoned the surfaces shall be removed and all fill graded to a smooth neat natural appearance free from water pockets and as directed by the Engineer .
Abandoned temporary or existing roads beyond the limits of the main roadway slopes but within the project limits shall be excavated graded loamed and seeded as directed to present a neat natural appearance and provide for proper drainage .
Compensation for this work will be included under the respective items of work involved .
Snow removal on detours or present traveled ways will not be required of the Contractor .
The Contractor as directed shall at all times so conduct the work that the abutters shall have reasonable access to their property .
When public or private property is isolated by the closure of a road the Contractor shall be responsible for providing such reasonably safe means of access to a public way as the Engineer deems essential and the Contractor shall be compensated for all such work directed by the Engineer at the contract unit prices for the type of work and materials involved .
When it is necessary to leave materials and equipment upon the highway they shall be placed so as to cause the least possible obstruction to drainage pedestrians and other travel .
When the work in any way affects the operation management maintenance business or traffic on any railroad such work shall be carried on in a manner satisfactory to the said railroad but all orders directions or instructions to the Contractor relative to work under the Contract will be issued only by the Engineer of the Department .
The Contractor shall use all possible vigilance in order effectively to guard against all accidents or damages on the railroad due to hisher work and the Contractor shall at all times during the progress of the work so manage and execute the same as to cause the least possible interference with the operation management business or traffic of the railroad .
Trenches shall not be opened in traveled ways until all materials and equipment required for the work are at the site and available for immediate use .
When work is not in progress trenches in areas subject to public travel shall be covered with steel plates capable of safely sustaining an MS truckload with impact .
The work at each trench shall be practically continuous with the placing of conduit and piping backfilling and patching of the surface closely following each preceding operation .
At the end of each working day where trenches in areas of public travel are covered with steel plates each edge of such plates shall either be bevelled or protected by a slope of millimeters vertically to millimeters horizontally .
Any temporary patching material may be used to construct the ramps .
The cost of necessary patching materials and their maintenance and removal will be considered incidental to the item involved with no separate payment .
Pending installation of castings all structures in travel ways or deemed hazardous by the Engineer shall be protected with suitable covers steel plates or equal capable of withstanding an MS truckload with impact .
The cost of necessary covers or plates will be considered incidental to the item involved with no separate payment. . Barricades and Warning Signs .
The Department may furnish erect and maintain regulatory warning and guide signs traffic control signals markings safety lighting and any other traffic devices as it deems necessary for the safe flow of traffic during construction .
Highways wholly or partly closed to traffic shall be protected by suitable barricades barrier fences traffic signs I. Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges and other traffic devices furnished and erected by the Contractor at locations shown on the plans or as directed and the Contractor shall be compensated therefor in accordance with the contract unit prices for the items of work involved .
The Contractor shall at hisher own expense provide and erect acceptable or as directed barricades barrier fences traffic signs and all other traffic devices not covered in hisher Contract as payment item to protect the work from traffic pedestrians or animals .
The Contractor shall at hisher own expense provide sufficient temporary lighting such as flares lanterns or other approved illuminated traffic signs and devices not covered in hisher Contract as a payment item to afford adequate protection to the traveling public .
The Contractor shall also at hisher own expense furnish a sufficient number of watchmen at all times to protect the work .
All barricades barrier fences traffic signs and other traffic devices must conform with the Departments manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices .
The Contractor shall be held responsible for all damage to the work due to any failure of barricades barriers warning signs or lights to properly protect the work from traffic pedestrians or other causes. . Traffic Officers and Railroad Flagging Service .
The Contractor shall provide such police officers as the Engineer deems necessary for the direction and control of traffic within the site of the improvement .
Such officers shall wear regulation policemens uniforms .
They may be reserve or special officers subject to the control of and paid directly by the Contractor or regular officers not subject to the control of the Contractor .
Compensation for the services of said regular police officers may be paid by the Contractor to their employers or paid directly by the Contractor to such regular police officers or paid by the Contractor to a designated municipal official at a patrolmans rate of pay subject to all rules and regulations ordinances or bylaws in effect in the city or town in which the work is to be performed .
The Party of the First Part will reimburse the Contractor for payments made for the services of all required traffic officers together with such payments as the Contractor will have made for reserve or special officers under the Massachusetts Workmens Compensation Act General Laws Chapter Section as amended Liability Insurance and for payments as the Contractor is required in writing by proper authority to make under the Massachusetts Employment Security Act General Laws Chapter A and the Federal Social Security Act United States Code Title and .
The Contractor is required to submit to the Engineer copies of this written requirement for the Massachusetts Employment Security Act and the Federal Social Security Act .
The rates of wages paid by the Contractor to such police officers shall be the same as those paid to police officers working on special details .
When the Contractor is required to submit weekly certified copies of payroll separate certified copies of payroll covering only such reserve and special police officers shall be submitted containing complete payroll information .
If any of the work required to be done by the Contractor may obstruct the tracks of a railroad or in any way endanger the operation of its trains and the services of a flagman or flagmen or other railroad employees are required by the Chief Engineer of the railroad company and men are assigned by himher for the protection of the property and traffic of the Railroad against hazards capable of being caused by the Contractor the cost of all such flagging services shall be borne by the Contractor and no compensation therefor shall be made other than that provided by the contract unit prices .
The Department will reimburse the Contractor for the above costs required by the Railroad when the preliminary estimate of bid items for a project is or less. . Use of Explosives .
When the use of explosives is necessary for the prosecution of the work the Contractor shall exercise the utmost care not to endanger life and property including new work and whenever directed the number and size of the charges shall be reduced .
The Contractor shall be responsible for all damage resulting from the use of explosives .
All explosives shall be stored in a secure manner in conformance with all the State laws and regulations as well as any local requirements and all such storage places shall be marked Dangerous Explosives .
The Contractor shall be required to conform to the regulations of the Massachusetts Department of Public Safety concerning storage handling and use of explosives .
Prior to start of the blasting the Contractor shall give at least a hour notice and a schedule of hisher operations thereof to the operating official company or companies leasing owning or responsible for pipes conduits I. Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges poles wires railroad tracks or any other public or private utility which may be endangered by the blasting in order that a representative of said owner or lessee may be present at the site .
The Contractor shall take proper precaution to prevent injury to said properties during all blasting operations. . Protection and Restoration of Property .
The Contractor shall at hisher own expense preserve and protect from injury all property either public or private along and adjacent to the proposed work and the Contractor shall be responsible for and repair at hisher own expense any and all damage and injury thereto arising out of or in consequence of any act of omission neglect or misconduct in the execution of the work or in consequence of the nonexecution thereof by the Contractor or hisher employees or Subcontractors in the performance of the work covered by the Contract prior to completion and acceptance thereof .
The Contractor shall exercise special care during hisher operations to avoid injury to underground structures such as water or gas mains pipes conduits manholes catch basins etc .
Written notice shall be given by the Contractor to all public service corporations or officials owning or having charge of public or private utilities of hisher intention to commence operations affecting such utilities at least hours exclusive of Saturdays Sundays and legal holidays in advance of the start of such operations in accordance with Chapter Section of the General Laws as amended and the Contractor shall at the same time file a copy of said notice with the Engineer .
When necessary the Contractor shall cooperate with representatives of public service companies in order to avoid damage to their structures by furnishing and erecting suitable supports props shoring or other means of protection .
Fire hydrants adjacent to the work at all times shall be readily accessible to fire apparatus and no material or other obstructions shall be placed within a radius of meters of a fire hydrant .
Although the plans may indicate the approximate location of existing subsurface utilities in the vicinity of the work the accuracy and completeness of the information is not guaranteed by the Department .
Before commencing any work or operations which may endanger or damage any subsurface structures the Contractor shall carefully locate all such structures and conduct hisher operations in such manner as to avoid damage thereto .
The Contractor shall not interrupt live services until new services have been provided .
All abandoned services shall be plugged or otherwise made secure .
The Contractor shall receive no extra compensation for such work unless said compensation is authorized in writing by the Engineer as specified under Subsection .
for Extra Work except test pits as directed to be made in order to locate existing underground structures .
If the Contractor wishes to have any utilities temporarily relocated for hisher convenience other than contemplated by the Department the Contractor shall make the necessary arrangement with the owners and make reimbursement for the cost thereof at hisher own expense .
Land monuments and property marks shall be carefully protected and if necessary to remove the same the Contractor shall do so only at the Engineers direction and after an authorized agent has witnessed or otherwise referenced their location .
The Contractor shall not injure or remove trees or shrubs without proper authority .
Insofar as possible the Contractor shall confine hisher movements and operations to the area within the limits of the location and the area outside the scope of the work shall not be disturbed except as directed .
The Contractors attention is directed to Chapter of the Acts of which stipulates that surveyors of highways road commissioners or any other person agency or authority responsible for road or highway repairs shall notify the Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority not later than fortyeight hours prior to the repair construction or reconstruction of any road or highway used by said Authority in the operation of regular route service if such repairs construction or reconstruction shall prohibit the operation of regular route service by the Authority over such road or highway .
The bidders attention is directed to the code of Federal Regulations Part Safety and Health Regulations for Construction Subpart N . relating to construction equipment clearances at overhead electric lines which states in part .
. .
The minimum clearance between the lines and any part of the crane or load must be at least .
meters from lines rated KV or below and greater distances for higher voltages . . .. For the protection of personnel and equipment the Contractor should be aware of this regulation especially during paving operations using large semitrailer vehicles. . Responsibility for Damage Claims .
I. Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges The Contractor shall indemnify defend and save harmless the Commonwealth the Department the municipality and all of its or their offices agents and employees against all suits claims or liability of every name and nature for or on account of any injuries to persons or damage to property arising out of or in consequence of the acts of the Contractor in the performance of the work covered by the Contract or failure to comply with the terms and conditions of said Contract whether by the Contractor or hisher employees or Subcontractors but only in respect of such injuries or damages sustained during the performance and prior to the completion and acceptance of the work covered by the Contract .
The Contractor will be held responsible for any and all claims for damage to underground structures such as but not restricted to water or gas mains pipes conduits manholes or catch basins due to hisher operation or to the operations of any of hisher Subcontractors .
The Contractors attention is directed to the provisions of General Laws Chapter Section H as amended .
In accordance therewith the Commonwealth agrees to indemnify the Contractor against loss by reason of the liability to pay damages to others for entry upon any land included within the boundaries of the area within which the work is to be performed as set forth in the construction Contract and the plans and specifications applying to such Contract or any approved changes thereof or for damage sustained upon any lands adjoining said land by reason of the flowage or drainage of water thereto or therefrom .
In any case wherein such damages result from the failure of the Commonwealth to take an interest or easement in such adjoining area provided that the Commonwealth acting by an authorized representative thereof has issued a notice in writing to the Contractor prior to the making of an entry upon such premises directing or permitting himher to proceed with hisher Contract and to make such entry upon the premises for the purpose of performing the work required by said Contract or any approved alteration thereof and provided further that the Contractor has given notice in writing to the contracting authority within days after receiving notice of any claim to come in and settle the same and upon the commencement of any action against himher to come in and defend said action but in no event shall any such damage claim be compromised or adjusted without the written consent of the Commonwealth .
The provisions of this section shall in no way relieve the Contractor from any liability for damage to property of others caused by hisher negligence or that of hisher employees nor shall they be construed to require the Commonwealth to indemnify the Contractor against any loss resulting from such acts of negligence. . Claims Against Contractors for Payment of Labor Materials and Other Purposes .
The Contractor shall pay all bills for labor materials rental of equipment and for such other purposes as are more specifically set forth in Chapter Section and Chapter Section A General Laws and all amendments thereto .
It is understood that the Payment Bond required by Subsection .
Paragraph B is the sole security for petitions brought pursuant to said sections .
The Contractor and Party of the First Part shall also comply with the provisions of Chapter Section F and G. Chapter Section of the General Laws as amended reads as follows Officers or agents contracting in behalf of the Commonwealth or in behalf of any county city town district or other political subdivision of the Commonwealth or other public instrumentality for the construction reconstruction alteration remodeling repair or demolition of public buildings or other public works when the amount of the Contract in the case of the Commonwealth is more than five thousand dollars and in any other case is more than two thousand dollars shall obtain security by bond in an amount not less than one half of the total contract price for payment by the Contractor and Subcontractors for labor performed or furnished and materials used or employed therein including lumber so employed which is not incorporated therein and is not wholly or necessarily consumed or made so worthless as to lose its identity but only to the extent of its purchase price less its fair salvage value and including also any material specially fabricated at the order of the Contractor or Subcontractor for use as a component part of said public building or other public work so as to be unsuitable for use elsewhere even though such material has not been delivered and incorporated into the public building or public work but only to the extent of its purchase price less its fair salvage value and only to the extent that such specially fabricated material is in conformity with the Contract plans and specifications or any changes therein duly made for payment of transportation charges for materials used or employed therein which are consigned to the Contractor or to a Subcontractor who has a direct contractual relationship with the Contractor for payment by such Contractor and Subcontractors of any sums due for the rental or hire of vehicles steam shovels rollers propelled by steam or other power concrete mixers tools and other appliances and equipment employed in such construction reconstruction alteration remodeling repair or demolition for payment of transportation charges directly related to I. Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges such rental or hire and for payment by such Contractor and Subcontractors of any sums due trustees or other persons authorized to collect such payments from the Contractor or Subcontractors based upon the labor performed or furnished as aforesaid for health and welfare plans supplementary unemployment benefit plans and other fringe benefits which are payable in cash and provided for in collective bargaining agreements between organized labor and the Contractor or Subcontractors provided that any such trustees or other persons authorized to collect such payments for health and welfare plans supplementary unemployment benefit plans and other fringe benefits shall subject to the following provisions be entitled to the benefit of the security only in an amount based upon labor performed or furnished as aforesaid for a maximum of two hundred and forty consecutive calendar days .
In order to obtain the benefit of such bond for any amount claimed due and unpaid at any time any claimant having a contractual relationship with the Contractor principal furnishing the bond who has not been paid in full or any amount claimed due for the labor materials equipment appliances or transportation included in the paragraph coverage within sixtyfive days after the due date for same shall have the right to enforce any such claim a by filing a petition in equity within one year after the day on which such claimant last performed the labor or furnished the labor materials equipment appliances or transportation included in the claim and b by prosecuting the claim thereafter by trial in the superior court to final adjudication and execution for the sums justly due the claimant as provided in this section .
Any claimant having a contractual relationship with a Subcontractor performing labor or both performing labor and furnishing materials pursuant to a Contract with the general Contractor but no contractual relationship with the Contractor principal furnishing the bond shall have the right to enforce any such claim as provided in subparagraphs a and b of paragraph only if such claimant gives written notice to the Contractor principal within sixtyfive days after the day on which the claimant last performed the labor or furnished the labor materials equipment appliances or transportation included in the paragraphs coverage stating with substantial accuracy the amount claimed the name of the party for whom such labor was performed or such labor materials equipment appliances or transportation were furnished provided that any such claimant shall have the right to enforce any part of a claim covering special fabricated material included in the paragraph coverage only if such claimant has given the Contractor principal written notice of the placement of the order and the amount thereof not later than twenty days after receiving the final approval in writing for the use of the material .
The notices provided for in this paragraph shall be served by mailing the same by registered or certified mail postage prepaid in an envelope addressed to the Contractor principal at any place at which the Contractor principal maintains an office or conducts hisher business or at the Contractor principals residence or in any manner in which civil process may be served .
Upon motion of any party the court shall advance for speedy trial a petition to enforce a claim pursuant to this section .
Sections and B of Chapter shall apply to petitions to enforce claims pursuant to this section .
The court shall enter an interlocutory decree upon which execution shall issue for any part of a claim found due pursuant to said Sections or B and shall upon motion of any party advance for speedy trial the petition to enforce the remainder of the claim .
Any party aggrieved by such interlocutory decree shall have the right to appeal therefrom as from a final decree .
The court shall not consolidate for trial the petition of any claimant under this section with the petition of one or more other claimants on the same bond unless the court finds that a substantial portion of the evidence of the same events during the course of construction other than the fact that the claims sought to be consolidated arise under the same general Contract is applicable to the petitions sought to be consolidated and that such consolidation will prevent unnecessary duplication of evidence .
The court shall not dismiss any petition on the ground that it was filed before the sixtyfifth day after the day the claimant last performed the labor or furnished the labor materials equipment appliances or transportation included in the claim nor shall the court dismiss any petition on the ground that a claim involves more than one Contract with the same party and that the one year period has elapsed as to any one Contract provided that the court shall not enter a decree upon any claim or part thereof prior to the seventieth day after the day the claimant last performed the labor or furnished the labor materials equipment appliances or transportation included in the claim .
A decree in favor of any claimant under this section shall include reasonable legal fees based upon the time spent and the results accomplished as approved by the court and such legal fees shall not in any event be less than the published rate of any recommended fee schedule of a statewide bar association or of a bar association in which the office of counsel for claimant is located whichever is higher .
Any person employing persons or any public works hereinbefore referred to shall post conspicuously at such place or places as will provide reasonable opportunity for all employees to read the same a correct copy of this section .
The Department shall enforce this paragraph .
Refers to the Department of Labor and Industries .
I. Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges In conformity with the requirements of Chapter Section F of the General Laws as amended the following is quoted from Chapter Section F. Every contract awarded pursuant to sections fortyfour A to L. inclusive of chapter one hundred and forty nine shall contain the following subparagraphs a through i and every contract awarded pursuant to section thirtynine M of chapter thirty shall contain the following subparagraphs a through h and in each case those subparagraphs shall be binding between the general contractor and each subcontractor .
a Forthwith after the general contractor receives payment on account of a periodic estimate the general contractor shall pay to each subcontractor the amount paid for the labor performed and the materials furnished by that subcontractor less any amount specified in any court proceedings barring such payment and also less any amount claimed due from the subcontractor by the general contractor .
b Not later than the sixtyfifth day after each subcontractor substantially completes hisher work in accordance with the plans and specifications the entire balance due under the subcontract less amounts retained by the awarding authority as the estimated cost of completing the incomplete and unsatisfactory items of work shall be due the subcontractor and the awarding authority shall pay that amount to the general contractor .
The general contractor shall forthwith pay to the subcontractor the full amount received from the awarding authority less any amount specified in any court proceedings barring such payment and also less any amount claimed due from the subcontractor by the general contractor .
c Each payment made by the awarding authority to the general contractor pursuant to subparagraphs a and b of this paragraph for the labor performed and the materials furnished by a subcontractor shall be made to the general contractor for that account of that subcontractor and the awarding authority shall take reasonable steps to compel the general contractor to make each such payment to each such subcontractor .
If the awarding authority has received a demand for direct payment from a subcontractor for any amount which has already been included in a payment to the general contractor or which is to be included in a payment to the general contractor for payment to the subcontractor as provided in subparagraphs a and b the awarding authority shall act upon the demand as provided in this section .
d If within seventy days after the subcontractor has substantially completed the work the subcontractor has not received from the general contractor the balance due under the subcontract including any amount due for extra labor and materials furnished to the general contractor less any amount retained by the awarding authority as the estimated cost of completing the incomplete and unsatisfactory items of work the subcontractor may demand direct payment of that balance from the awarding authority .
The demand shall be by a sworn statement delivered to or sent by certified mail to the awarding authority and a copy shall be delivered to or sent by certified mail to the general contractor at the same time .
The demand shall contain a detailed breakdown of the balance due under the subcontract and also a statement of the status of completion of the subcontract work .
Any demand made after substantial completion of the subcontract work shall be valid even if delivered or mailed prior to the seventieth day after the subcontractor has substantially completed the subcontract work .
Within ten days after the subcontractor has delivered or so mailed the demand to the awarding authority and delivered or so mailed a copy to the general contractor the general contractor may reply to the demand .
The reply shall be by a sworn statement delivered to or sent by certified mail to the awarding authority and a copy shall be delivered to or sent by certified mail to the subcontractor at the same time .
The reply shall contain a detailed breakdown of the balance due under the subcontract including any amount due for extra labor and materials furnished to the general contractor and of the amount due for each claim made by the general contractor against the subcontractor .
e Within fifteen days after receipt of the demand by the awarding authority but in no event prior to the seventieth day after substantial completion of the subcontract work the awarding authority shall make direct payment to the subcontractor of the balance due under the subcontract including any amount due for extra labor and materials furnished to the general contractor less any amount i retained by the awarding authority as the estimated cost of completing the incomplete or unsatisfactory item of work ii specified in any court proceedings barring such payment or iii disputed by the general contractor in the sworn reply provided that the awarding authority shall not deduct from a direct payment any amount as provided in part iii if the reply is not sworn to or for which the sworn reply does not contain the detailed breakdown required by subparagraph d. The awarding authority shall make further direct payments to the subcontractor forthwith after the removal of the basis for deductions from direct payments made as provided in parts i and ii of this subparagraph .
f The awarding authority shall forthwith deposit the amount deducted from a direct payment as provided in part iii of subparagraph e in an interestbearing joint account in the names of the general contractor and the subcontractor in a bank in Massachusetts selected by the awarding authority or agreed upon by the general contractor I. Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges and the subcontractor and shall notify the general contractor and the subcontractor of the date of the deposit and the bank receiving the deposit .
The bank shall pay the amount in the account including accrued interest as provided in an agreement between the general contractor and the subcontractor or as determined by decree of a court of competent jurisdiction .
g All direct payments and all deductions from demands for direct payments deposited in an interestbearing account or accounts in a bank pursuant to subparagraph f shall be made out of amounts payable to the general contractor at the time of receipt of a demand for direct payment from a subcontractor and out of amounts which later become payable to the general contractor and in the order of receipt of such demands from subcontractors .
All direct payments shall discharge the obligation of the awarding authority to the general contractor to the extent of such payment .
h The awarding authority shall deduct from payments to a general contractor amounts which together with the deposits in interestbearing accounts pursuant to subparagraph f are sufficient to satisfy all unpaid balances of demands for direct payment received from subcontractors .
All such amounts shall be earmarked for such direct payments and the subcontractors shall have a right in such deductions prior to any claims against such amounts by creditors of the general contractor .
i If the subcontractor does not receive payment as provided in subparagraph a or if the general contractor does not submit a periodic estimate for the value of the labor or materials performed or furnished by the subcontractor and the subcontractor does not receive payment for same when due less the deductions provided for in subparagraph a the subcontractor may demand direct payment by following the procedure in subparagraph d and the general contractor may file a sworn reply as provided in that same subparagraph .
A demand made after the first day of the month following that for which the subcontractor performed or furnished the labor and materials for which the subcontractor seeks payment shall be valid even if delivered or mailed prior to the time payment was due on a periodic estimate from the general contractor .
Thereafter the awarding authority shall proceed as provided in subparagraphs e f g and h. Chapter Section G of the General Laws as amended reads as follows Upon substantial completion of the work required by a contract with the Commonwealth or any agency or political subdivision thereof for the construction reconstruction alteration remodeling repair or improvement of public ways including bridges and other highway structures sewers and water mains airports and other public works the contractor shall present in writing to the awarding authority its certification that the work has been substantially completed .
Within twentyone days thereafter the awarding authority shall present to the contractor either a written declaration that the work has been substantially completed or an itemized list of incomplete or unsatisfactory work items required by the contract sufficient to demonstrate that the work has not been substantially completed .
The awarding authority may include with such list a notice setting forth a reasonable time which shall not in any event be prior to the contract completion date within which the contractor must achieve substantial completion of the work .
In the event that the awarding authority fails to respond by presentation of a written declaration or itemized list as aforesaid to the contractors certification within the twentyone pay period the contractors certification shall take effect as the awarding authoritys declaration that the work has been substantially completed .
Within sixtyfive days after the effective date of a declaration of a substantial completion the awarding authority shall prepare and forthwith send to the contractor for acceptance a substantial completion estimate for the quantity and price of the work done and all but one percent retainage on that work including the quantity price and all but retainage for the undisputed part of each work item and extra work item in dispute but excluding the disputed part thereof less the estimate cost of completing all incomplete and unsatisfactory work items and less the total periodic payments made to date for the work .
The awarding authority also shall deduct from the substantial completion estimate an amount equal to the sum of all demands for direct payment filed by subcontractors and not yet paid to subcontractors or deposited in joint accounts pursuant to section thirtynine F but no contract subject to said section thirtynine F shall contain any other provision authorizing the awarding authority to deduct any amount by virtue of claims asserted against the contract by subcontractors material suppliers or others .
If the awarding authority fails to prepare and send to the contractor any substantial completion estimate required by this section on or before the date hereinabove set forth the awarding authority shall pay to the contractor interest on the amount which would have been due to the contractor pursuant to such substantial completion estimate at the rate of three percentage points above the rediscount rate then charged by the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston from such date to the date on which the awarding authority sends that substantial completion estimate to the contractor for acceptance or to the date of payment therefor whichever occurs first .
The awarding authority shall include the amount of such interest in the substantial completion estimate .
I. Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges Within fifteen days after the effective date of the declaration of substantial completion the awarding authority shall send to the contractor by certified mail return receipt requested a complete list of all incomplete or unsatisfactory work items and unless delayed by causes beyond hisher control the contractor shall complete all such work items within fortyfive days after the receipt of such list or before the then contract completion date whichever is later .
If the contractor fails to complete such work within such time the awarding authority may subsequent to seven days written notice to the contractor by certified mail return receipt requested terminate the contract and complete the incomplete or unsatisfactory work items and charge the cost of same to the contractor .
Within thirty days after receipt by the awarding authority of a notice from the contractor stating that all of the work required by the contract has been completed the awarding authority shall prepare and forthwith send to the contractor for acceptance a final estimate for the quantity and price of the work done and all retainage on that work less all payments made to date unless the awarding authoritys inspection shows that work items required by the contract remain incomplete or unsatisfactory or that documentation required by the contract has not been completed .
If the awarding authority fails to prepare and send to the contractor the final estimate within thirty days after receipt of notice of completion the awarding authority shall pay to the contractor interest on the amount which would have been due to the contractor pursuant to such final estimate at the rate hereinabove provided from the thirtieth day after such completion until the date on which the awarding authority sends the final estimate to the contractor for acceptance or the date of payment therefor whichever occurs first provided that the awarding authoritys inspection shows that no work items required by the contract remain incomplete or unsatisfactory .
Interest shall not be paid hereunder on amounts for which interest is required to be paid in connection with the substantial completion estimate as hereinabove provided .
The awarding authority shall include the amount of the interest required to be paid hereunder in the final estimate .
The awarding authority shall pay the amount due pursuant to any periodic substantial completion or final estimate within thirtyfive days after receipt of written acceptance for such estimate from the contractor and shall pay interest on the amount due pursuant to such estimate at the rate hereinabove provided from that thirtyfifth day to the date of payment .
In the case of periodic payments the contracting authority may deduct from its payment a retention based on its estimate of the fair value of its claims against the contractor a retention for direct payments to subcontractors based on demands for same in accordance with the provisions of section thirtynine F and a retention to secure satisfactory performance of the contractual work not exceeding five percent of the approved amount of any periodic payment and the same right to retention shall apply to bonded subcontractors entitled to direct payment under section thirtynine F of chapter thirty provided that a five percent value of all items that are planted in the ground shall be deducted from the periodic payments until final acceptance .
No periodic substantial completion or final estimate or acceptance or payment thereof shall bar a contractor from reserving all rights to dispute the quantity and amount of or the failure of the awarding authority to approve a quantity and amount of all or part of any work item or extra work item .
Substantial completion for the purposes of this section shall mean either that the work required by the contract has been completed except for work having a contract price of less than one percent of the then adjusted total contract price or substantially all of the work has been completed and opened to public use except for minor incomplete or unsatisfactory work items that do not materially impair the usefulness of the work required by the contract. . Claims of Contractor for Compensation .
No person or corporation other than the signer of the Contract as Contractor now has any interest hereunder and no claim shall be made or be valid and neither Party of the First Part nor any member agent or employee thereof shall be liable for or be held to pay any money except as provided in Subsections . . . . and .
of these Specifications and Clause of the Contract .
All claims of the Contractor for compensation other than as provided for in the Contract on account of any act of omission or commission by the Party of the First Part or its agents must be made in writing to the Engineer within one week after the beginning of any work or the sustaining of any damage on account of such act such written statement to contain a description of the nature of the work performed or damage sustained and the Contractor shall on or before the th day of the month succeeding that in which such work is performed or damage sustained file with the Engineer an itemized statement of the details and amount of such work or damage and unless such statement shall be made as required hisher claim for compensation shall be forfeited and invalidated and the Contractor shall not be entitled to payment on account of any such work or damage .
Such notice by the Contractor and the keeping of costs by the Engineer shall not in any way be construed as providing the validity of the claim .
The provisions of this paragraph shall I. Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges not apply to changes in quantities as provided under Subsection .
or to Extra Work ordered by the Engineer in writing .
On the basis of information provided in writing by hisher own employees servants or agents the Contractor will be required to certify in writing that the work for which the Contractor is claiming payment other than as provided for in the Contract is work actually performed and the costs as shown are the amounts legally due for performing such work for which payment is claimed .
The Engineer shall determine all questions as to the amount and value of such work and the fact and extent of such damage and shall so notify the Contractor in writing of hisher determination .
Such determination of the Engineer may be appealed to the Board of Contract Appeals in accordance with General Law Chapter Section b as amended .
The appeal shall set forth the contract number city or town project is in the name and address of the Contractor the amount of the claim and breakdown of how amount was computed a clear concise statement of the specific determination from which appeal is taken including the reasons for appealing the determination and shall be signed by the Contractor .
The Commission Secretary shall record the date and time any such appeal is received and shall keep the appeal on record .
The Commission Secretary shall forward a copy of the appeal to the Hearing Examiner who shall set the matter down for hearing in accordance with rules adopted by the Commission .
Interest on judgments for contractor claims filed with the Superior Court of Massachusetts shall be computed from the date of the breach or demand or if not established from the date of the action in Superior Court and shall be at the rate of three percentage points above the discount rate then charged by the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston with a cap of twelve percent .
The acceptance by the Contractor of the final payment made under the provisions of Subsection .
shall operate as and shall be a release to the Party of the First Part and every member agent and employee thereof from all claim and liability to the Contractor for anything done or furnished for or relating to the work or for any act or neglect of the Party of the First Part or of any person relating to or affecting the work except the claim against the Party of the First Part for the remainder if any there be of the amounts kept or retained as provided in Subsection .. For claims for extensions of time see Subsection .. . Traffic Accommodation .
Any portion of the work which is in an acceptable condition for travel may be opened for traffic as directed in writing by the Engineer but such opening for traffic shall not be construed as an acceptance of the work or part thereof nor shall it act as a waiver of any of the provisions of these specifications or of the Contract provided however that on such portions of the project as are opened for use of traffic the Contractor shall not be required to assume any expense entailed in maintaining the roadway for traffic .
The Party of the First Part will be responsible for maintenance and any damage to the work caused solely by traffic on any portion of the project which has been opened to public travel as stipulated above and it may order the contractor to repair or replace such damage whereupon the Contractor shall make such repairs at contract unit prices so far as the same are applicable or as Extra Work under the provisions of Subsection .
if there are no applicable items in the Contract .
Any damage to the highway not attributable to traffic which might occur on such section shall be repaired by the Contractor at hisher expense .
No hauling or other traffic shall be permitted over any portions of the work unless so authorized by the Engineer .
If the Contractor is dilatory in completing shoulders drainage structures or other features of the work the Engineer may order all or a portion of the project open to traffic but in such event the Contractor shall not be relieved of hisher liability and responsibility during the period the work is so opened prior to final acceptance .
The Contractor shall conduct the remainder of hisher construction operations so as to cause the least obstruction to traffic .
Where the new construction coincides with the present traveled way the Engineer may order the installation of various items of work for safety and convenience of the public due to the highway being open to traffic .
The Party of the First Part will be responsible for damage to the following items of work caused solely by traffic on any portion of the project which is open to public travel and on which these items of work have been ordered to be installed and partial acceptance made thereof by the Engineer under the terms and conditions stated below. . Guard Rail .
Metal Bridge Railing I. Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges .
Traffic Signal Systems .
Highway Lighting .
Traffic Attenuators .
Traffic Signs If the person or persons causing the damage has been identified the Contractor shall be responsible for recovering the cost of such repair or replacement from that person or their insurance company .
No additional unit price or extra work payment will be made by the Party of the First Part unless the Contractor has been unable to recover the full repair of replacement cost from said person or their insurance company .
The Party of the First Part may order the Contractor to repair or replace such damage whereupon the Contractor shall make such repairs at contract unit prices so far as the same are applicable or as Extra Work under the provisions of Subsection .
if there are no applicable items of work in the Contract .
Any damage not attributable to traffic which might occur on such traveled way shall be repaired by the Contractor at hisher own expense . .
Contractors Responsibility for the Work .
Until written acceptance of the physical work by the Chief Engineer the Contractor shall assume full charge and care thereof and the Contractor shall take every necessary precaution against injury or damage to the work by action of the elements or from any cause whatever whether arising from the execution or the nonexecution of the Contract and especially when blasting is to be done .
The Contractor shall bear all losses resulting to himher on account of the amount or the character of the work or because the nature of the land in or on which the work is done is different from what was estimated or expected or on account of the weather elements or other causes except as stated in Subsection .
Changed Conditions .
The Contractor shall rebuild repair restore and make good all injuries or damages to any portion of the work occasioned by any of the above causes before the completion and written acceptance of the physical work and shall bear the expense thereof except damage to the work due to war whether or not declared civil war insurrection rebellion or revolution or to any act or condition incident to any of the foregoing to Acts of God limited to hurricane tornado cyclone and earthquake as classified by the United States Weather Bureau for the particular locality and for the particular season of the year and in addition thereto damages resulting directly from flooding from any of the aforementioned Acts of God .
The repair of such damages shall be done by the Contractor and paid for at the respective contract unit prices for the quantity and items of work involved .
In any case in which the estimate for replacing such work or repairing such damage caused by war whether or not declared civil war insurrection rebellion or revolution or to any act or condition incident to the foregoing or an Act of God combined with any previously authorized Extra Work results in a change of such magnitude as to be incompatible with competitive bid status the Department reserves the right to terminate the Contract and to call for new bids and award a new Contract for such work .
In the event any Contract is terminated for such reason the Department shall pay the Contractor such sum as may be due for work performed up to the date of the Act of God or of damage directly due to war whether or not declared civil war insurrection rebellion or revolution or to any act or condition incident to any of the foregoing and shall also take over and pay for any material stored at site of the work provided said material was intended to be and could have been incorporated into the work the Department shall also take over and pay for any material which was being especially fabricated for incorporation into the work provided however that as a condition precedent to the Departments liability for such material the Contractor is legally liable therefor and the material was intended to be and could have been incorporated in the work .
Issuance of an estimate on any part of the work done shall not be construed as final acceptance of any work completed up to that time .
Should the Contractor fail to take prompt action whenever conditions make it necessary the Party of the First Part shall make emergency repairs or cause the same to be made with the stipulation that the costs for such repairs shall be charged against the Contractor and deducted from moneys due himher .
In case of suspension of work from any cause whatsoever the Contractor shall be responsible for the project and shall take such precautions as may be necessary to prevent damage to the project provide for normal drainage and shall erect any necessary temporary structures signs or other facilities at hisher expense .
During such period of suspension of work the Contractor shall properly and continuously maintain in an acceptable growing condition all living material in newly established plantings seedings and soddings furnished under hisher Contract and shall take adequate precautions to protect new tree growth and other important vegetative growth against injury .
I. Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges .
Personal Liability of Public Officials .
In carrying out any of the provisions of these specifications or in exercising any power or authority granted to them by or within the scope of the Contract there shall be no liability upon the Commissioner Engineer or their authorized representatives either personally or as officials of the Commonwealth it being understood that in all such matters they act solely as agents and representatives of the Commonwealth. . No Waiver of Legal Rights .
The Party of the First Part shall not be precluded or estopped by any measurement estimate or certificate made either before or after the physical completion and final acceptance of the work and payment therefor from showing the true amount and character of the work performed and materials furnished by the Contractor nor from showing that any such measurement estimate or certificate is untrue or is incorrectly made nor that the work or materials do not in fact conform to the Contract .
The Department shall not be precluded or estopped notwithstanding any such measurement estimate or certificate and payment in accordance therewith from recovering from the Contractor or hisher sureties or both such damage as it may sustain by reason of hisher failure to comply with the terms of the Contract .
Neither the acceptance by the Department or any representative of the Department nor any payment for any acceptance of the whole or any part of the work nor any extension of time nor any possession taken by the Department shall operate as a waiver of any portion of the Contract of any power herein reserved or of any right to damages .
A waiver of any breach of the Contract shall not be held to be a waiver of any other or subsequent breach .
Any remedy provided in the Contract shall be taken and construed as cumulative that is in addition to each and every other remedy herein provided and the Party of the First Part shall also be entitled as of right to a writ of injunction against any breach of the provisions of the Contract . .
Preference in Employment of Labor .
In the employment of mechanics teamsters chauffeurs and laborers in the construction of public works by the Commonwealth or by a county town or district or by persons contracting or subcontracting for such work preference shall first be given to citizens of the Commonwealth who have been residents of the Commonwealth for at least six months at the commencement of their employment and who are veterans as defined in General Laws Chapter Section Clause as amended and who are qualified to perform the work to which the employment relates and secondly to citizens of the Commonwealth generally who have been residents of the Commonwealth for at least six months at the commencement of their employment and if they can not be obtained in sufficient numbers then to citizens of the United States and every Contract for such work shall contain a provision to this effect .
Each county town or district in the construction of public works or persons contracting or subcontracting for such works shall give preference to veterans and citizens who are residents of such county town or district .
The Contractors attention is hereby directed to said Section of Chapter of the General Laws as amended .
The requirements in the above paragraph do not apply to any project or part thereof financed in whole or in part with Federal Funds. . Labor Lodging Board Maximum Hours of Employment Weekly Payment Keeping of Payroll Records .
Every employee in public work shall lodge board and trade where and with whom heshe elects and no person or hisher agents or employees under Contract with the Commonwealth a county city or town or with a department board commission or officer acting therefor for the doing of public work shall directly or indirectly require as a condition of employment therein that the employee shall lodge board or trade at a particular place or with a particular person Chapter Section of the General Laws .
No laborer workman mechanic foreman or inspector working within this Commonwealth in the employ of the Contractor Subcontractor or other person doing or contracting to do the whole or a part of the work contemplated by this Contract shall be required or permitted to work more than eight hours in any one day or more than hours in any I. Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges one week or more than six days in any one week except in cases of emergency or in case any town subject to Section of Chapter of the General Laws is a party to such a Contract more than eight hours in any one day except as aforesaid .
The Department or the Contractor or any Subcontractor may employ laborers Workmen mechanics foremen and inspectors for more than eight hours in any one day in the work to be done or under Contract when in the opinion of the Commissioner of Labor and Industries public necessity so requires .
Chapter Section of the General Laws as amended .
Attention of Bidders is called to Section of Chapter of the General Laws and amendments thereof requiring the weekly payment of employees .
Upon request of the Engineer or the Massachusetts Department of Labor and Industries the Contractor shall furnish certified copies of any or all payrolls for the Contract showing the name address and occupational classification of each employee on said works and the hours worked by and the wages paid to each such employee .
Such payroll shall also include the rates paid for rented trucks or rental equipment of any kind used on the work .
This requirement shall also apply to the work or any Subcontractor having a Subcontract for any of the work performed on the project .
Such records shall be kept in such manner as the Commissioner of Labor and Industries shall prescribe and shall be open to inspection by the Engineer or any authorized representative of the Department of Labor and Industries at any reasonable time and as often as may be necessary .
In the case the work covered by this Contract is financed from Federal Funds the above provisions relative to the hours of employment shall be subject to such revision and amendment as are required by the Rules and Regulations controlling the expenditures of such Federal Funds. . Archeological and Paleontological Discoveries .
The Contractors attention is directed to the United States Department of Transportation Federal Highway Administration Federal Aid Highway Program Manual Volume Chapter Section subject Archeological and Paleontological Salvage incorporating Policy and Procedure Memorandum dated March and to the Commonwealth of Massachusetts Acts of Chapter .
In compliance with these procedures and legislation the contractor shall exercise special care during hisher operations to avoid injury to underground prehistoric and historic archeological remains or paleontological remains .
Should any archeological or paleontological remains be encountered during any phase of construction the contractor shall immediately suspend all work in the area and shall notify the Engineer .
The Engineer shall immediately notify the State Archeologist and the Massachusetts Historical Commission .
All Construction work in that area will be temporarily delayed while the State Archeologist and Representatives of Massachusetts Historical Commission inspect the site to determine the importance of the discovery .
Areas of prehistorical historical or paleontological significance shall be carefully protected in accordance with Section .
and shall not be disturbed by the Contractor until so directed by the Engineer .
I. Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges SECTION .
PROSECUTION AND PROGRESS .
Subletting or Assignment of Contract .
The Contractor shall not sublet sell transfer assign or otherwise dispose of the Contract or any portion thereof or of hisher right title or interest therein without written consent of the Engineer .
In case such consent is given the Contractor will be permitted to sublet a portion thereof but shall perform with hisher own organization work amounting to not less than percent of the original total Contract price except that any items designated in the Contract as specialty items may be performed by Subcontract and the cost of any such specialty items so performed by Subcontracts may be deducted from the total cost computing the amount of work required to be performed by the Contractor with hisher own organization .
No Subcontractors or transfer of Contract shall in any case release the Contractor of liability under the Contract and Bonds .
The Contractor shall notify the Engineer as soon as practicable after execution of the Contract the name and address of each Subcontractor the Contractor intends to employ the portion of the work which the Subcontractor is to do and such other information the Engineer may require in order to ascertain whether the Subcontractor is reliable and able to perform the work .
The Contractor shall direct the attention of hisher Subcontractors to the requirements of Subsection .
regarding insurances and also the Minimum Wage Rates and Health and Welfare and Pensions Fund Contributions as determined by the Commission of Labor and Industries of the Commonwealth and also to the provisions of Subsections .
and .
and Chapter General Laws Section L requires that the Commonwealth and every county city town district board commission shall not enter into a Contract for such work with and shall not approve as a Subcontractor furnishing labor and materials for a part of any such work a foreign corporation which has not filed with the Department a certificate of the State Secretary stating that such corporation has complied with Sections and of Chapter and the date of such compliance .
Chapter Section requires foreign corporations to appoint the Secretary of the Commonwealth as an attorney for service of process and Section Chapter requires foreign corporations to file certain documents with the Secretary of State which will permit them to do business in Massachusetts .
The Contractor shall also direct the attention of hisher Subcontractors and of all suppliers of material to the requirements of Subsection .
regarding facilities for the Engineers inspectors . .
Schedule of Operations .
The Contractor shall submit to and for the comments of the Engineer a schedule of operations within ten days after the mailing of the executed Contract to the Contractor .
The schedule shall show the proposed methods of construction and sequence of work and the time the Contractor proposes to complete the various items of work within the time specified in the Contract .
If the Contractors operations are materially affected by changes in the plans or in the quantity of the work or if the Contractor has failed to comply with the submitted and reviewed schedule the Contractor shall submit a revised schedule if requested by the Engineer within seven days after the date of the Engineers request .
This revised schedule shall show how the Contractor proposes to prosecute the balance of the work so as to complete the work within the time specified in the Contract . .
Prosecution of Work .
The Contractor shall commence work within days after the mailing of the executed Contract to the Contractor unless otherwise ordered in writing by the Engineer and the Contractor shall thereafter prosecute the work at such places and in such order as the Engineer may from time to time prescribe .
Should the prosecution of the work for any reason be discontinued the Contractor shall notify the Engineer at least hours in advance of resuming operations .
I. Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges .
Removal or Demolition of Buildings and Land Takings .
When the removal or demolition of buildings within highway locations is done under other and separate Contracts the provisions of Subsection .
shall apply and it is expressly agreed between the parties that the Party of the First Part shall not be held liable for any expense to the Contractor on account of any delay or interference with hisher work due to removal or demolition of the buildings or on account of any failure to remove or demolish any building or because of failure to make necessary land takings and it is further expressly agreed that no allowance of any kind will be made except as provided in Subsections .
or .. .
Claim for Delay or Suspension of the Work .
The Contractor hereby agrees that heshe shall have no claim for damages of any kind on account of any delay in commencement of the work or any delay or suspension of any portion thereof except as hereinafter provided .
Provided however that if the Commission in their judgment shall determine that the performance of all or any major portion of the work is suspended delayed or interrupted for an unreasonable period of time by an act of the Department in the administration of the Contract or by the Departments failure to act as required by the Contract within the time specified in the Contract or if no time is specified within a reasonable time and without the fault or negligence of the Contractor an adjustment shall be made by the Department for any increase in the actual cost of performance of the Contract excluding profit and overhead necessarily caused by the period of such suspension delay or interruption .
No adjustment shall be made if the performance by the Contractor would have been prevented by other causes even if the work had not been so suspended delayed or interrupted by the Department .
No claims shall be allowed under this Subsection for the Departments failure to act as required by the Contract within the time specified in the Contract or if no time is specified within a reasonable time for any cost incurred more than two weeks before the Contractor shall have notified the Department in writing of hisher claim due to the Departments failure to act .
The contractor shall submit in writing not later than days after the termination of such suspension delay or interruption the amount of the claim and breakdown of how the amount was computed in accordance with Subsection .B except no allowance for overhead and profit shall be allowed .
Any dispute concerning whether the delay or suspension is unreasonable or any other question of fact arising under this paragraph shall be determined by the Commission and such determination and decision in case any question shall arise shall be a condition precedent to the right of the Contractor to receive any money hereunder .
The Contractor further agrees that the sole allowance for any such delay or suspension other than as provided above is an extension of time as provided in Subsection .. .
Limitations of Operations .
The Contractor shall conduct the work at all times in such a manner and in such sequence as will assure the least interference with traffic and abutters .
The Contractor shall have due regard to the location of detours and to the provisions for handling traffic .
The Contractor shall not open up work to the prejudice or detriment of work already started . .
Character of Workmen Methods and Equipment .
The Contractor shall at all times employ sufficient labor and equipment for prosecuting the several classes of work to full completion in the manner and time required by these specifications .
All workmen shall have sufficient skill and experience to perform properly the work assigned to them .
Workmen engaged in special work or skilled work shall have sufficient experience in such work and in the operation of the equipment required to perform all work properly and satisfactorily .
Any person employed by the Contractor or by any Subcontractor who in the Engineers judgment does not perform hisher work in a proper and skilled manner or is intemperate or disorderly or otherwise unsatisfactory or not employed in accordance with the provisions of Subsection .
shall at the written request of the Engineer be removed I. Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges forthwith by the Contractor or Subcontractor employing such person and shall not be employed again in any portion of the work without the approval of the Engineer .
Should the Contractor fail to take the necessary action to remove such person or persons as required above or fail to furnish suitable and sufficient personnel for the proper prosecution of the work the Engineer may suspend the work by written notice until such orders are complied with .
All equipment which is proposed to be used on the work shall be of sufficient size and in such mechanical condition as to meet requirements of the work and to produce a satisfactory quality of work .
Equipment used on any portion of the project shall be such that no injury to the roadway adjacent property or other highways will result from its use .
When the methods and equipment to be used by the Contractor is accomplishing the construction are not prescribed in the Contract the Contractor is free to use any methods or equipment that heshe demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Engineer which will accomplish the contract work in conformity with the requirements of the Contract .
When the Contract specifies the methods and equipment by which the construction be performed such methods and equipment shall be used unless others are authorized by the Engineer in writing .
If the Contractor desires to use a method or type of equipment other than that specified in the Contract the Contractor may request authority from the Engineer to do so .
The request shall be in writing and shall include a full description of the methods and equipment proposed to be used and an explanation of the reasons for desiring to make the change .
If approval is given it shall be in writing and it will be on the condition that the Contractor will be fully responsible for producing construction work in conformity with contract requirements .
If after trial use of the substituted methods or equipment the Engineer determines that the work produced does not meet contract requirements the Contractor shall discontinue the use of the substitute method or equipment and shall complete the remaining construction with the specified methods and equipment .
The Contractor shall remove the deficient work and replace it with work of specified quality or take such other corrective action as the Engineer may direct .
No changes will be made in basis of payment for the construction items involved nor in contract time as a result of authorizing a change in methods or equipment under these provisions. . Preservation of Roadside Growth .
In general the Contractor shall take special precautions at all times to protect and preserve natural surroundings and roadside growth either within or adjacent to the location from damage or injury due to hisher operations .
The Contractor shall not except by written permission of the Engineer remove destroy or trim such roadside trees or shrubs .
Any trees or landscape features carelessly scarred or damaged by the Contractors operations shall be removed and replaced or neatly trimmed and restored as nearly as possible to the original condition as required by the Engineer .
In general the Contractor shall be responsible for all damage to roadside growth due to hisher operations and shall without compensation satisfactorily repair or replace all such damage .
All scars on trees shall be painted as soon as possible with an approved tree paint. . Delay and Suspension of Work .
The Engineer shall have the authority to delay the commencement of the work and delay or suspend any portion thereof for such period or periods as the Engineer may deem necessary because of conditions beyond the control of the Commonwealth or the Contractor or beyond the control of the Commonwealth and the Contractor for the failure of the Contractor to correct conditions unsafe for the general public for failure to carry out provisions of the Contract for failure to carry out orders for causes and conditions considered unsuitable for the prosecution of the work for acts of third persons not a party to the Contract or for any other cause condition or reason deemed to be in the public interest .
Upon receipt of written order of the Engineer the Contractor shall immediately delay the commencement of the work or delay or suspend any portion thereof in accordance with said order .
No work shall be suspended or delayed without the prior written approval or order of the Engineer .
The work shall be resumed when conditions so warrant or deficiencies have been corrected and the conditions of the Contract satisfied as ordered or approved in writing by the Engineer .
The Contractors attention is also directed to the requirements of Subsections .
and .
which shall govern during any period of temporary or partial suspension of work .
I. Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges .
Determination and Extension of Contract Time for Completion .
The maximum time limit for the satisfactory completion of the work set forth in the Proposal is based upon the requirements of public convenience and the assumption that the Contractor will prosecute the work efficiently and with the least possible delay in accordance with the maximum allowable working time per week as specified herein .
It is an essential part of this Contract that the Contractor shall perform fully entirely and in an acceptable manner the work required within the time stated in this Contract except that the contract time for completion shall be adjusted as follows A .
If the Contractor does not receive the Notice to Proceed for a Federally Aided project within days of bid opening or for a NonFederally Aided project within days of bid opening it shall be entitled to an extension of time equivalent to the number of days beyond or that it takes for the Contractor to receive the Notice to Proceed .
Any such extension of time shall be reduced by the number of days beyond days from the date of receipt of the Notice of Award that the Contractor takes to return the executed Contract and the required surety .
B .
In case the commencing of the work is delayed or any part thereof is delayed or suspended by the Party of the First Part except for unsuitable weather winter months or reasons caused by the fault or neglect of the Contractor the Contractor will be granted an extension of time in which to complete work or any portion of the work required under the Contract equivalent to the duration of the delay less a reasonable period of time within which the Contractor could have done necessary preliminary work .
C. If satisfactory completion of the work shall require performance of work in greater quantities than those set forth in the Proposal the time allowed for performance shall be increased in the same ratio as the total final estimate value of the contract items bears to their total bid value .
D. When delay occurs due to reasonable causes beyond the control and without the fault or negligence of the Contractor including but not restricted to Acts of God to war whether or not declared civil war insurrection rebellion or revolution or to any act or condition incident to any of the foregoing acts of the Government acts of the State or any political subdivision thereof acts of other contracting parties over whose acts the Contractor has no control fires floods epidemics abnormal tides not including Spring tides severe coastal storms accompanied by high winds or abnormal tides freezing of streams and harbors abnormal time of Winter freezing or Spring thawing interference from recreational boat traffic use of beaches and recreational facilities for recreational purposes during the Summer season abnormal ship docking and berthing unanticipated use of wharves and storage sheds strikes except those caused by improper acts or omissions of the Contractor extraordinary delays in delivery of materials caused by strikes lockouts wrecks freight embargoes the time for completion of work shall be extended in whatever amount is determined by the Engineer to be equitable .
An Act of God as used in this article is construed to mean an earthquake flood cyclone or other cataclysmic phenomenon of nature beyond the power of the Contractor to foresee or make preparation in defense of .
A rain windstorm or other natural phenomenon of normal intensity based on United States Weather Bureau reports for the particular locality and for the particular season of the year in which the work is being prosecuted shall not be construed as an Act of God and no extension of time will be granted for the delays resulting therefrom .
Within the scope of acts of the Government consideration will be given to properly documented evidence that the Contractor has been delayed in obtaining any material or class of labor because of any assignment or preference ratings by the Federal Government or its agencies to War Navy or other defense Contracts .
E. In case the work is delayed by Public Service Corporations or Municipal Corporations see Subsection .. F. Each Extra Work Order as issued will include a statement of additional time if any that is agreed upon by the Contractor and the Engineer as required for the completion of this Contract by reason of this Extra Work Order and no other time allowance on account of the performance of the work covered by such Extra Work Order will be allowed .
No extension of time will be granted for any delay or any suspension of the work due to the fault of the Contractor nor if a request for an extension of time on account of delay due to any of the aforesaid causes is not filed within days of the date of the commencement of the delay nor if the request is based on any claim that the contract period as originally established was inadequate .
If the approved extended date of completion falls within the period from December st to March th due to reasons above then the Contractor will be allowed the same number of days beyond December st extended after March th .
The contract period has been carefully considered and has been established for reasons of importance to the Party of the First Part .
This time limit will be enforced and any prospective Bidder who is not willing to accept this Contract I. Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges with the intention of complying with the time limit is cautioned not to submit a bid .
The probable slowdown or curtailment of work during inclement weather and winter months has been taken into consideration in determining the total time required to complete the project hence no extension of time will be allowed due to this reason. . Failure to Complete Work on Time .
On or before the date stated in the proposal for completion or the date to which the time of completion shall have been extended under the provisions of Subsection .
the whole work shall have been performed in accordance with the terms of the Contract .
The time in which the various portions and the whole of the Contract are to be performed and the work is to be completed is an essential part of the Contract .
In case the work embraced in the contract shall not have been physically completed by the time stipulated therein according to the foregoing requirements the Contractor shall pay to the Party of the First Part a designated sum per day for the entire period of overrun in accordance with the following Schedule of Deductions .
In the event the Contract has been substantially completed and the project opened for traffic as directed in writing by the Engineer but physical completion of the work is subject to delay because of minor uncompleted items which do not impair the usefulness of the project the designated sum per day shall be the charges shown .
In addition to the daily charge the Contractor shall pay without reimbursement the entire cost of all traffic officers railroad flagmen and inspectors the Engineer or the Chief Engineer of the railroad determines to be necessary during the period of overrun of time .
Schedule of Deductions Project Value Deduction to .
to .
to .
to .
to .
to .
to .
to .
to .
over .
In the event the physical work embraced in the Contract has been completed and accepted in writing by the Chief Engineer but there remains to be submitted to the Department by the Contractor any reports or other documents in accordance with the provisions of the Contract the Contract shall not be considered satisfactorily completed within the meaning of Section G of Chapter of the General Laws until the receipt of such reports or documents by the Department but the designated sum per day during this interval shall be zero .
Whatever sum of money may become due and payable to the Party of the First Part by the Contractor under this Subsection may be retained out of money belonging to the Contractor in the hands and possession of the Party of the First Part .
It is agreed that this Subsection shall be construed and treated by the parties to the Contract not as imposing a penalty upon said Contractor for failing fully to complete said work as agreed on or before the time specified in the Proposal but as liquidated damages to compensate said Party of the First Part for all additional costs incurred by said Party because of the failure of the Contractor fully to complete said work on or before the date of completion specified in the Proposal .
Permitting the Contractor to continue and finish the work or any part of it after the time fixed for its completion or after the date to which the time for completion may have been extended shall in nowise operate as a waiver on the party of the Party of the First Part of any of its rights under the Contract .
I. Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges .
Default Termination .
If the Contractor shall be adjudged a bankrupt or if the Contractor shall make a general assignment for the benefit of hisher creditors or if a receiver of hisher property shall be appointed or if the work to be done under the Contract shall be abandoned or if the Contract or any part thereof shall be sublet without the previous written consent of the Party of the First Part or if the Contract or any claim thereunder shall be assigned by the Contractor otherwise than as herein specified or if at any time in the Engineers judgment and the Engineer so certifies in writing to the Party of the First Part that the work or any part thereof is unnecessarily or unreasonably delayed or that the Contractor has violated any of the provisions of the Contract the Party of the First Part may notify the Contractor to discontinue all work or any part thereof .
Such notice shall be given to the Contractor in writing and thereupon the Contractor shall discontinue such work or such part thereof as the Party of the First Part may designate and the Party of the First Part shall require the surety or sureties to complete the Contract .
If the Engineer shall certify that the rate of progress is not satisfactory the Party of the First Part may instead of notifying the Contractor to discontinue all work or any part thereof notify himher from time to time to increase the force equipment and plant or any of them employed on the whole or any part of the work stating the amount of increase required to insure the proper completion of the work .
The Contractor shall provide and maintain at no additional cost to the Department any lights necessary to protect the work or the traveling public for the safety of hisher construction forces and to insure the proper construction inspection and prosecution of the work see Subsections .
and ..
Unless the Contractor shall within five days after any such notice increase hisher force equipment and plant to the extent required therein and maintain and employ the same from day to day until the completion of the work or such part thereof or until the conditions as to the rate of progress shall in the Engineers judgment be fulfilled the Party of the First Part may employ and direct the labors of such additional force equipment and plant as may in the Engineers judgment be necessary to insure the completion of the work or such part thereof within the time specified or at the earliest possible date thereafter and charge the expense thereof to the Contractor .
Neither the notice from the Party of the First Part to the Contractor to increase hisher force equipment or plant nor the employment of additional force equipment or plant by the Party of the First Part shall be held to prevent a subsequent notice from the Party of the First Part to himher to discontinue work under the provisions of the preceding portion of this article .
All expenses charged under this article shall be deducted and paid by the Party of the First Part out of any moneys then due or to become due the Contractor under the Contract or any part thereof and in such accounting the Party of the First Part shall not be held to obtain the lowest figures for the work of completing the Contract or any part thereof or for insuring its proper completion but all sums actually paid therefor shall be charged to the Contractor .
In case the expenses so charged are less than the sum which would have been payable under the Contract if the same had been completed by the Contractor the Contractor shall be entitled to receive the difference and in case such expenses shall exceed the said sum the Contractor shall pay the amount of the excess to the Party of the First Part upon completion of the work without further demand being made therefor . .
Convenience Termination .
If the Department determines that it is in the public interest to do so the Department may notify the Contractor to discontinue all work or any part thereof .
Such notice shall be given to the Contractor in writing and thereupon the Contractor shall discontinue such work or such part thereof as the Department may designate .
If the Department notifies the Contractor to discontinue all work or any part thereof the Department shall pay and the Contractor shall accept as full payment for all work done and materials provided a sum agreed to by the Contractor and the Department or if a sum can not be agreed upon the sum of A plus B determined as follows A .
For Construction Related Costs The actual costs for direct labor direct labor costs shall include the actual salary costs of laborers equipment operators truck drivers steel workers and other trades persons up to and including working foremen .
The costs of general superintendence shall be considered included in field andor home office overhead .
materials less salvage value if any and use of equipment determined in accordance with subsection .
of the Standard Specifications plus of this total for overhead the additive is inclusive of both field and home office overhead and I. Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges The actual cost for Salary Related Costs such as Workmens Compensation and Liability Insurance Health Welfare and Pension benefits Social Security deductions and Employment Security Benefits and of the total of and for profit and The estimated proportionate cost of surety bonds and The actual cost to the Contractor for work performed by a subcontractor plus of such cost .
No allowance shall be made for general superintendence and the use of small tools and manual equipment .
General superintendence is that next level above the working foreman .
The costs of general superintendence as well as use of small tools and manual equipment shall be considered included in field andor home office overhead .
B .
For Discontinuance Costs The reasonable and necessary costs of storage transportation and other costs incurred for the preservation protection or disposition of the discontinued work which are preapproved by the Department to be determined as follows The actual costs for direct labor Direct Labor costs shall include the actual salary costs of laborers equipment operators truck drivers steel workers and other trades persons up to and including working foremen .
The costs of general superintendence shall be considered included in field andor home office overhead .
materials less salvage value if any and use of equipment determined in accordance with subsection .
of the Standard Specifications plus of this total for overhead the additive is inclusive of both field and home office overhead and The actual cost for Salary Related Costs such as Workmens Compensation and Liability Insurance Health Welfare and Pension benefits Social Security deductions and Employment Security Benefits .
No allowance shall be made for general superintendence and the use of small tools and manual equipment .
General superintendence is that next level above the working foreman .
The costs of general superintendence as well as use of small tools and manual equipment shall be considered included in field andor home office overhead .
The reasonable and necessary legal costs of work discontinuance plus an additive of for overhead the additive is inclusive of both field and home office overhead is allowable .
The legal costs for litigation andor negotiation purposes with the Department in settlement of said discontinuances is not allowable .
Any other reasonable and necessary costs for discontinuance that are preapproved by the Department plus an additive of for overhead the additive is inclusive of both field and home office overhead .
When requested by the Department the Contractor shall furnish itemized statements of the cost of the work performed and shall give the Department andor the Departments Auditors access to any and all financial andor project records and documents relating thereto .
Unless the Contractor when requested to do so furnishes such itemized statements and access to any and all financial andor project records and documents the Contractor shall not be entitled to payment for the work for which such information is sought by the Department .
The Contractor shall not be paid and the Contractor shall not have any claim for loss of anticipated profits or for any costs or profit in addition to those stipulated above for loss of expected reimbursement or for any increased expenses resulting directly or indirectly from the discontinuance of any or all work or from unbalanced allocation among the contract items of overhead expense on the part of the bidder and subsequent loss of expected reimbursement therefor or any other cause .
The Contractor shall incorporate the provisions of this section as provisions in its contracts with each of their subcontractors .
The authority of the Department under this section shall be in addition to the authority of the Department andor Engineer under other sections of these specifications .
I. Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges SECTION .
MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT .
Measurement of Quantities .
The quantities of the various items of work performed shall be determined for purposes of payment by the Engineer and by the Contract for purposes of the certifications of work performed that are generally required by law and specifically by the provisions hereof .
Upon the completion of the work and before final payment is made the Engineer will make final measurements to determine the quantities of the various items of work performed as the basis for final settlement .
All measurements shall be made according to the United States standard units of measurements .
The method of measurement and computations to be used in determination of quantities of material furnished and of work performed under the Contracts shall be selected by the Engineer .
Unless otherwise specified longitudinal measurements for area computations will be made horizontally and no deductions will be made for individual fixtures having an area of one square meter or less .
Unless otherwise specified transverse measurements for area computations will be the neat dimensions shown on the plans or ordered in writing by the Engineer .
Structures will be measured according to neat lines shown on the plans or as altered to fit field conditions .
All items which are measured by the meter such as pipe culverts guardrail underdrains etc .
will be measured parallel to the base or foundation upon which such structures are placed unless otherwise shown on the plans .
In computing volumes of excavation the average end area method or other methods acceptable to the Engineer will be used .
When the term gage refers to the measurement of wire it will mean the wire gage specified in the AASHTO Designation M . All materials which are specified for measurement by mass shall be weighed on standard scales furnished by and at the expense of the Contractor .
Such scales shall be sealed at the expense of the Contractor as often as is necessary to insure their accuracy .
A sworn weigher to be compensated by the Contractor shall weigh all materials required to be weighed as above provided .
The weighing of such materials may be witnessed by the Engineer .
If materials are shipped by rail or trucks the car masses or quarry masses may be accepted but scales shall be used as above if so directed .
Mass slips shall be provided for each shipment of material weighed .
Each mass slip shall be signed by the sworn weigher .
The mass slips shall be countersigned on delivery by the Engineer and no mass slip not so countersigned shall be included for payment under the Contract .
When requested by the Contractor and approved by the Engineer in writing material specified to be measured by the cubic meter may be weighed and such masses will be converted to cubic meters for payment purposes .
Factors for conversion from mass measurement to volume measurement will be determined by the Engineer and shall be agreed to by the Contractor before such method of measurement of pay quantity is used .
The term lump sum when used as a unit of payment will mean complete payment for the work described in the Contract .
When a complete structure or structural unit in effect lump sum work is specified as the unit of measurement the unit will be construed to include all necessary fittings and accessories .
When standard manufactured items are specified such as fence wire plates rolled shapes pipe conduit etc .
and these items are identified by gage unit mass section dimensions etc .
such identification will be considered to be nominal mass or dimensions .
Unless more stringently controlled by tolerances in cited specifications manufacturing tolerances established by the industries involved will be accepted . .
Scope of Payments .
The Party of the First Part will pay and the Contractor shall receive and accept the compensation as herein provided in full payment for furnishing all materials labor tools and equipment and for performing all work contemplated and embraced under the Contract also for all loss or damage arising out of the nature of the work or from I. Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges the action of the elements except as specified in Subsection .
or from any unforeseen difficulties or obstructions which may arise or be encountered during the prosecution of the work except as set forth in Subsection .
until its final approval by the Party of the First Part and for all risks of every description connected with the prosecution of the work also for all expenses incurred by or in consequence of the suspension or discontinuance of the said prosecution of the work as herein specified and for any infringement of patent trademark or copyright and for completing the work in an acceptable manner according to the plans and specifications .
The payment of any current estimate or any retained percentage shall in no way constitute an acknowledgment of the acceptance of the work or in no way or degree prejudice or affect the obligation of the Contractor at hisher own cost and expense to repair correct renew or replace any defects and imperfections in the construction of or in the strength of or quality of materials used in or about the construction of the work under Contract and its appurtenances as well as all damages due or attributable to such defects which defects imperfections or damages shall have been discovered on or before the final inspection and acceptance of the work .
The Engineer shall be the sole judge of such defects imperfections or damages and the Contractor shall be liable to the Party of the First Part for failure to correct the same as provided herein also see Subsection .. . Payment for Extra Work .
A .
Payment for work for which there is a unit price provided for in the Contract .
Where the Contract contains a unit price for work and the Engineer orders Extra Work for work of the same kind as other work contained in the Contract and is performed under similar physical conditions the Contractor shall accept full and final payment at the Contract unit prices for the accepted quantities of Extra Work done .
No allowance will be made for any increased expenses or any damages whatsoever .
B .
Payment for work or materials for which no price is contained in the Contract .
If the Engineer directs the Contractor shall submit promptly in writing to the Engineer an offer to do the required work on a lump sum or unit price basis as specified by the Engineer .
The stated price either lump sum or unit price shall be divided so as to show that it is the sum of the estimated cost of direct labor materials and the use of equipment plus percent of this total for overhead plus the actual cost of Workmens Compensation and Liability Insurance Health Welfare and Pension benefits Social Security deductions Employment Security Benefits and such additional fringe benefits which the Contractor is required to pay as a result of Union Labor Agreements andor is required by authorized governmental agencies plus percent of the total of and plus the estimated proportionate cost of surety bonds .
Unless an agreed lump sum andor unit price is obtained from above and is so stated in the Extra Work Order the Contractor shall accept as full payment for work or materials for which no price agreement is contained in the Contract an amount equal to the following the actual cost for direct labor material less value of salvage if any and use of equipment plus percent of this total for overhead plus actual cost of Workmens Compensation and Liability Insurance Health Welfare and Pension benefits Social Security deductions and Employment Security Benefits plus percent of the total of and plus the estimated proportionate cost of surety bonds .
For work performed by a Subcontractor the Contractor shall accept as full payment therefor an amount equal to the cost to the Contractor of such work as determined by the Engineer plus percent of such cost .
No allowance shall be made for general superintendence and the use of small tools and manual equipment .
The Contractor shall when requested by the Engineer furnish itemized statements of the cost of the work ordered and give the Engineer access to all accounts bills and vouchers relating thereto and unless the Contractor shall furnish such itemized statements access to all accounts bills and vouchers the Contractor shall not be entitled to payment for any items of extra work for which such information is sought by the Engineer .
C. Equipment Rates .
In the event there arises the need for determination of costs of use of equipment as part of actual costs or cost of performance or damages under Subsections . . . . andor .
or under Chapter of the Massachusetts General Laws such costs for use of equipment shall be established in accordance with the following Construction equipment as used herein means equipment in sound workable condition either owned or controlled by the Contractor or the Subcontractor at any tier or obtained from a commercial rental source and furnished for use under the contract .
Allowable hourly ownership and operating costs for contractorowned or subcontractorowned equipment shall be determined as follows I. Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges a Actual cost data from the Contractors accounting and operating records shall be used whenever such data can be determined for hourly ownership and operating costs for each piece of equipment or groups of similar serial or series equipment .
Actual costs shall be limited to booked costs of the annual accounting period or periods during which the equipment was utilized on the Contract and will not include estimated costs not recorded and identifiable in the Contractors formal accounting records .
The Contractor shall afford Department auditors full access to all accounting equipment usage and other records necessary for development or confirmation of actual hourly cost rates for each piece of equipment or groups of similar serial or series equipment .
The Contractors refusal to give such full access shall invalidate any request or claim for payment of the equipment costs .
When costs can not be determined from the Contractors records hourly equipment cost rates may be determined under b and c below .
b When the Department ascertains that it is not practicable to determine actual equipment cost rates from the Contractors records hourly equipment cost rates for equipment owned by the Contractor may be determined by the use of rate schedules with adjustments contained in the Rental Rate Blue Book Volumes and published by Dataquest Incorporated said publication is incorporated herein by reference .
The contractor shall provide to the Department in a format prescribed by the Department sufficient descriptive ownership and operating records and documentation for each piece of equipment subject to the extra work so that the equipment rates may be determined and adjusted from the aforementioned Dataquest Rental Rate Blue Book as follows Hourly equipment rates shall be developed by dividing monthly rates contained in the Rental Rate Blue Book by hours per month the weekly hourly and daily rates listed in the Rental Rate Blue Book will not be used Equipment rates shall in all cases be adjusted by application of the Rate Adjustment Tables for machine age adjustment plus adjustments to eliminate Equipment Overhead plus Regional Adjustments plus adjustments to the CFC to reflect for the equipments age and Equipment operating rates shall be further reduced by to eliminate duplicate and excessive costs except that the rates shall instead be reduced by to determine standby equipment rates .
The number of equipment hours to be paid for under the extra work or force account work shall be the number of hours that the equipment is actually used on a specific extra work or force account activity .
The current revisions to Dataquests Rental Rate Blue Book will be used in establishing equipment rates .
The current revision applicable to specific extra work or force account work will be the revision in effect the copyright date being the deciding factor as of the Contractors Notice to Proceed .
In all cases the Department reserves the right to utilize equipment rates based upon the contractors actual equipment ownership costs other equipment rate books and guides i.e .
Construction Equipment Ownership and Operating Expense Schedule Region One published by the Army Corps of Engineers or hybrid rates determined to be reasonable by the Department .
c In those cases where a percent additive for overhead and profit is to be superimposed on the equipment costs as provided in Subsections .
and .B equipment cost rates determined under a and b above shall exclude any overhead costs such as equipment insurance licenses or taxes .
The percent additive shall compensate the Contractor for all overhead costs including equipment overhead general superintendence small tools manual equipment field overhead and central office overhead .
Where the percent overhead additive is not applicable overhead items clearly related to equipment equipment insurance licenses taxes shall be includable in the equipment rates provided however that such costs shall be identified and eliminated from any other direct or indirect costs or damages payable by the Department under the Contract .
No element of profit shall be allowable in equipment cost rates for Contractorowned equipment it being understood that a percent profit additive will be superimposed upon equipment costs when called for by the Contract .
Reasonable hourly costs of renting equipment are allowable subject to Contractor production of auditable records supporting actual costs incurred provided further that a Costs such as fuel lubricants and minor or running repairs incident to operating such rented equipment that are not included in the rental rate are allowable .
b Costs incident to major repair and overhaul of rental equipment are not allowed .
c Charges for equipment leased or rented from any division subsidiary organization under common control or business under common ownership ordinarily will be reimbursable to the extent that they do not exceed the actual costs of ownership and operating costs determined as in above .
Rental cost of equipment leased or rented from any division subsidiary affiliate of the Contractor under common control or business under common ownership that has an established practice of renting out the same or similar equipment to unaffiliated parties shall be allowed at I. Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges rates higher than actual ownership and operating costs provided that the Contractor furnishes the Department adequate documentation including the rental and usage records for the same or similar equipment items demonstrating a reasonable likelihood that the equipment would have been rented out if not used on this Contract and that the rental rates charged are consistent with rates charged to unaffiliated parties and going market rates .
Rental costs under a sale and leaseback arrangement will be allowable only up to the amount the Contractor would be allowed if the Contractor retained title .
Equipment cost rates determined in and shall be exclusive of labor cost of equipment operators .
Such costs shall be reimbursable subject to Contractor production of auditable payroll and other records sufficient for determination of hours pay rates and reimbursable fringe costs as defined in Subsection .
and above .
Except in cases of unit price or lump sum extra work orders approved by the Department before the work is done actual reimbursable hours of equipment usage and operator time must be adequately documented by the Department force account records or Contractor field and office records maintained during performance of the work in a manner acceptable to the Department .
Failure of the Contractor to so maintain time records which adequately segregate added equipment hours caused by extra work required by the Department or caused by other Department actions cited in the Contractors claim for damages from other equipment time worked on the Contract when maintenance of such records would have been feasible shall constitute a cardinal omission of the Contractor invalidating any claim for equipment cost reimbursement .
The above provisions constitute an advanced agreement made in general conformance with intent of Federal Acquisition Regulation .
paragraph d said intent being to maximize clarity of understanding and minimize possible disputes with respect to determination of reimbursable actual equipment costs under this Contract . .
Partial Payments .
The Engineer shall biweekly make an estimate of the total amount of the work done from one estimate to the next .
The Departments Computer Section will process the estimated value from the Engineers report .
The Party of the First Part shall retain a portion of such estimated value but not to exceed on any one Contract as part security for the fulfillment of the Contract by the Contractor and shall also retain from said estimates an amount sufficient to cover claims which it may have against the Contractor and claims filed pursuant to Chapter Section and Chapter Section A and F of the General Laws .
The Party of the First Part shall pay biweekly to the Contractor while carrying on the work the balance not retained as hereinbefore provided .
No such estimates or payment shall be required to be made when in the Engineers judgment the work is not proceeding in accordance with the provisions of the Contract or when in hisher judgment the total value of the work done since the last estimate amounts to less than ..
There will be a retainage of ten percent of the value of all planting items .
For all other items of work there will be no retainage for the first fifty percent of the bid price as determined by the Engineer .
For the second fifty percent of the bid price there will be a retainage of five percent of the value of all items of work excluding planting items .
Whenever the work is substantially complete the Party of the First Part may if it considers the amount retained to be in excess of the amount adequate for the protection of the Commonwealth and is required by statute at its discretion release to the Contractor all or a portion of such excess amount and may cause the Contractor to be paid temporarily or permanently from time to time such portion of the reserve as it deems prudent .
Upon presentation by the Contractor of certified copies of paid invoices the Party of the First Part may include in the estimate advance payments for acceptable reinforcing steel structural steel stone piles culvert pipe or other non perishable materials purchased expressly for the work and delivered on the work or in approved storage places at the site but which materials are not considered as erected or complete in place under the items of the Contract and for which partial payment as specified above would not be made until such materials and items were erected or complete in place .
If it is impossible due to lack of area on the site or other valid reason the Contractor may request in writing permission from the Engineer to store materials off the site and still have the materials paid as material on hand and the Engineer may approve payment .
This request will state the reason for the request location of proposed storage site methods that will be employed to insure that material is properly protected and the material will be used on the particular project and any other information as may be deemed necessary in order to evaluate the request .
No advance payment for material stored off the site will be made until written approval of the Engineer has been obtained .
The amount to be I. Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges included in the estimate will be determined by the Engineer up to a maximum of of the value of the materials as shown by the certified copies of paid invoices .
Payment will not be approved when the invoice value of such materials as determined by the Engineer amounts to less than .
Deductions at rates and in amounts which are equal to the payments will be made from estimates as the materials are incorporated in the work .
Payment for the materials as aforesaid shall not in itself constitute acceptance and any materials which do not conform to the specifications for same shall be rejected in accordance with the stipulation of Subsection .. Payment for structural steel and aluminum specifically purchased and received by fabricators for incorporation into a Department project may be requested by the Contractor and included in the current estimates in an amount not to exceed fifty percent of the contract price .
Certified paid invoices and material certifications must be submitted by the Contractor to the Department with the request for payment .
The invoices must clearly identify the Department project for which the material is intended along with the material type and quantity .
When payment is made the raw material becomes the property of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts .
A document transferring ownership of the raw material to the Commonwealth shall be submitted to the Department immediately after payment is made .
Such payment shall in no way release the Contractor from hisher responsibility for condition protection and in case of loss replacement of such materials or from any liability resulting in any manner from the presence of such materials wherever they may be stored .
Any material not conforming to the specifications shall be rejected in accordance with the stipulation of Subsection ..
In instances where the raw material is not in the process of fabrication the material shall be segregated from other material designated as Property of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts and clearly marked to identify the project into which the material will be incorporated .
All material shall be inspected at the fabricators plant by a representative of the Department prior to the submittal of invoices to ensure that all material has been received and is properly stored and segregated .
For any item for which the payment is made on a lump sum basis except lump sum Bridge Structures and for which payment may be allowed if the Contractor requests partial payment on such an item the Contractor shall submit for approval by the Engineer a schedule of the quantities and unit prices for the major components of the item .
Each component part shall be considered as including all its concomitance so that the total cost listed for the components is the contract cost for the item .
The approval of the schedule by the Engineer shall not be considered as a guarantee to the Contractor that the quantities shown on the schedule are the approximate quantities actually included in the lump sum item .
The schedule is only for the purpose of estimating partial payments and it shall not affect the contract terms in any way .
The Contractor will be required to certify in writing that the work for which the Contractor is being paid on the estimate in question has in fact been done . .
Final Acceptance and Final Payment .
When in the opinion of the Chief Engineer the Contract has been satisfactorily completed and final acceptance has been voted by the Board of Commissioners the Department Secretary shall inform the Contractor in writing of the date of such acceptance upon which date the Contractors responsibility shall cease except as provided in his bond and as provided in Subsection ..
The Engineer shall as soon as practicable after the physical completion of the Contract make final estimate of the amount of work done thereunder and the value of such work .
Within days from and after the date the work has been accepted by the Board the Party of the First Part shall forward to the Contractor a copy of the final estimate or semifinal estimate as stipulated in Chapter Section G of the General Laws as amended together with an agreement form for his acceptance .
After such acceptance has been filed with the Supervisor of Fiscal Management of the Department payments of the entire sum will be made so found to be due thereunder after deducting therefrom all previous payments and all amounts to be kept and all amounts to be retained under the provisions of the Contract .
All prior partial estimates and payments shall be subject to correction in the final estimate and payment .
If within six months from the date the final estimate is forwarded to the Contractor the Contractor has not filed a valid as determined by the Engineer written reasons for not accepting the final estimate the final estimate will be considered acceptable to the Contractor and payment of the final estimate made .
The acceptance by the Contractor of the final payment shall operate as and shall be a release to the Party of the I. Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges First Part and every member agent and employee thereof from all claims by the Contractor for anything done or furnished for or relating to the work or for any act or neglect of the Party of the First Part or of any person relating to or affecting the work except the claim against the Party of the First Part for the remainder if any there be of the amounts kept or retained as provided in Subsection .. Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
DIVISION II CONSTRUCTION DETAILS SECTION EARTHWORK GRADING DEMOLITION RODENT CONTROL AND BORINGS SECTION DRAINAGE SECTION WATER SYSTEMS SECTION SUBBASE BASE COURSES SHOULDERS PAVEMENTS AND BERMS SECTION CURB AND EDGING SECTION HIGHWAY GUARD FENCES AND WALLS SECTION INCIDENTAL WORK SECTION TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES SECTION STRUCTURES Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
This page intentionally blank .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
CONSTRUCTION DETAILS SECTION EARTHWORK GRADING DEMOLITION RODENT CONTROL AND BORINGS SECTION CLEARING AND GRUBBING DESCRIPTION .
General .
This work shall consist of clearing grubbing cutting removal and disposal of all vegetation and debris from areas either within or outside of the RightofWay as shown on the plans or designated by the Engineer .
The work shall also include the preservation from injury or defacement of all vegetation and objects designated by the Engineer to remain .
CONSTRUCTION METHODS .
General .
The burning of trees brush stumps etc .
will not be permitted .
The Contractor shall provide other satisfactory methods of disposal without additional compensation .
The Contractor shall obtain written permission of the Engineer for use of storage areas within the RightofWay requiring clearing and grubbing or selective clearing and thinning .
Any clearing for the Contractors convenience shall be done at hisher own expense .
All such areas shall be restored to a condition acceptable to the Engineer including necessary mulching seeding and planting without additional compensation .
The Engineer shall be provided with notarized copies of agreements between the Contractor and owners of land used as disposal or storage areas .
When fencing is installed outside normal clearing areas every reasonable effort shall be made to preserve trees or shrubs whose removal is not essential to the installation of the fencing .
Acceptable material obtained on the project may be used to produce wood chip mulch .
The Contractor shall use an approved chipper and millimeter knife setting as described under Subsection M .. Wood Chip Mulch .
Material obtained from Elm trees shall not be accepted for use .
Wood chips produced on the project from clearing and grubbing shall be stockpiled within the location and used where and as directed .
Except for materials used for making wood chip mulch the Contractor shall make all arrangements and negotiations necessary for the satisfactory disposal of trees shrubs stumps roots dead wood and other litter in areas outside the RightofWay and in such manner that no condition or accumulation of material shall be permitted to disfigure or mar the finished landscape. . Clearing and Grubbing .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
The stumps of all trees brush and major roots shall be grubbed and removed in all excavation areas and under all embankments where the original ground level is within meter of the subgrade or slope of embankments .
All trees stumps and brush shall be cut off within millimeters of the ground in embankment areas where the original ground level is more than meter below the subgrade or slope of embankments .
Trees and shrubs that are specifically designated by the Engineer not to be cut removed destroyed or trimmed shall be saved from harm and injury .
All damage done to trees by the Contractors operation and all branches of trees extending within the roadway shall be trimmed and painted where cut as directed to provide a meter minimum vertical clearance including selective trimming of such trees as directed . .
Selective Clearing and Thinning .
A .
General .
The work under this item shall consist of the removal of hazardous growth and dead dying or diseased plant material the removal of groups and individual plants which interfere with the growth of more desirable types of trees and the clearing away of lesser growth that may obscure outstanding trees tree groups or scenic views .
Any part of tree trunks or base of plant material located on the Location Lines shall be considered within the State Highway Limits .
Densely wooded areas shall be thinned to provide space for healthy growth by eliminating thinner weaker trees and the reduction of number of varieties .
The Contractors attention is called to the requirements for work under this item .
The desired appearance to be attained in certain areas of heavy growth may require three or more operations .
First the obvious dead dying and diseased trees and undergrowth shall be cut and cleared out of the area .
This work includes removal of any previously fallen trees branches uprooted stumps and other debris as directed .
Next the area is to be thinned out as directed by removing the less desirable trees and brush which interfere with the growth of the better plant material .
Finally clear out lesser growth which may obscure outstanding trees tree groups or scenic views .
Tree upbranching and shaping under this item will be restricted to trees which have limbs and branches restricting sight distance extending over roadways shoulders turn outs etc .
Upbranching or trimming will be required to produce a meter minimum vertical clearance over all locations described hereinbefore and the removal of limbs and branches involved in this operation shall be accomplished as outlined hereafter .
B .
Prosecution of Work .
Supplementing Subsection .. Quality of work must conform with accepted tree trimming practices .
All trimming and pruning shall conform to recognized tree surgery practices and particular note should be made that painting with an approved tree dressing or paint will be required on all cuts millimeters or over in diameter .
The dressing or paint shall be applied no later than two days after the cuts are made .
Recognized tree surgery practices include among many others the fact that all limbs and branches which require removal and all stubs regardless of age must be cut flush either to a union with the next larger sound limb or branch or flush to the trunk of the tree .
The cutting shall be performed by experienced woodsmen .
Trained tree climbers are required for pruning of tall growth .
Care shall be exercised by the Contractor to prevent injury to trees and shrubs designed to be preserved .
Any injury to limbs bark or roots of such plants shall be repaired by the Contractor as directed or the plants replaced without additional compensation for such repair or replacement .
C. Cutting and Treatment of Stumps and Stubble .
Standing trees undesirable brush and existing stumps to be removed shall be cut flush with the ground and a millimeter tolerance permitted and the resulting stumps or stubble then brushed or sprayed with a chemical spray material conforming to the requirements of Subsection M .. of Division III Materials .
Application shall be by brush or spray so as to give complete coverage and wetting to the point of runoff .
This application shall be completed within two days after the cutting .
As the specified chemical herbicide is harmful to desirable roadside growth the Contractor shall apply the chemical in such a manner that damage will not occur either from the direct spray or from drift of the chemical to any Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
desirable growth .
The Contractor shall use all necessary precautions to prevent injury to crops or damage to other desirable growth on private abutting property as well as to those within the RightofWay and shall assume full responsibility for any damage .
D. Disposal of Cuttings .
The Contractor may dispose of cut material by processing into a wood chip mulch as described in Subsection M .. and spreading uniformly throughout the cleared and thinned areas as directed by the Engineer . .
Disposal of Trees .
All trees to be cleared shall become the property of the Contractor and the satisfactory disposal of the wood in such trees outside the RightofWay shall become hisher responsibility .
The trees including cuttings and slash shall be disposed of after cutting as soon as practicable and in such a manner as not to detract from the appearance of the roadside .
If the existing ground in the area is disturbed by any of the work or equipment the Contractor shall roughgrade and loam and seed if necessary the disturbed areas if so directed without additional compensation . .
Disposal of Stumps and Brush .
After removal all stumps including the major root system shall be disposed by the Contractor at hisher own responsibility outside the layout where the material will not cause obstruction to streams and will not detract from the appearance of the roadside . .
Disposal of Dutch Elm Diseased Wood .
Dutch Elm diseased wood shall be disposed of in accordance with the provisions of General Law Chapter Section and Chapter Sections and as amended and in accordance with any additional local regulations .
Where the work includes the removal of elm trees or the limbs of elm trees such trees or limbs thereof shall be disposed of immediately after cutting or removal and in such a manner as to prevent the spread of Dutch Elm disease .
This shall be accomplished by covering them with earth to a depth of at least millimeters in areas outside the highway location where the Contractor has arranged for disposal .
Where the work includes the removal and disposal of stumps of elm trees such stumps shall be completely disposed of immediately after cutting in the manner specified above .
COMPENSATION .
Method of Measurement .
Clearing and grubbing shall be measured by the horizontal plane area and will be the number of hectares within the limiting stations of the project andor as designated by the Engineer and the outside limits of measurement shall extend to a point .
meters beyond the top or bottoms of slopes excluding existing roadway and shoulder surfaces streams or bodies of water .
Areas outside of the limits specified above when cleared and grubbed in connection with the construction of fences shall be computed on the basis of a three meter width multiplied by the total length of fencing installed and when done in connection with excavating ditches or trenches the width shall be limited to .
meters beyond the outer edges of the excavation .
Measurement of selective clearing and thinning will be based on the actual number of hectares which receive the required attention .
Approximate locations will be shown on the plans or detail sheets and as designated in the field by the Engineer .
Only such trees as have a shortest diameter of at least millimeters and less than millimeters shall be included in the item of Trees Removed Diameter Under Millimeters .
Only such trees as have a shortest diameter of Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
millimeters or more shall be included in the item of Trees Removed Diameter Millimeters and Over .
The item of Stumps Removed shall include the removal and satisfactory disposal of all tree stumps which remain in their original position and measure millimeters or more in shortest diameter at the cutoff point where the trees have been previously removed by others .
A stump shall not be construed as a tree under these specifications unless the trunk extends over meters above the average ground .
Trees or stumps to be removed which have the shortest diameter specified for payment will be measured in place by the following procedure Where the tree consists of a single trunk extending more than a meter vertical height above the average natural ground line the shortest diameter shall be measured at the meter level above the average elevation of the original ground .
Any tree whose main trunk separates into multiple trunks or which has limbs or branches growing out from the main trunk below the meter level defined hereinbefore shall have its shortest diameter measured at the lowest point on the main trunk where multiple growth or branching out begins .
The shortest diameter of a stump shall be measured at the cutoff except that where multiple growth begins below cutoff the shortest diameter shall be measured at the main trunk where multiple growth begins .
Measurement for payment under the respective items shall be such that any individual growth to be classed as a tree stump shall be measured in a manner to limit payment to one single tree or stump at each particular location of the individual growth .
When multiple trunks with a common root system are separated at ground level each separate trunk shall be considered as an individual growth under these specifications .
The quantity of trees or stumps to be paid for will be the number actually removed by the Contractor in the completed and accepted work as determined by count .
Wood chip mulch produced from Clearing and Grubbing will be measured by the cubic meter truck load measure at time of spreading . .
Basis of Payment .
Clearing and Grubbing and Selective Clearing and Thinning will be paid for at the contract unit price per hectare .
When Clearing and Grubbing is not included in the Proposal as a payment item payment for any such work will be included in the items of Earth Excavation or Borrow except as herein provided for the removal of trees and stumps .
The removal of trees including the stumps thereof and required spray material will be paid for at the contract unit price each for the particular kind of work involved as defined hereinbefore when a quantity is given in the Proposal under their respective items otherwise this work will be paid for at the contract unit price for excavation or at the contract unit price per hectare of Clearing and Grubbing or Selected Clearing and Thinning whichever is applicable .
The contract unit price shall include the cost of all arrangements and methods required to protect from harm all existing overhead or underground installations .
The contract unit price for the respective items shall not include any trees or stumps removed from the area paid for under the item of Clearing and Grubbing or Selected Clearing and Thinning .
No payment shall be allowed for preparation and spreading of wood chip mulch used from areas included under Selective Clearing and Thinning .
Wood chip mulch directed to be produced from Clearing and Grubbing shall be paid for complete in place at the contract unit price .
Only such trees or stumps as have a shortest diameter of millimeters and over measured as stipulated in Subsection .
shall be included for payment. . Payment Items. . Clearing and Grubbing Hectare .
Selective Clearing and Thinning Hectare .
Tree Removed Diameter Under Millimeters Each .
Tree Removed Diameter Millimeters and Over Each .
Stump Removed Each Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II. . Wood Chip Mulch Cubic Meter SECTION DEMOLITION OF BUILDINGS STRUCTURES AND BRIDGES DESCRIPTION .
General .
The work to be done consists of demolishing completely such buildings and structures as are listed in the Proposal .
Said demolishing of the buildings shall be done on the site .
Buildings as such shall not be removed intact from the site by the Contractor nor shall they be sold to others for such removal .
Buildings or Structures shall be considered interchangeable terms within the scope of these Specifications .
The Contractor shall not proceed with the demolition of any building or structure unless and until heshe receives written approval .
Structures which must be removed and which are not listed in the Proposal will be removed by others at the direction of the Department .
The Contractors attention is directed to the relevant provisions of Subsections . . and .
wherein it is stipulated that he shall have no claim for damages for any delay in the prosecution of the work under any of these items or for the omission of any one or more of the items scheduled in the Proposal .
The Department may withdraw from the Contract any or all of the structures which are scheduled for demolishing and for which items are included in the Proposal and the Contractor shall in this case have no redress against the Department for any loss in anticipated profits .
The Contractors attention is further directed to the probability that delay may be encountered in the prosecution of demolition or removal work and that as stipulated in said Subsections .
and .
he shall have no claim for damages for any delay in the prosecution of work hereunder except as provided .
The Contractor shall be solely responsible for making all necessary arrangements and for performing any necessary work to the satisfaction of the Utility Companies and Municipal Departments involved in connection with the discontinuance or interruption of all public utilities or services such as gas water sewer electricity and telephone which will be affected by the work to be done under the Removal items specified in the Proposal .
CONSTRUCTION METHODS .
Demolition of Buildings and Structures .
Each item for demolition includes the demolition of the building or buildings as identified and described under the particular item listed in the Proposal and the satisfactory disposal of the buildings and all contents therein .
Basements shall be completely cleaned of all unsuitable materials and debris all partition walls and supports for the appurtenances to the buildings .
The foundation walls of the structures shall be broken down to a depth of not less than millimeters below the existing ground level .
Cellar floors shall be broken into pieces having an area not more than .
square meter with well defined cracks through the full depth of the floor .
Holes having an area of not less than .
square meter shall be made through the floor at intervals of not more than meters lengthwise and crosswise to provide vertical drainage .
Buildings without basements or cellars having concrete or masonry floors or slabs at ground level when demolished shall be removed to the ground floor grade .
The floor or slab shall be removed and the area graded as directed .
All fences debris etc .
on the parcel on which the building that is demolished is located shall be removed and the parcel left in a reasonably neat and safe condition .
In case the building to be removed is served by a septic tank or cesspool or underground fuel tanks such Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
structure or structures and appurtenant pipes shall be broken down or removed and all resulting cavities satisfactorily filled with selected excavated material placed in millimeter layers and thoroughly compacted .
If directed the Contractor shall remove the contents of said structures prior to disturbing them and the disposal thereof shall conform to the requirements of the local Board of Health .
Underground fuel tanks and contents shall become the property of the Contractor and shall be carefully handled and removed and immediately disposed of in compliance with applicable safety and pollution control regulations .
The Department assumes no responsibility for any changes in the condition of the buildings or for loss of fixtures or equipment at any time .
All materials resulting from the demolition of the buildings shall become the property of the Contractor and heshe shall dispose of the same outside and away from the site except all acceptable solid fill shall be used in filling cellar holes before borrow is used .
Solid fill shall consist of noncombustible material such as brick stone and plaster but not wood lath and shall contain no piece larger than .
cubic meter in volume or greater than meter in dimension .
All materials which consist of hazardous substances such as lead paint asbestos petroleum products etc .
shall be disposed of in accordance with state and federal environmental regulations .
Acceptable materials from removal may be placed no higher than millimeters below existing grade .
All pipes and other conduits encountered and to be abandoned on account of the demolition shall be plugged with brick and mortar .
Drainage structures shall be removed completely and the cavity completely filled with selected excavated material or borrow in millimeter layers and thoroughly compacted .
A minimum depth of at least millimeters of ordinary borrow shall be used as a cover and shall be reasonably leveled .
The areas adjacent to the site of the removal shall be left in a neat and safe condition satisfactory to the Engineer .
Upon completion of the work all cellar holes shall be filled to the grade of adjacent ground in the manner specified hereinabove .
The Contractor shall protect all buildings which adjoin a structure to be demolished and shall leave the same in a permanently safe and satisfactory condition .
In accordance with the provisions of Subsection .
the Contractor shall erect suitable fences around unfilled basements and other dangerous locations created by hisher work during demolition and prior to filling of cellar holes or cavities .
All costs in connection with such fences shall be included in the contract price for the appropriate demolition item. . Demolition of Bridges .
The Contractor shall not disturb any utility or property carrying water gas telephone electric or similar service across the bridge unless heshe is permitted to do so by the Engineer .
If the Contractor is directed to make any repairs or to do any maintenance work on the present superstructure or bridge supports during the period it is open for public travel the Contractor shall do the directed work in accordance with the provisions of Subsection ..
The Contractor shall assume responsibility for the maintenance and safety of the present superstructure or bridge immediately on notice to himher that the Engineer has closed the bridge to the public .
Where the bridge to be removed is over a railroad all work of removing the bridge superstructure and bridge supports shall be done at such times and in such manner as will cause the least possible interference with the operation management business or traffic of the railroad .
Demolition of Present Superstructure .
All materials in or on the superstructure of the present bridge its supporting beams and braces shall be satisfactorily removed .
Such material as the present owner desires which are specified in the Special Provisions shall be stacked near the site as directed and convenient for removal by owner .
The material that the present owner does not specify shall become the property of the Contractor .
Demolition of Present Bridge .
The work under this item shall include the removal and satisfactory disposal of the entire superstructure as specified above and the removal and satisfactory disposal of the substructure to the extent that the slopes in the abutment area will match the slopes of the adjacent embankment .
Materials resulting from removal may be used as embankment materials on the project if approved by the Engineer without any additional compensation to the Contractor .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
Stone concrete masonry or other support shall be removed so that none of it will come within millimeters of the finished slopes or within meter of the roadway surface and the remaining space shall then be backfilled .
When the bridge to be removed is over water all parts of piers or other supports in the water shall be removed to the elevation of the bed of the stream or other body of water or as indicated on the plans or in the Special Provisions .
COMPENSATION .
Method of Measurement .
Ordinary borrow shall be measured as described under Subsection .. .
Basis of Payment .
The work will be paid for at the contract lump sum price under the respective item for the particular building structure or bridge designated to be demolished as set forth in the Proposal which price shall include full compensation for all the work prescribed herein except furnishing and placing ordinary borrow for cover where required. . Payment Items. . Demolition of Building No .
___ or Structure No .
___ Lump Sum .
Demolition of Superstructure of Bridge No .
___ Lump Sum .
Demolition of Bridge No.___ or Structure No .
___ Lump Sum .
Ordinary Borrow Cubic Meter SECTION CONTROL OF RODENTS DESCRIPTION .
General .
The work to be done consists of the control extermination of rodents prior to the demolition of buildings in dump areas landfills or other areas so designated by the Engineer .
CONSTRUCTION METHODS .
Control Extermination .
This work shall consist of two phases as follows .
Initial Treatment .
This phase shall start immediately after execution of the Contract and shall be applied in all buildings to be razed and to all other buildings and areas within the limits of construction where in the Engineers judgment rodents have gathered or may gather during the construction period .
A toxic material consisting of zinc phosphide prepackaged acute toxicants or another acute anticoagulant which has been approved by the Massachusetts Department of Food and AgriculturePesticide Board with a suitable bait shall be used .
The treated bait shall be placed in all structures to be demolished so as to attract the greatest possible number of rodents and in accordance with best practices . .
Maintenance .
One week more or less as directed after the Initial Treatment the Contractor shall start a program of maintenance to rid the structures and adjacent areas within the limits of this Contract of any remaining rodents their Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
carcasses and to prevent their migration to other adjacent areas .
The toxicant should be an acute anticoagulant premixed bait and used in accordance with the labeled and regulatory laws .
All visible carcasses of rodents shall be removed and disposed of satisfactorily .
The toxic bait shall be renewed semimonthly or as directed throughout said maintenance period until the structures have been demolished and the cellar holes have been filled to the extent required .
All extermination operations shall be in accordance with the rules and regulations of the Municipality and State Health Departments .
COMPENSATION .
Basis of Payment .
The work will be paid for at the contract lump sum price. . Payment Item. . Rodent Control Lump Sum SECTION EXCAVATION DESCRIPTION .
General .
This work shall consist of excavation disposal or compaction of all materials not being removed under some other item which is encountered within the limits of the Contract in accordance with the specifications and in close conformity with the lines grades thicknesses and cross sections shown on the plans or established by the Engineer .
All excavation will be classified as Earth Excavation Class A Rock Excavation Muck Excavation Topsoil Excavated and Stacked Bituminous Concrete Excavation by Cold Planer and Unclassified Excavation as hereafter described .
Materials from all classes of excavation which are unsuitable and any surplus of suitable materials remaining after completing the formation of embankments shoulders approaches widening of roadway or embankment slopes as directed or backfilling will be known as waste and shall be disposed of by the Contractor outside the RightofWay at hisher responsibility and expense unless otherwise directed .
Waste material shall not be disposed of in the flood channel areas of any stream. . Earth Excavation .
Earth Excavation shall consist of all excavation not included as Class A Rock Excavation or excavation which is otherwise classified and paid for .
Unless otherwise provided for in the Contract Earth Excavation shall also include as incidental to the general work the removal and disposal of abandoned junk cars trash signs fences guardrails guide posts bituminous concrete berms and debris of every nature. . Class A Rock Excavation .
When encountered within the limits of roadway or channel excavation unless otherwise provided for the Proposal .
Class A Rock Excavation shall consist of Igneous metamorphic and sedimentary rock which can not be excavated without blasting or the use of rippers .
All rock stone parts of stone brick or cement concrete pavement parts of cemented stone walls or masonry Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
structures measuring one cubic meter or more that require blasting for removal. . Muck Excavation .
Muck excavation shall consist of the removal and disposal of saturated or unsaturated mixtures of soils and organic matter not suitable for foundation material regardless of moisture content. . Topsoil Excavated and Stacked .
The work to be done under this item consists of excavating topsoil from certain locations listed on the details sheet and where directed to the depths shown on the cross sections or as directed and stacking the topsoil in accordance with the provisions of Subsection .. . Bituminous Concrete by Cold Planer .
The work to be done under this item consists of removing by Cold Planer bituminous concrete in designated areas. . Unclassified Excavation .
This work shall consist of all earth excavation as specified in Subsection .
rock excavation as specified in Subsection .
and all other excavation not provided for elsewhere in the Contract .
CONSTRUCTION METHODS .
General .
A. Sequence of Operations .
When required the Contractor shall so prosecute hisher work that traffic will be maintained over and through the work with a maximum of safety and convenience in accordance with the provisions of Subsection .
Public Safety and Convenience .
The sequence of all excavation operations earth or rock shall be such as to insure the most efficient utilization of excavated materials into embankments as specified in Section and the use of a minimum amount of borrow .
When the plans require excavation in areas in close proximity to existing roads structures and utilities it shall be the responsibility of the Contractor at hisher expense to construct suitable drainage ditches or use other satisfactory means and methods to protect and maintain the stability of such roads and structures located immediately adjacent to but outside the limits of excavation .
The Contractors attention is directed to the requirements of the Prevention of Water Pollution and Erosion .
The Contractor shall prosecute the work as to prevent the ponding of water .
Each lift of excavation shall be visibly crowned to allow drainage of surface and rain water .
B .
Disposal of Excavated Materials .
All suitable materials obtained from the excavation or from the removal of present structures shall be used either in the formation of embankments shoulders slopes loam or clay hardening etc .
or for backfill under over or around structures pipe culverts or drains and at such other places as directed and the material shall be placed and compacted in a manner conforming to the specifications for the particular type of work required without additional compensation .
It shall be the Contractors responsibility to obtain from the Engineer approval for the use and placing of various materials encountered in excavation .
It shall be the Contractors responsibility to dispose of material designated as unsuitable and any excavated material which is not required except as noted in Paragraph C of this subsection outside of the RightofWay in such a manner as not to obstruct streams or otherwise impair the drainage appearance safety or efficiency of any structure or any other part of the road .
No materials from the excavation nor from construction shall be deposited in flood plains nor within Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
meters of any body of water without compliance under provisions of Chapter Section of the Massachusetts Wetlands Protection Act .
Notification to the Engineer in writing will be required wherein such filling has been authorized by the local Conservation Commission .
No excavated material shall be placed outside of and adjacent to the RightofWay without the written approval of the Engineer .
The Contractor shall certify heshe has proper releases from property owners within meters of RightofWay which is used as disposal areas for unsuitable material .
The Contractor shall construct sod or other adequate retaining banks around perimeters of the disposal areas outside the project to protect existing roads stream channels and adjoining properties including underground water supplies against the spread of or contamination by the excavated material .
Stream channels and ditches within and adjacent to the project shall be maintained as at present or as specifically altered by the design of the project .
All waste areas shall be thoroughly stabilized by means of drains proper grading mulching loaming and seeding as required to promote vegetation and to insure the areas will not be subject to erosion .
C. Grading Outside of the Location .
Where directed earth loam or borrow of the kind required shall be used for grading outside of the Rightof Way and the surface shall be raked smoothed and rolled .
Excavation shall be made as directed on slopes or surfaces outside of and adjoining the location .
When temporary or existing roads are abandoned within the limits of highway work and beyond the limits of the main roadway slopes their surfaces shall be removed and graded and loamed for a neat and natural appearance for proper drainage of surface water as directed. . Earth Excavation .
This work shall be performed in the manner specified in Subsection .
and Subsection .. . Class A Rock Excavation .
Class A Rock Excavation shall be performed in accordance with the requirements specified in Subsection .
with the following additional requirements The Contractor shall prosecute hisher work so that all rock available for disposal in embankments shall be removed previous to the final embankment formation .
Rock shall be partially or completely stripped of overburden as directed before removal operations are begun .
Loose or shattered fragments of rock which may be a hazard to traffic shall be removed from the slopes. . Presplitting Rock .
Presplitting shall be required in rock cuts meters or more in vertical height where designed slope is horizontal to vertical or steeper .
Rock cuts more than meters in vertical height may be presplit in stages lifts at the option of the Contractor provided that no stage shall be less than meters in depth and further provided that no payment will be made for additional excavated quantities caused by offsetting presplitting holes beyond the specified face in the top on successive stages .
Presplitting holes in successive stages shall be offset not more than millimeters inside of the previously presplit face .
Prior to the blasting of any rock for removal the Contractor shall presplit the rock along the designated cut face by the method hereinafter described to produce a uniform plane of rupture so that the resulting face will not be affected by subsequent fragmentation blasting and excavation operations .
The Contractor shall adjust hisher blasting operations according to the characteristics and structure of the rock formation to obtain the required slope without fracturing the rock beyond the presplit face .
The sequence of operations shall be as follows unless otherwise directed .
Remove all overburden soil within the areas of proposed fragmentation blasting to expose the rock surface . .
Drill millimeter or millimeter nominal diameter holes not more than meter on centers along the top of the proposed slope line and at the required inclination to the full depth of the cut or to a predetermined stage lift Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
elevation .
Presplit holes shall deviate not more than millimeters at any point from the plane of specified slope nor more than millimeters at any point from a vertical plane through the top of the hole and normal to the plane of slope. . Fragmentation blast holes shall be positioned so that no portion of any blast hole shall be within meter of the designated presplit face unless otherwise permitted by the Engineer .
The plane of presplitting slope as originally drilled shall not be penetrated by subsequent fragmentation blast holes . .
The Contractor shall inspect and test each hole to determine the possible presence of any obstruction before placing the charge .
No loading shall be permitted until the hole is clear of all obstructions .
Precautions shall be used in placing the charge to prevent cavingin of material from the wall of the hole. . Cartridge explosives prepared and packaged by explosive manufacturing firms and approved by the Engineer shall be used in presplitting holes except with prior permission of the Engineer either of the following charges may be used as an alternative provided the results are satisfactory a Continuous column commercial explosives manufactured especially for presplitting .
b Multiple strands of highstrength detonating fuse Primacord taped together at .
meter to .
meter intervals . .
The spacing of the dynamite charge in each hole shall be accomplished by securely taping or attaching by other approved means each piece of dynamite to the detonating fuse at the selected intervals or by deckloading .
If the latter method is used the dynamite must be in intimate contact with the detonating fuse to assure detonation of all charges. . All space in each hole not occupied with the explosive charge shall be filled with .
millimeter crushed stone meeting the requirements of Materials Subsection M No other material or type of stemming will be permitted . .
The detonation of presplit charges shall precede the detonation of adjacent fragmentation charges within the section by a minimum of milliseconds. . Muck Excavation .
The work of muck excavation shall be performed in accordance with the requirements of Subsection .
with the following additional requirements .
Muck shall be excavated to the estimated widths and depths shown on the plans andor so as to completely remove the muck .
Where a proposed bridge or other structure comes within the limits of muck excavation that portion of the excavation within the limits of the proposed structure will be paid for as Muck Excavation. . Topsoil Excavated and Stacked .
This work shall consist of removing topsoil and stacking it where and as directed in accordance with the relevant requirements of Sections and .
Such of the topsoil as will be selected after testing by Department of material obtained from test pits shall be stacked neatly outside the limits of the proposed slopes within the RightofWay or such material may be temporarily stacked by the Contractor outside the RightofWay for hisher own convenience with the approval of the Engineer in which case the Contractor shall be responsible for all arrangements and negotiations .
If the material stacked outside the RightofWay is not available when needed for use on the project the Contractor will furnish at hisher expense an equal volume of equal material .
If the temporary storage areas outside the RightofWay require clearing and grubbing the Contractor shall do such work without additional compensation .
Storage areas shall be cleared grubbed and rough graded so that maximum amount of stacked material will be available for reuse .
The Contractor shall take reasonable care to avoid leaving any unsightly condition and to avoid unnecessary damage or injury to natural surroundings and roadside growth .
The landscape shall be left in a satisfactory neat and trim condition upon completion of the work .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II. . Bituminous Concrete Excavation by Cold Planer .
This work consists of removing bituminous concrete by Cold Planer in designated areas .
The Cold Planer must be equipped with an elevating device capable of loading planed material directly into dump trucks while operative .
It shall have all necessary safety devices such as reflectors headlights taillights flashing lights and back up signals so as to operate safely in traffic both day andor night .
The Cold Planer shall be designed and built for planing flexible pavements and possess the ability to plane cement concrete patches when encountered in bituminous pavement .
It shall be selfpropelled and have the means for planing without tearing or gouging the underlying surface .
Variable lacing patterns shall be provided to permit a rough grooved or smooth surface as directed .
A millimeter cut to predetermine grade or any specified lesser depth may be required in one pass .
The minimum width of pavement planed in each pass shall be meters except in areas to be trimmed and edged .
The machine shall be adjustable as to crown and depth and meet the standards set by the Air Quality Act for noise and air pollution .
The milled or planed surface shall conform generally to the grade and cross slope required .
The surface shall not be torn gouged shoved broken or excessively grooved .
It shall be free of imperfections in workmanship that prevent resurfacing after this operation .
Surface texture shall be as specified by the Engineer and excess material shall be removed so that the surface is acceptable to traffic if required. . Unclassified Excavation .
This work shall consist of the excavation removal and satisfactory disposal in accordance with the relevant provisions of Section .
of all materials listed under Section necessary for the construction of the proposed work as shown on the Plans or as directed except those materials for which payment is specified under other items of the Contract .
COMPENSATION .
Method of Measurement .
All classes of excavation except topsoil will be measured in their original position by the cross section method except where such measurement is impracticable the volume shall be measured by such other methods as the Engineer may determine .
In any case payments will be made only for excavation to lines and grades as indicated on the plans or as directed .
Pay limits for rock excavation actually removed will be as follows .
For side slopes .
a In excavation for side slopes up to a limit of millimeters beyond and parallel to slope lines either shown on the plan or ordered in writing by the Engineer .
b No allowance will be made for rock excavation beyond these specified lines in side slopes except that if ordinary borrow is required for the work and excess rock excavation is used in embankments such rock will be paid for as ordinary borrow. . Rock excavation in curb and edging trenches not already paid for in previous rock excavation will be paid up to a width of millimeters providing rock extends to that width. . For area between side slopes .
a In excavation to subgrade an allowance of a depth of millimeters below subgrade lines .
b In any other rock excavation an allowance of a depth of millimeters below lines of proposed excavation .
Boulders which are to be included in the item for rock excavation will be measured at the point of removal .
Presplitting of rock will be measured by the square meter of exposed rock face measured from the top of Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
exposed rock to the bottom of the Class A Rock Excavation at the presplit face as directed .
Topsoil excavation will be measured in its original position by measuring the surface area of topsoil to be removed and measuring the depth to be removed by test pits prior to removal or by the cross section method as determined by the Engineer .
Bituminous Concrete Excavation by Cold Planer will be measured by the square meter to the limits shown on the plans or as directed . .
Basis of Payment .
All classes of excavation will be paid for at the contract unit price for the particular type of excavation as defined hereinbefore .
In Contracts where ordinary borrow is required excavated material taken by the Contractor with the prior written permission of the Engineer and used on the project for purposes other than for forming embankments will be paid for at the contract price for the purpose of which it is used in addition to the payment to be made for excavation provided that any additional filling material made necessary by such use shall be replaced except Bituminous Concrete excavated by Cold Planer .
The amount of borrow to be replaced shall be as follows .
If Class A Rock Excavation is used in revetment the revetment shall be measured in its final position and this computed quantity shall be divided by .
and the resulting quantity shall be the amount of borrow to be replaced . .
If Earth Excavation is used for gravel borrow special borrow etc .
the amount of gravel borrow special borrow etc .
as computer including any percentage added to in place measurement shall be the amount of borrow to be replaced .
Payment shall be made only for the purpose the borrow was used until such time as replacement borrow is supplied at which time an equal volume of excavation will be paid for .
In Contracts where excavated materials are used as described in the paragraph above and no additional filling material is required the following will govern .
Material such as gravel sand special borrow or impervious soil borrow obtained in excavation and used as gravel sand borrow special borrow or impervious soil borrow will be paid for only at the contract price for the purpose used. . Topsoil obtained in excavation and stacked for future use on the project will be paid for at the contract unit price for the item of Topsoil Excavated and Stacked which price will include excavating for test pits required but if such future use necessitates rehandling and spreading payment will also be made at the contract unit price for Topsoil Rehandled and Spread. . No deduction from the item of Class A Rock Excavation will be made on account of the use of boulders or rock fragments in masonry or in revetment .
Presplitting of rock will be paid for at the contract unit price per square meter of exposed presplit rock face .
Bituminous Concrete Excavation by Cold Planer will be paid for at the contract unit price per square meter. . Payment Items. . Earth Excavation Cubic Meter .
Unclassified Excavation Cubic Meter .
Class A Rock Excavation Cubic Meter .
Presplitting Rock Square Meter .
Muck Excavation Cubic Meter .
Topsoil Excavated and Stacked Cubic Meter .
Bituminous Concrete Excavation by Cold Planer Square Meter Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
SECTION EXCAVATION FOR STRUCTURES DESCRIPTION .
General .
Excavation for foundations of bridges culverts pipe drains masonry walls and other structures shall be made to the depth and lines indicated on the plans or established by the Engineer. . Bridge Excavation .
Bridge excavation shall include excavation required for construction of bridges culverts having a clear square span of .
meters or more end walls and wingwalls that are part of these structures and major wall structures as designated in the Contract Documents .
The excavation shall include the removal and satisfactory disposal of materials including piles sheeting and timbers encountered in these constructions .
In areas where unsuitable material is removed and backfilled under Item Muck Excavation the excavation of the backfill shall be included under bridge excavation .
All other material encountered in the above noted construction except that classified as Class B Rock Excavation and Muck Excavation as defined in these specifications will be classified as Earth Excavation. . Class A Trench Excavation .
Unless otherwise shown on the plans Class A Trench Excavation shall include the removal and satisfactory disposal of all materials except Class B Rock Excavation that are encountered in the construction or demolition of masonry culverts and other structures having a clear square span of less than .
meters masonry inlets culvert ends masonry walls revetment test pits paved waterways construction of drains for slope or subgrade stabilization and in the construction widening straightening or deepening of drainage ditches and water courses in connection with pipes or structures having a clear span of less than .
meters .
Test pits to locate underground services shall be excavated where directed and will be classed as Class A Trench Excavation .
The Contractor shall take special care during this excavation to avoid damage to any underground structures or utilities .
When necessary the Contractor shall cooperate with representatives of public service companies in order to avoid damage to their structures by permitting them to erect suitable supports props shoring or other means of protection. . Class B Trench Excavation .
Class B Trench Excavation shall include the removal and satisfactory disposal of all materials except Class B Rock Excavation encountered in the construction of drainage and water pipes greater than the .
meter maximum depth specified in Section .
Trench excavation for pipe laying in roadway cuts shall include only that portion of the trench which is below the roadway excavation except where the Engineer orders in writing that the trench excavation and its backfill shall be completed before the roadway excavation is begun. . Channel Excavation .
Channel Excavation shall include the removal and satisfactory disposal of all materials other than those classified as Bridge Excavation Trench Excavation Muck Excavation or Rock Excavation when encountered in the excavation for streams or rivers or excavation on new locations for same in connection with drainage structures having a clear span of .
meters or more .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II. . Class B Rock Excavation .
This item shall include the removal and satisfactory disposal when encountered in the excavation for drainage structures fences highway guard posts bounds pipes ducts walls open trenches and bridge structures of A Boulders measuring cubic meter or more and all solid rock that requires blasting or breaking by hand power tools such as jackhammers etc .
prior to removal .
B Masonry removed from the walls covers and other portions of existing drainage structures also plain and reinforced concrete pavements and masonry removed from bridge substructures .
Removal operations shall be so prosecuted that no damage will be caused to adjacent structures or property. . Drainage Structures Abandoned or Removed .
The work shall consist of the removal and stacking of iron castings the plugging of inlets and outlets and the filling of all drainage structures designated to be abandoned and the removal of all masonry and filling the cavity of the drainage structures designated to be removed .
CONSTRUCTION METHODS .
General .
A. Sequence of Operations .
The Contractor shall prosecute hisher work so as to conform to the requirements of Subsection .A .
B .
Disposal of Excavated Materials .
The Contractor shall prosecute hisher work so as to conform to the requirements of Subsection .B .
C. Cofferdams .
Cofferdams for foundation construction shall be carried to adequate depths and heights shall be safely designed and as watertight as necessary for the proper performance of the work which must be done inside them .
Sheeting shall be driven to a sufficient depth below the proposed foundation grade to permit reasonable change in depth of the proposed foundation to a maximum of millimeters except where solid rock is encountered .
The interior dimensions shall be sufficient for the unobstructed and satisfactory completion of such construction work as pile driving form building inspection and pumping .
Cofferdams which become tilted or are displaced during the process of building the substructure shall be righted reset or enlarged as may be necessary to provide the necessary clearances and this shall be at the sole expense of the Contractor .
Cofferdams shall be dewatered and the proposed masonry footings placed in the dry .
Cofferdams shall be constructed so as to protect masonry against damage from a sudden rising of water and to prevent damage to the foundation by erosion .
No part of the cofferdam shall be left in such a way as to extend into the substructure masonry without written permission of the Engineer .
Upon request the Contractor shall submit plans to the Engineer for hisher information showing hisher proposed method of cofferdam construction prior to the start of such construction .
The furnishing of such plans and methods shall not serve to relieve the Contractor of any of hisher responsibility for the safety of the work or the responsibility for the successful completion of the project .
Where the plans indicate construction of a tremie concrete seal below the footing or if in the Engineers opinion a tremie seal is necessary heshe may require the placing of underwater concrete of such dimensions as necessary to safely dewater the foundations and place the footing concrete in the dry .
All tremie concrete seals shall be placed as shown on the plans or as directed by the Engineer .
Before placing the underwater concrete the inside walls of the cofferdam shall be thoroughly cleaned and the walls made sufficiently tight to reduce the velocity of water to less than meters per minute .
The elevation of the water inside the cofferdam shall be controlled during the placing and the curing of the concrete .
Concrete shall not be placed in water having a temperature below C. No pumping of water shall be permitted while concrete is being placed nor until Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
the concrete has cured a minimum of hours .
Once concreting has started the tremie shall not be moved laterally through the deposited concrete .
When necessary to move the tremie it shall be lifted out of the concrete and moved to the new position .
Unless otherwise directed by the Engineer spacing of the tremies shall be at the Contractors option .
After each excavation is completed the Contractor shall notify the Engineer and no construction shall be started until the Engineer has approved the depth of the excavation and the character of the foundation material .
Unless otherwise provided all parts of the cofferdams shall be removed after the completion of the substructure care being taken not to disturb or otherwise injure the finished masonry .
Sheet piling used in the construction of cofferdams may be left in place at the option of the Contractor provided it is cut off at an elevation as may be directed by the Engineer and the cutoff portions are removed from the site .
D. Excavation for Stepped Footings .
Where the footings for bridges are shown stepped the Contractor shall sheet and shore the existing ground so that adjacent sections of the footings will rest on undisturbed ground according to the pattern shown on the plans .
The sheeting shall be strong enough to support the earth along the designated lines tight enough to restrain the fines in the concrete and shall be left in place to the extent required to hold the concrete that is to be placed against it .
Before the concrete is placed the sheeting shall be cut so that none of the sheeting will extend into the concrete .
Shoring and bracing shall be removed .
If rock is encountered it shall be stepped to the pattern shown and sheeting will not be required .
E. Water Control in Foundation Area .
When concrete for the foundations of a structure is to be placed in the dry the Contractor shall use such equipment and perform hisher operations in such a manner that boiling or other disturbances of the ground in the foundation area will be prevented and shall keep the area being excavated dry by such means that will prevent the entering of water through or from the adjacent ground if such entering water could affect the stability of the foundation material or the adjacent ground or the foundations .
No surface pumping will be allowed .
Water shall be controlled by means of properly screened sumps or well points .
If sumps are used they shall be installed at strategic locations but not closer than .
meters from the nearest edge of the footing .
The contractor shall provide temporary diversion channels excavations embankments sheeting drains flumes well point dewatering systems pumps or other effective procedures or structures together with all labor materials and equipment necessary for dewatering the foundation areas .
Such work shall be subject to the approval of the Engineer but such approval will not relieve Contractor of responsibility for the adequacy of construction maintenance operation and safety of the water control system .
Upon completion of the work all temporary embankments and structures shall be removed from the site .
All temporary excavations shall be backfilled in accordance with the applicable provisions of Section for forming embankments or as directed .
F. Shoring and Bracing of Trenches .
Shoring and bracing of trenches and other excavations shall be in accordance with the requirements of the Department of Labor and Industries Industrial Bulletin No .
Section dated April and subsequent amendments .
G. Excavation .
Trenches for pipes structural pipes arches and pipe arches shall be excavated to the required line and grade and of sufficient width to permit thorough tamping of backfill material under the haunches .
Soft or unsuitable material existing below the required bedding grade shall be removed as directed and replaced with sand gravel crushed stone or other suitable material and thoroughly compacted .
Rock or boulders shall be removed below the bedding grade as specified in Subsection .. All materials excavated from pipe trenches and subdrain trenches and not used in the backfill of the trench will be used as part of the embankment when deemed suitable for this purpose by the Engineer and no deduction will be made from the inplace measurement of the embankment .
If cross pipes conduits drains or other unforeseen obstacles are encountered during the excavation the proposed line and grade of the pipe may be altered but only as directed by the Engineer .
When pipes structural pipes arches and pipe arches are to be installed in new embankments the Contractor shall first construct and compact the embankment to an elevation at least millimeters above the proposed flow line .
When culverts storm drains or sewer pipes are to be installed in roadway areas on traveled ways the edges of Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
the trench through the pavement shall be cut to a neat line using an approved pavement breaker or power saw. . Channel Excavation .
The excavation shall be made and the bank sloped as shown on the plans or as directed .
Unless otherwise directed the banks outside of the limits of a bridge structure shall be cut to a vertical to horizontal slope .
Within the limits of the bridge structure the banks shall be cut to the slope required for revetment .
No waste or surplus excavation shall be left within .
meters from the edge of the ditch or channel .
Any such surplus or waste material shall be spread in a thin uniform layer .
All ditches and channels constructed on the project shall be maintained to the required cross section and shall be kept free from debris until final acceptance. . Class B Rock Excavation .
If a rock is encountered in a location such that it may be used as a part of a base footing wing or abutment of any structure it shall not be removed .
The surface of all rock or other hard material upon which masonry is to be placed shall be freed from all loose fragments cleaned and cut to a firm surface .
The surface shall be level stepped or serrated as directed by the Engineer .
All structures shall be founded on uniform bearing materials .
If rock is encountered at portions of the bottom of the foundation for bridges box culverts structural plate pipe structural plate pipe arches and end walls and wingwalls that are a part of these structures the rock shall be removed to a minimum depth of millimeters below the bottom of foundation for a depth of fill on the structure up to meters .
For fills over meters the depth of excavation shall be increased millimeters for every additional millimeters of fill .
The excavation shall be backfilled with gravel borrow and compacted .
Payment for such excavation will be made under the item for Class B Rock Excavation .
Where wingwalls are not integral with the bridge or culvert the overdepth excavation will not be required. . Drainage Structures Abandoned or Removed .
The present castings shall be carefully removed .
They shall be satisfactorily stored and protected until they are required for use or until they are removed from the project by the owners .
Inlets and outlets of structures to be abandoned shall be plugged with brick masonry not less than millimeters in thickness conforming to Section .
Upper portions of the masonry shall be removed to a depth of millimeters below the finished grade at the location designated by the Engineer and the structures shall be completely filled with selected excavated material placed in millimeter layers and thoroughly compacted .
The existing masonry of structures to be removed shall be completely removed .
The cavity shall be completely filled with selected excavated materials placed in millimeter layers and thoroughly compacted .
COMPENSATION .
Method of Measurement .
All classes of excavation for structures will be measured in their original position by the cross section method except that where such measurement is impracticable the volume shall be measured by such other methods as the Engineer may determine .
In calculating excavation for structures the sides of the excavation will be considered vertical .
Bridge Excavation shall be measured as follows Unless otherwise shown on the plan the quantity of excavation shall be computed within the following limits .
Horizontally to vertical planes millimeters outside of and parallel to the neat lines of masonry bases or footings .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II. . Horizontally to vertical planes millimeters outside of and parallel to the inside walls of structural plate pipes and arches spans .
meters or more and without masonry footings at their widest dimensions. . Horizontally to vertical limits of crushed stone or gravel borrow for bridge foundation as shown on the plans. . Vertically from the bottom of the earth excavation limits of proposed roadway andor design slopes carried through the structure location or existing ground surface whichever is lower to the bottom of the required excavation as determined by the Engineer .
In areas where unsuitable material is removed and backfilled under Item Muck Excavation excavation of the backfill will be measured horizontally and vertically as above except the upper limit of excavation shall be millimeters above the swamp or millimeters above any water that is present whichever is higher .
Where masonry is ordered removed from existing substructures only the actual quantity ordered removed shall be measured for payment .
Excavation made outside the lines prescribed for payment will be considered as made for the Contractors convenience and will not be included for payment under any item of excavation nor will the refilling of any such area be included under any item of filling material .
Class A Trench Excavation shall be measured as follows For masonry culverts having a clear square span of less than .
meters inlets and walls a width of millimeters outside the base of the masonry section shown on the plans and to the depth required .
Trench excavation for walls in cuts shall include only that portion below the elevation of the subgrade adjacent to the wall .
For walls where an embankment is proposed trench excavation shall be only that portion between the existing ground and the bottom of the foundation .
All other Class A Trench Excavation will be measured according to the amount of materials removed to the lines and grades shown on the plans or as directed .
Class B Trench Excavation shall be measured as follows For pipe culverts drains and water pipes the depth of excavation shall be measured from the bottom of the pipe barrel to the bottom of the roadway excavation or existing ground whichever is lower as determined above the center line of the pipe less .
meters .
The width of excavation shall be meter greater than the rated inside diameter of the pipe up to a point .
meters above the bottom of the pipe barrel and a width above that point equivalent to the base width plus an allowance for to slopes on the sides of the trench for the measured depth described above .
The allowance for to slopes will be included regardless of the actual scope excavated or whether sheeting or shoring is used that is not included for payment under Section .
The sides of the trench excavation will be considered vertical when sheeting is used and paid for separately under Section and the width shall be meter greater than the inside diameter of the pipe .
If necessary to obtain a satisfactory foundation for pipe culverts drains and water mains trenches shall be excavated deeper than normally required for bedding the pipe and such excavation below the barrel of the pipe will be measured for payment under this item .
The width of trench shall be meter greater than the rated inside diameter of the pipe and the depth shall be the actual depth as directed by the Engineer .
Class B Rock Excavation shall be measured as follows Pay limit for rock excavation actually removed in all masonry culverts walls and bridges will be up to a limit of millimeters outside of the foundation .
This rock excavation in cuts shall include only that portion below the limits of payment of Roadway Earth Excavation or Class A Rock Excavation and in embankment only that portion below the surface of the existing ground .
Pay limit for rock actually excavated in pipe trenches will be made to a width of millimeters greater than the rated inside diameter of the pipe barrel providing rock extends to that width .
The maximum depth of rock to be paid for shall be equal to the difference in depth between the top of the original rock in the trench and a line millimeters below the bottom of the outside of the pipe barrel .
No part of any rock remaining in the trench shall come within millimeters of any portion of the pipe .
Rock actually excavated in the construction of catch basins manholes and leaching basins will be calculated on a basis of millimeters outside of the outer walls and millimeters below the bottom of the structure .
Rock excavation in subdrain trenches will be measured as specified above for pipe trenches .
Rock excavation in post and bound holes not already paid for in previous rock excavation shall be based on an area of .
square meters multiplied by the depth of rock encountered in the post or bound hole required plus millimeters .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
Rock excavation in channel excavation will be measured as specified in Subsection ..
The unit of measurement for drainage structure abandoned or removed will be each structure abandoned for each structure removed complete . .
Basis of Payment .
Excavation for structures will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic meter under the item for the particular type of excavation encountered .
The unit price per cubic meter shall include all backfilling when the materials are obtained from excavation all clearing and grubbing except as may be otherwise provided on the plans or in the Specifications all excavations for the structure formation of embankments disposal of surplus material and the furnishing of all equipment tools labor and work incidental thereto .
If cofferdams sheeting shoring bracing dewatering system or other method of control for excavation are not specific items in the Contract no allowance in addition to the prices bid for any items in the Contract will be made for such controls or for labor equipment or materials required .
If any change in depth of foundation greater than millimeters or in other dimensions of the foundation is directed by the Engineer after the controls have been provided and if such change is greater than can be accommodated by the controls as constructed by the Contractor with the approval of the Engineer then any changes made as directed by the Engineer will be paid for in accordance with the Contract provisions for Extra Work .
Excavation borrow concrete or other items of work done within the controlled area will be paid for only at the contract prices for these items unless the operations require different or additional equipment or labor in addition to or different from that required for the original design of the control .
If such different or additional equipment or labor is required to perform the operation for the pay unit of an item the additional costs will be paid for under Extra Work .
Where salvage of material is involved in the additional work the value of the salvage shall be deducted from the additional payment .
Backfilling when not obtained from excavation will be paid for at the contract unit price for the kind of material used .
Bridge Excavation will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic meter under Item Bridge Excavation .
Bridge excavation within a cofferdam and included in the Proposal as a separate pay item will be paid under Item .
Bridge Excavation within Cofferdam .
All other excavation encountered in the construction of bridges culverts spans .
meters or more and major wall structures not otherwise defined in these specifications will be classified and paid for as Earth Excavation .
Class A Trench Excavation will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic meter of Class A Trench Excavation except that where the depth is greater than .
meters that excavation below the .
meter depth will be paid for at a price per cubic meter equal to times the price bid per cubic meter for Class A Trench Excavation with the exception that no addition to unit bid price will be allowed for excavation of open ditches that may exceed .
meters in depth for excavation required for the construction of revetment regardless of the depth .
Test pits exclusively for the purpose of locating existing underground structures and conduits where directed regardless of depth will be paid for at times the contract unit price per cubic meter for Class A Trench Excavation .
Class B Trench Excavation will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic meter for Class B Trench Excavation .
Channel excavation except rock will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic meter of Channel Excavation which price shall include full compensation for all handling stacking or rehandling of excavated material .
Where channel excavation is made adjacent to a bridge or other structure the limits of pavement for channel excavation begin at the outer limits of payment for excavation for bridge or other structure .
Excavation for the placing of riprap in channel excavation areas where required will be included under the item of Channel Excavation .
Rock excavation except in channel excavation will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic meter of Class B Rock Excavation .
Class B Rock excavated within a cofferdam constructed of lumber wood or steel sheeting will be paid for at times the contract unit price per cubic meter of Class B Rock Excavation .
Rock excavation in channel excavation will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic meter of Class A Rock Excavation .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
Drainage structures abandoned will be paid for at the contract unit price each under the item for Drainage Structures Abandoned .
Drainage structures removed will be paid for at the contract unit price each under the item for Drainage Structures Removed. . Payment Items. . Bridge Excavation Cubic Meter .
Bride Excavation Within Cofferdam Cubic Meter .
Class A Trench Excavation Cubic Meter .
Class B Trench Excavation Cubic Meter .
Channel Excavation Cubic Meter .
Class B Rock Excavation Cubic Meter .
Drainage Structure Abandoned Each .
Drainage Structure Removed Each .
Class A Rock Excavation Cubic Meter .
Extra Depth Class A Trench Excavation Cubic Meter .
Test Pit Excavation Cubic Meter .
Cofferdam Class B Rock Excavation Cubic Meter SECTION DREDGING DESCRIPTION .
General .
Dredging shall consist of the removal and disposal of all materials within the limits shown on the plan or as laid out in the field .
Materials shall be removed to the depths shown on the plan .
All dredging material will be classified as Material Dredged and Disposed Rock Removed from Dredged Area and Disposed and Ledge Removed from Dredged Area and Disposed .
The Contractors attention is directed to the requirements of Section .
concerning Prevention of Water Pollution and Erosion. . Material Dredged and Disposed .
Material Dredged and Disposed shall consist of all material removed from the dredging area and placed in scows and disposed of where and as directed in the Special Provisions not included are Rocks Removed from Dredged Area and Disposed and Ledge Removed from Dredged Area and Disposed. . Material Dredged and Disposed Hydraulic Method .
Material Dredged and Disposed Hydraulic Method shall consist of all material removed from the dredging area and disposed of by Hydraulic dredging methods where and as described in the Special Provisions not included are Rocks Removed from Dredged Area and Disposed and Ledge Removed from Dredged Area and Disposed .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II . .
Rocks Removed from Dredged Area and Disposed .
Rocks in excess of cubic meter in volume and less than cubic meters in volume which are entirely removed from the dredged areas and deposited at a location approved by the Engineer will be paid for under this item .
No compensation will be made for rocks which are lowered so that they are below the depths of the proposed work. . Ledge Removed from Dredged Area and Disposed .
Ledge or Rocks including masonry in excess of cubic meters in volume encountered within the dredging limits shall be removed and disposed of upon the direction of the Engineer. . Mobilization and Demobilization .
Mobilization and Demobilization shall consist of the mobilization of all the Contractors dredging plant including tugs scows pipe lines pontoons and all equipment at the site of the work prepared to commence dredging operations and upon completion of dredging operations the demobilization and removal of all aforesaid plant and equipment .
CONSTRUCTION METHODS .
General .
The material shall be removed by dredging plant and equipment either by the Hydraulic Method or by placing the material in scows and disposing of it outside of the dredging areas .
The methods to be used will be specified in the Special Provisions .
If no area for the disposal of material is stated in the Special Provisions it shall be the Contractors responsibility for the negotiations necessary to furnish all required areas for disposal of materials .
In the dredging and disposal of dredged material the Contractor will be required to observe all laws of the United States all requirements of the U.S .
Corps of Engineers and all local or state authorities in relation thereto .
The Contractors attention is directed to the fact that material disposal of below mean high water requires a permit from the U.S .
Corps of Engineers and a license from the Commonwealth .
The areas shown on the plans or as laid out in the field shall be dredged so that they shall have throughout upon completion of the work the specified depths over their whole extent as shown on the plans with the banks at the sides sloped at an angle of approximately vertical to horizontal unless otherwise shown on the plan .
The Contractor shall make the bottom of the dredged areas as smooth and level as possible to or slightly below the required depths .
The Contractor shall exercise extreme caution in any location in which the dredging operations are in close proximity to structures .
The Contractor shall bear full responsibility for damage of any nature to structures caused by dredging beyond the limits shown on the plan or as laid out in the field and such damage shall be satisfactorily remedied at the sole expense of the Contractor .
The Contractor shall conduct hisher dredging and disposal operations so as to cause a minimum of interference with navigation .
The Contractor shall furnish regularly to inspectors on board the dredge or other craft upon which they are employed when transportation ashore is impracticable a suitable room for office and sleeping purposes .
The room shall be properly heated ventilated and lighted and shall have a desk which can be locked a comfortable bed and chair for each Inspector and washing conveniences .
If such quarters and conveniences are not provided or the work is so located that transportation ashore can be furnished without interference with the work the Contractor shall provide the Inspector with transportation to and from such points ashore as the Engineer may from time to time designate .
If the Contractor maintains on hisher work an establishment for the subsistence of hisher own employees heshe shall furnish to Inspectors and survey parties when employed on the work meals of satisfactory quality .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
Each Bidder shall state in hisher Proposal whether the plant proposed to be used on the work has facilities for furnishing the meals and accommodations required .
The entire cost to the Contractor for furnishing equipping and maintaining the foregoing accommodations providing transportation ashore and furnishing meals shall be included in the price bid for dredging .
COMPENSATION .
Method of Measurement .
The amount of material dredged and disposed of will be determined by preliminary and final cross sections taken by the Engineer in the dredging area .
If this method is impracticable the Engineer will determine the method of measurement .
If the alternate method of measurement is by measuring the dredging materials in the scows in which it is placed for disposal such actual scow quantities as determined by the measurements shall be divided by .
to compensate for bulking or swelling .
The quotient for this division shall then be the quantity to be paid for .
The quantity of materials shown in the Proposal has been computed to the payment limits .
The Engineer may take additional soundings before the work is started which soundings shall be the preliminary soundings for payment purposes .
Pay limits for material actually dredged and disposed will be as follows A .
Bottom Depth up to and including meters below mean low water plus millimeters below the required depths .
Depths more than meters below mean low water plus millimeters below the required depths .
B .
Side slopes shall be as shown on the plans .
Rocks .
Removed from Dredged areas and Disposed will be determined by measurement made by the Engineer .
Ledge .
Removed from Dredged Areas and Disposed will be determined by preliminary and final cross sections taken by the Engineer in the dredging area .
The overlying material shall be removed prior to the Engineer taking preliminary cross sections .
If this method of measurement is impracticable the Engineer will determine the method of measurement .
Mobilization and Demobilization will be paid for at the contract lump sum price .
The Contractor will be paid sixty percent of the lump sum price upon completion of hisher mobilization at the work site .
The remaining forty percent will be included in the final payment for work under the Contract . .
Basis of Payment .
All classes of dredged material will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic meter for the particular type of material removed and disposed as defined hereinbefore. . Payment Items .
Dredging and Disposing of Material Cubic Meter .
Dredging and Disposing of Material Hydraulic Method Cubic Meter .
Removal and Disposal of Rock from Dredged Areas Cubic Meter .
Removal and Disposal of Ledge from Dredged Areas Cubic Meter .
Dredging Mobilization and Demobilization Lump Sum SECTION EMBANKMENT Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
DESCRIPTION .
General .
Construction of all embankment fill shall be done in accordance with the relevant provisions of Sections and and in accordance with the procedures described herein .
This work comprises the formation of embankments with suitable material obtained from excavation and borrow thoroughly compacted to produce a stabilized embankment .
The work shall be performed in accordance with the lines and grades shown on the plans as directed .
Material available from widened cuts outside the slopes as indicated on the plans or as ordered by the Engineer may be used in embankments or elsewhere upon written request by the Contractor and subsequent written approval by the Engineer .
The Engineer shall determine the suitability of any excavation material for incorporation in the embankment .
If the Contractor desires to waste excavated material and provide borrow to replace it for hisher own convenience heshe may do so only after obtaining the written approval of the Engineer and after satisfactory arrangements have been made for the measurements and disposal of the material .
When it is determined by the Engineer that there is not sufficient material available either from excavation within the RightofWay or the slope lines of the section under Contract for the formation of embankments roadbeds in cut sections foundations shoulders or backfill the Contractor shall obtain such additional material as may be necessary from outside the location and this material will be borrow material . .
Borrow Pit Restrictions .
With the exception of commercial borrow pits the location material removal operation and final shaping and finishing of borrow pits regardless of location must conform with all local and State regulations and for the purpose of preventing water pollution shall be subject to approval by the Engineer prior to use during the material removal operation and upon completion .
Borrow pits shall be so graded and finished after material removal is completed that there can be no reasonable possibility of a safety hazard nor ponding of water nor water pollution caused by later erosion of the pit .
Borrow pits located adjacent to the RightofWay shall be finished by extending the slope of the cross section to a berm to be constructed or left within the RightofWay at the side line .
The berm shall be a minimum of .
meters high and millimeters wide across the top with natural slopes in both directions or as otherwise directed .
The floor of the pit shall slope away from the location line at a minimum rate of for at least meters .
Portions of borrow pits within meters of the project or any other highway location line which may be noticeable from a traveled way residence or place of business shall be neatly trimmed and left in a condition satisfactory to the Engineer .
Particular attention shall be given to make the slopes harmonize with the general appearance of the adjacent landscape provided however that no slope shall be steep enough to constitute a public menace .
No unsightly accumulation of material shall be permitted which may in any manner deface the finished landscape .
The cost for the final shaping and finishing of borrow pits shall be included in the contract unit price of the type of borrow furnished with no additional compensation .
MATERIALS .
General .
All embankment materials whether coming from excavation or borrow shall consist of solid sound mineral aggregate .
It shall be free from deleterious organic elastic or foreign matter and shall be adequately graded for satisfactory compaction into a stabilized soil structure .
These materials will be classified into particular groups according to AASHTO M The Classification of Soils and Soil Aggregate Mixtures for Highway Construction Purposes .
All borrow material to be furnished shall meet the requirements specified in the following Subsections of Division III Materials Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
Ordinary Borrow M .. Gravel Borrow M ..
Sand Borrow M ..
Type b Gravel Borrow for Bridge Foundation M ..
Type a Special Borrow M .. Impervious Soil Borrow M ..
Crushed Stone for Drainage Revetment and Water Work Foundations M ..
Crushed Stone for Bridge Foundation M .. Reclaimed Pavement Borrow Material For Base Course meeting Subsection M .. may be substituted for Ordinary Borrow under the pavement areas .
CONSTRUCTION METHODS .
General .
Prior to starting work the Contractor shall obtain approval for the compaction equipment to be used .
Unless otherwise required in the Special Provisions each layer of embankment material shall be thoroughly compacted with power rollers or tamping rollers .
Other equipment or equivalent compactive capacity may be used subject to trial on the project and approval by the Engineer .
Compacting equipment will not be used for any other purpose during compaction operations .
The use of tractors trucks scrapers or other equipment designed primarily for purposes other than compaction and being used for purposes other than solely compaction will not be considered as compaction equipment but traffic of such vehicles shall be distributed over this fill in such a manner as to take advantage of the additional compaction afforded thereby .
Sufficient leveling and compacting equipment shall be provided to do the work of spreading and compacting the material promptly after it has been deposited .
When in the Engineers judgment such equipment is inadequate to spread and compact the material properly the Contractor shall reduce the rate of excavation and placing of the fill to a rate not to exceed the capacity of the leveling and compacting equipment or employ additional equipment .
The Contractor shall plan hisher grading operation to use all rock possible from all excavation either as backfill in excavated muck areas or in areas of greatest depth .
Before placing of any fill the areas under embankments shall be cleared grubbed and stripped as specified in Section and .
Frozen material shall not be placed on embankments nor shall embankments be placed on material frozen to a depth of over millimeters .
If during the construction of an embankment the top layer becomes frozen to a depth of over millimeters the frozen material shall be removed before a succeeding layer is placed on the embankment .
This work shall be performed at no additional expense to the Department .
Frozen excavated material if suitable when dry shall be allowed to thaw and dry and then be placed in the embankment .
No compensation will be allowed for the storing and rehandling of these materials .
Embankments shall be formed by placing successive layers of material uniformly distributed and compacted over the full width of the cross section unless otherwise directed .
Stumps rubbish sod frozen or other unsuitable materials shall not be incorporated in the embankment .
The Contractor shall prosecute hisher work so that no damage will occur to drainage pipe lines or masonry or brick structures See Subsection .. .
Preparation of Foundation Areas .
The foundation areas shall be cleared grubbed and stripped as required and all soft spongy or other material unsuitable for embankment foundation shall be removed .
When in the Engineers judgment there is reasonable doubt as Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
to the suitability of the existing material for embankment foundation no further work shall be performed in the area in question until the material is tested and approved for use or remedial methods are ordered by the Engineer .
Embankment areas meter or less in height from the subgrade to the existing ground shall be rough graded and compacted to not less than percent of the maximum dry density of the material as determined by the AASHTO Standard Method of Test T Method C at optimum moisture content as determined by the Engineer without additional compensation before placing any fill .
If the material retained on the .
millimeter sieve is or more of the total sample this test shall not apply and the material shall be compacted to the satisfaction of the Engineer .
For embankments greater in height than meter below the proposed subgrade to existing ground no additional embankment foundation area preparation will be required provided the material within the area is suitable for the purpose .
Regardless of the height of fill where embankment is to be placed against existing earth slopes steeper than vertical to horizontal the slope shall be broken up into steps of random width as the fill is placed in order to provide a suitable bond between the existing ground and the new embankment .
Both the material cut out and the bottom of the area cut into shall be compacted along with and to the same degree as the material being placed in the embankment without additional compensation for excavation benching or compacting .
Where foundations for bridges culverts span .
meters or more and major wall structures are to be founded on the embankment the embankment to the extent shown on the plans shall be constructed of Gravel Borrow for Bridge Foundations andor Crushed Stone for Bridge Foundations .
At the sites of footings for abutments piers or other structures having pile foundations the material shall be placed in embankment prior to driving piles and shall be of a quality and grading that will not obstruct driving of the piles .
Where foundations for structures are to be supported on newly formed embankments and where flying wingwalls are to be constructed the embankment shall be placed to an elevation of at least millimeters above the bottom of the proposed foundation or flying wingwalls and thoroughly and satisfactorily compacted .
After the above work is completed the material within the area of the proposed foundation or flying wingwalls will be excavated to the grade of the bottom of the concrete .
Excavation of this compacted fill will be paid for under the item of Bridge Excavation as stipulated in Subsection .. . Embankment Construction With Materials Other Than Rock .
Embankment construction with materials other than rock shall not be placed from December to April except with written permission of and under such special conditions and restrictions as may be imposed by the Engineer .
Embankment meters or more in height from the elevation of the subgrade to the original ground elevation shall be constructed to the elevation of the proposed subgrade and then allowed to settle for days or such other period as the Engineer shall direct in writing before the pavement structure is constructed thereon .
If the condition of the subgrade is suitable not frozen or muddy and is shaped compacted and fine graded within the tolerance provided in the Specification the Contractor may apply and the Engineer may approve the placing but not the fine grading of the subbase prior to the termination of the day waiting period .
Earth embankment shall be placed and compacted in uniform layers not exceeding millimeters in depth loose measurement each layer of material shall be spread on the entire width of the embankment and leveled off by approved equipment .
The embankment materials shall be compacted to not less than percent of the maximum dry density of the embankment material as determined by AASHTO Standard Method of Test T Method C at optimum moisture content .
If the material retained on the .
millimeter sieve is percent or more of the total sample this test shall not apply and the material shall be compacted to the satisfaction of the Engineer .
The Contractor shall without additional compensation employ whatever measures that may be necessary to adjust the natural water content of the suitable embankment material to permit the placement and compaction as hereinbefore specified .
The Engineer during the progress of the work may make tests as required determining the inplace density of the soil by one of the following Standard Methods of Test Density of Soil and Soil Aggregate InPlace by Nuclear Methods Shallow Depth AASHTO T Density of Soil InPlace by the SandCone Method AASHTO T or Density of Soil InPlace by the Rubber Balloon Method T . Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
Each lift of compacted materials shall be visibly crowned to allow drainage of surface and rain waters off the surface of the embankment .
No stones larger than millimeters shall be used to fill where piles are to be driven .
Embankment constructed in basement areas of demolished buildings and other areas restricting the use of power rollers etc .
shall be compacted by mechanical tamping with approved power tools .
If the naturalinplace moisture of the excavated material makes it impractical to compact the soil the Contractor shall dry the soil by disking harrowing blading rotary mixing or by other approved means or compaction of the layer of wet material may be deferred until the layer has dried so that it can be properly compacted .
If these above methods do no produce the desired results or when in the judgment of the Engineer excess moisture resulting from climactic conditions beyond the control of the Contractor is considered to have affected adversely the stability of the previously placed and satisfactorily compacted embankment materials the Engineer may direct the placement of single layers of Special Borrow to act as stabilizing drainage layers .
When so ordered by the Engineer the Contractor shall place a layer of Special Borrow having a depth of not more than millimeters in thickness loose measure .
Such materials shall be placed completely over the entire width between the limits designated by the Engineer and shall be compacted as hereinafter specified before the succeeding layer of suitable embankment materials from the roadway excavation is placed .
The work may be ordered suspended if the weather and climactic conditions are such that the embankment and excavation can not be performed in accordance with the specifications .
No additional compensation will be allowed to the Contractor for such suspension of work .
If the work is ordered suspended due to weather or other climactic conditions not under the control of the Contractor an extension of time may be granted to the Contractor by the Engineer. . Rock in Embankment .
Where rock is used in embankments the materials shall be carefully spread so that all large stones shall be well distributed and the interstices of each layer shall be practically filled with smaller stones and suitable material from excavation or borrow to form a solid and dense layer of embankment .
No rock in excess of millimeters in its largest dimension shall be incorporated in the top millimeter layer of embankment immediately below the subgrade .
The maximum size of boulders or ledge fragments used in embankments shall be such that they can be incorporated into layers not exceeding meter in depth .
Any stones or fragmented material too large to be placed in meter layers shall be broken down by blasting or other means to appropriate size .
Rock in fills shall not be placed adjacent to masonry or brick structures or to any pipe lines .
At bridge abutments rock fill shall not be placed within meters of the backwall of the abutment. . Backfilling for Structures and Pipes .
A .
General .
All backfilling shall consist of suitable materials uniformly distributed and thoroughly compacted .
When suitable backfilling materials can not be obtained from excavation the material shall consist of satisfactory borrow .
When directed mechanical tampers shall be used in compacting backfill for trenches and in hard to reach areas around masonry .
No backfill whatever shall be placed on or against structures pipes or other masonry until permitted by the Engineer .
It shall be formed of successive layers not more than millimeters in depth uniformly distributed and each layer thoroughly compacted .
B .
Structures .
The backfill in back of abutments and wingwalls of bridges shall consist of gravel .
The gravel shall meet the specifications of Subsection M ..
Type b .
Measurement of Gravel Borrow under this work will not include any filling made beyond a vertical plane millimeters outside the footings except as directed .
Whenever backfill is placed in back of or over arches culverts or rigid frames the fill shall be first placed midway between the ends of the structure .
The remainder of the fill shall then be placed to equal depths on both sides of the structure working equally both ways from the center of the structure toward the ends .
This procedure shall continue up to the bottom of the subbase of the roadway .
C. Pipes .
No load greater than kilonewtons shall be moved over any pipe until a fully compacted backfill of at least Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
millimeters has been placed over the top of the pipe .
This minimum will be increased to meter for a kiloNewton single wheel load and to .
meters for a kilonewton single wheel load .
The required fully compacted backfill cover shall be placed a minimum of meters on both sides of the pipe crossing .
However compliance with this requirement is not to be construed as relieving the Contractor of any responsibility concerning damage to the pipe .
Material used for backfilling to a point millimeters over the pipe shall contain no stones larger than millimeters in greatest dimension .
Backfill below the haunches shall be placed in millimeter layers and compacted simultaneously on both sides of the pipe with railroad tampers or approved mechanical rammers which shall not come in contact with the pipe .
Backfill above the haunches shall be placed in millimeter layers and compacted as directed .
Backfill material shall be moist prior to and during compaction .
If directed backfill material shall consist of gravel borrow type c. Backfilling for structural plate pipe pipearches and arches shall be placed evenly on both sides of the structure in layers not exceeding millimeters in depth .
Backfilling shall be placed uniformly on both sides of pipe .
The fill material shall be thoroughly tamped around the pipe or pipearch between the pipe or pipearch and the sides of the trench or for a minimum distance each side of the pipe or pipearch equal to the diameter or span of the structure .
In all cases the filling material shall be thoroughly tamped .
Puddling or jetting the backfill will not be permitted except with written approval of the Engineer. . Backfilling Muck Excavation Areas .
Backfilling after muck is removed shall consist of rock fragments boulders up to .
cubic meters in size if available or selected clean granular material not more than of which will pass through a micrometer sieve as determined by AASHTO Test T . The backfill shall be obtained from suitable excavation on the project or from Special Borrow under Item ..
When rock is used as backfill granular material meeting the specifications described above shall also be provided and used with the rock backfill .
The volume of the granular material shall be sufficient to fill all voids and interstices of the rock backfill .
Where directed backfilling shall be placed immediately after the muck has been excavated in order that any remaining soft material may be pushed ahead of the backfill and readily removed .
The backfill shall be placed at least millimeters above the top of the swamp area or at least millimeters above the level of any water that is present whichever will give the highest elevation of backfill .
The surface of the embankment shall be kept free of unsuitable material .
No muck or unsuitable material shall be entrapped by any successive deposits of fill. . Gravel Borrow for Bridge Foundations .
The gravel shall be placed on firm material free from standing water and thoroughly compacted in layers not exceeding millimeters in depth loose measurement in accordance with the provisions of Subsection .
to a minimum total depth of millimeters except the requirements of AASHTO T shall apply .
In areas where it is not practicable to compact the gravel for bridge foundations by rollers or other rolling moving equipment the compaction shall be accomplished by means of mechanical or pneumatic tampers and the density of the compacted gravel as tested in the field shall not be less than of the laboratory maximum density as determined by AASHTO Test T Method D. If the material retained on the .
millimeter sieve is or more of the total sample this test shall not apply and the material shall be compacted to the satisfaction of the Engineer .
Compaction of the gravel and any adjoining embankment material shall be done simultaneously so that the respective materials will be confined substantially to the indicated lines . .
Crushed Stone for Bridge Foundation .
Crushed stone shall be furnished and placed where shown on the plans and where directed by the Engineer .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
In no case shall crushed stone be placed on other than firm material .
The crushed stone shall be placed to an elevation millimeters above ground water level or lowered water level .
The entire mass of crushed stone shall be compacted into place by overlapping coverage by pneumatic tired earth rollers having wheels abreast and loaded vibratory plate type compactors vibratory rollers or by other means that shall achieve equivalent compaction and are approved by the Engineer .
The compaction operation shall be continued until there is no moving stone directly ahead of the wheels of the moving machine . .
Crushed Stone for Drainage Revetment andor Water Works Foundations .
When directed in writing by the Engineer to place crushed stone in the bottom of the excavation of revetment drainage and water system installation to stabilize the foundation the work will be performed under this item .
The minimum total depth of crushed stone to be placed under this item of work shall be millimeters .
No compaction will be required for depth up to millimeters .
For any depth over millimeters the crushed stone shall be placed and compacted in layers not to exceed millimeters .
Compaction will be accomplished by means of mechanical or pneumatic tampers .
Compaction effects shall continue until the stones are firmly interlocked and the surface is unyielding .
COMPENSATION .
Method of Measurement .
All borrow with the exception of sand borrow and crushed stone will be measured in place .
When this method of measurement is impracticable and the Engineer prior to the start of construction so directs and the Contractor agrees in writing borrow with the exception of sand borrow and crushed stone will be measured in its original position in the pit after stripping by the crosssection method .
When ordinary borrow is paid for as measured in place it shall be measured from existing or compacted old ground surface to the lines and grades applicable to embankment as shown on the plans or as directed .
The volume of ordinary and special borrow when in place measure is necessary shall be determined as follows .
Measure the total volume of embankment in place .
Add .
percent of this quantity for compaction .
Deduct the total volume of all suitable materials available for embankments including rock excavation except that excavated under Section . .
Deduct an additional percent of the volume of rock excavation .
When not measured in its original position in the pit by the cross section method gravel borrow used in subbase gravel for base course gravel for surfacing gravel for bridge foundations and gravel for backfilling around structures and pipes will be paid for as measured in place plus .
When not measured in its original position in the pit by cross section method gravel borrow used in slope stabilization and other miscellaneous uses will be paid as measured in place plus ..
If material that is measured in place is taken from a cross sectioned pit the amount of material to be deducted from the crosssection pit quantity shall be equal to the material measured in place plus any allowable percent added to the in place measurement .
Sand borrow will be measured by the cubic meter by load measurement .
The quantity shall be the volume of the load as measured divided by ..
If stone screenings are used the volume shall be obtained from its mass using kilograms as the mass of a cubic meter of stone screenings .
Crushed stone complete in place will be measured by the metric ton .
The weight slips shall be countersigned on delivery by the Engineer and no weight slip not so countersigned shall be included for any payment under the Contract .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
No overhaul allowance will be made for any kind of borrow . .
Basis of Payment .
Payment for the formation of embankments as specified will be included in the items of excavation or borrow .
Excavated material used with the permission of the Engineer for other than the formation of embankments will be paid for as specified in Subsection .
and such payment shall include full compensation for the formation of the required embankments .
The contact unit prices for the aforesaid items shall constitute full compensation for the satisfactory performance and completion of the entire work .
Borrow will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic meter complete in place which shall include such test pits and borings necessary to procure samples to establish the suitability of the materials and all required stripping operations .
Crushed stone will be paid for at the contract unit price per metric ton complete in place. . Payment Items . .
Ordinary Borrow Cubic Meter .
Special Borrow Cubic Meter .
Gravel Borrow Cubic Meter .
Gravel Borrow Type c Cubic Meter .
Gravel Borrow for Bridge Foundation Cubic Meter .
Gravel Borrow for Backfilling Structures and Pipes Cubic Meter .
Sand Borrow Cubic Meter .
Crushed Stone for Drainage Revetment andor Water Works Foundations Metric Ton .
Crushed Stone for Bridge Foundations Metric Ton SECTION GRADING DESCRIPTION .
General .
The shaping trimming compacting and finishing of the surface of the subgrade the grading and finishing of all unpaved shoulders and slopes and the preparation of all areas for topsoil loam riprap or slope paving as shown on the plans or as directed shall be constructed in accordance with these specifications and in close conforming with the lines grades and typical cross sections shown on the plans or established by the Engineer .
CONSTRUCTION METHODS .
General .
All soft or spongy material below the subgrade shall be removed to a depth to be determined by the Engineer and backfilled with satisfactory material .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
All material within a depth of millimeters below the subgrade in embankment areas shall conform to the requirements of Subsection M .. for Special Borrow Material except that it shall contain no stone larger than millimeters in its greatest dimension and shall be placed and compacted in layers not exceeding millimeters in depth compacted measurement .
In cut sections excluding rock excavation where existing soil within a depth of millimeters below the subgrade after testing is found to comply with the requirements of Subsection M .. for Special Borrow Material it shall not be excavated .
In cut sections excluding rock excavation where the existing soil within a depth of millimeters below the subgrade after testing for gradation requirements is found to have greater than material passing the micrometer sieve the material shall be excavated .
The replacing material shall conform to the requirements of Subsection M .. for Special Borrow Material except that it shall contain no stone larger than millimeters in its greatest dimension and shall be placed in layers not exceeding millimeters in depth compacted measurement .
In the areas described above where Special Borrow is to be used the plane of the base upon which the material is to be placed shall be compacted and graded until the surface is smooth without additional compensation .
A tolerance of millimeters above or below the proposed grade will be allowed provided that this millimeters above or below grade is not maintained for a distance longer than meters and that the required crown is maintained. . Fine Grading and Compacting .
Before surfacing or subbase is spread the subgrade shall be shaped to a true surface conforming to the proposed cross section of the highway and compacted in accordance with the provisions of Subsections .
and .. All depressions and high spots shall be filled with suitable material or removed and such areas again compacted until the surface is smooth and satisfactorily compacted .
A tolerance of millimeters above or below the finished subgrade will be allowed provided that this millimeters above or below grade is not maintained for a distance longer than meters and that the required crown is maintained in the subgrade .
Any portion of the subgrade which is not accessible to a roller shall be thoroughly compacted with the mechanical tampers or by other adequate methods approved as satisfactory by the Engineer .
COMPENSATION .
Method of Measurement .
The grading and compaction of the subgrade will be measured by the horizontal square meter at the plane at the bottom of subgrade in all areas where a subgrade was placed .
Grading and finishing for the entire project will include all grading work not included under the item of Fine Grading and Compacting Subgrade Area . .
Basis of Payment .
Payment for the shaping and compacting of the subgrade as specified herein shall be included in the item for Fine Grading and Compacting Subgrade Area .
The removal and disposal of material below subgrade will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic meter for the appropriate Excavation Items in Section .
Grading and finishing other than subgrade areas will be included in the price of the other respective items of work involved .
In areas where Special Borrow material is required as stipulated in Subsection .
the material shall be paid for as Special Borrow .
The provisions of Subsection .
shall apply when the Special Borrow is obtained from excavated materials. . Payment Items .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II. . Special Borrow Cubic Meter .
Fine Grading and Compacting Subgrade Areas Square Meter SECTION BORINGS DESCRIPTION .
General .
This work shall consist of making soiltest borings obtaining and preserving acceptable samples preparing a report of the results obtained and delivery of the report and samples .
The Engineer will establish the location and provide the ground surface elevation for each boring .
No change in boring locations shall be made unless prior consent of the Engineer is obtained .
The Contractor shall complete the borings to the specified highest bottom elevations or as directed .
The actual location at which each boring is made shall be shown on the plans and the actual starting grade shown on the boring log .
The Contractor shall confine hisher operation as closely as possible to each location where work is to be performed .
The Contractor shall take precautions necessary to prevent damage to existing structures and conduits both above and below ground and to lawns walks and pavements .
When the work at each borehole is completed the hole shall be adequately blocked and solidly filled to a depth of at least .
meters in a manner to preclude any possibility of injury to man or animal or damage to property .
Special Provisions for backfilling boreholes on railroad property may also be employed in accordance with railroad requirements .
Boreholes within the limits of travel ways shoulders sidewalks and paved areas shall be backfilled and compacted with granular materials and brought to the grade of the adjacent surface with a minimum of millimeters of bituminous concrete or cement concrete whichever is applicable .
The Department reserves the right at any time during the life of the Contract to determine the order in which remaining borings are to be taken and reserves the right to eliminate borings from or to add borings to those shown on the plans and the right to increase or decrease the depth of any andor all borings .
The Contractor shall be responsible for any claims resulting from damage to underground pipes conduits and structures .
It is suggested that possible damage to such utilities can be minimized or eliminated by hand augering the first several meter of each borehole .
The Contractors attention is called to Subsection .
of the Standard Specifications regarding Protection and Restoration of Property. . Boring Samples and Reports .
All Borings including Trial Borings Auger Borings Wellpoints and Test Pits shall require boring logs andor records .
Four copies of the typewritten boring report shall be submitted to the Research and Materials Engineer within ten calendar days after completion of the work at each site .
One copy shall be on transparent paper onion skin vellum etc .
from which satisfactory prints can be made .
Abbreviations shall not be used on the final typewritten log .
Boring samples packaged packed and labeled as required and described hereinafter under each type of boring and sample shall be delivered at the time the boring report is submitted transportation prepaid to the Research and Materials Engineer Massachusetts Highway Department D Street South Boston Massachusetts .
In advance of shipment of boring samples a letter of transmittal shall be sent to the Research and Materials Engineer with a copy of the boring report and one copy of the Boring Record Cards as required in Subsection .. A supply of Boring Record Cards for Department projects may be obtained upon request from the Research and Materials Engineer .
Where Control Borings are specified on the plans or in the Special Provisions a legible copy of the drillers field Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
log shall be forwarded to the Research and Materials Engineer or as directed in the Special Provisions the day after the Control Boring work at each site is completed .
The original drillers field log copy will be submitted to the Research and Materials Engineer with the drillers field description unaltered .
Should the Contractors office engineer or geologist after review find it necessary to change a description heshe shall do so on a separate copy of the field log date sign and clip the copy to the original drillers log .
Copies of these logs shall be sent to the Research and Materials Engineer District Highway Engineer and all others concerned .
The field logs shall be sent to all concerned no later than one day after the completion of each borehole . .
Supervision .
The work shall be performed under the supervision of the authorized representative of the Engineer .
No subsurface exploratory work shall be done in the absence of the Inspector .
The Contractor shall furnish the means and the men required to transport safely the Inspector to and from high ground and the position of borings located on water in a swamp or other surface conditions over which it is impossible or difficult to travel on foot .
The Contractor shall notify the Research and Materials Engineer and the District Highway Engineer who is supplying the inspector not less than forty eight hours in advance of when heshe intends to commence work at a particular job site or when heshe intends to increase or decrease the number of rigs on a project in order that the Engineer may have time to provide a proper number of inspectors for the project. . Driller Qualifications .
The driller of each boring crew shall be responsible for determining changes in the soil .
The driller shall be experienced in detecting variations in the soil by changes in the feel and sound of the hollow rod to which the bit is attached .
The driller shall also be competent to classify the recovered soil samples in accordance with the Departments Visual Identification of Soils Table copies may be obtained from the Research and Materials Engineer .
Before beginning on the Departments work the Contractor shall certify in writing to the Engineer the name of each driller heshe proposes to use .
The driller shall be qualified as acceptable to the Engineer by exhibiting satisfactory abilities using the methods defined herein .
Once qualified a driller need not be requalified for subsequent projects although approval must be obtained for hisher employment on each Contract .
The Engineer reserves the right to determine the acceptability of the driller at any time during the prosecution of the work .
The Contractor shall designate a field supervisor on each Project .
DRILLING METHODS .
General .
A .
Starting Boring Every boring shall start as a Drive Sample Boring except Hollow Stem Auger Auger Undisturbed Sample Preparatory and Vane Shear Test Preparatory Borings .
Where the resistance to penetration with earth boring tools as defined herein by Practical Refusal Section F. is encountered above the specified highest bottom elevation the borehole nevertheless shall be made to said elevation .
Should bedrock be encountered above the specified highest bottom elevation the borehole shall be continued as a rock core boring for meters unless otherwise directed .
B. Casing Casing shall be of a size that will permit the specified soil sample or rock core to be obtained or groundwater observation well to be installed or to allow for telescoping and spinning of casing .
All pieces of casing and washpipe shall be equal in length .
Casing may be driven into the ground only so far as is necessary to keep the wall of the borehole in place and then open hole techniques may be employed .
However if the Contractor so elects casing may be used throughout the borehole as required .
Casing for rock core borings shall be sealed on bedrock to prevent loose material from entering the hole and to prevent the loss of drilling fluid return regardless of the type or types of material Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
encountered .
Except for the first piece when starting each borehole the bottom of the casing should not be advanced below the bottom of the borehole that has been made with a chopping or drilling bit without the approval of the Engineer .
C. Making the Borehole Independent of whether casing or open hole techniques are employed the borehole shall be started and made by loosening the soil with a bit attached to the lower end of a hollow rod and given a chopping motion with a clockwise twist at the bottom of each stroke .
An auger either hand or power driven a welldrill or a rotary drill shall not be used for advancing the borehole in less than Dense or Very Dense or Practical Refusal soil .
However when casing is used a rotary bit may be used to clean the casing .
A sampler shall not be used instead of a chopping or drilling bit for making a borehole .
To make a borehole through Dense Very Dense or Practical Refusal soil boulders rockfill or other similar material the Contractor may employ whatever method heshe chooses including roller bits telescoping and spinning of a casing without endangering life and property or affecting the purpose for which the boring is being made .
The Contractor shall not use a backhoe or other earth moving equipment without the express approval of the Engineer to start a boring .
The soil thus loosened shall be borne to the surface in a liquid which is forced down through the hollow rod out through the discharge ports in the bit and up the annular space between the hollow rod and the wall of the borehole andor casing .
Except when preparing the borehole for special sampling the discharge ports shall direct the flow downward .
The returning liquid shall be discharged into a settling basin and shall be reused recirculated to form a native mud .
Water alone for transporting the loosened soil shall not be used except at the very beginning of each borehole .
If a contractor elects to use open hole techniques an effective mud for the purpose of transporting out the loosened soil and for stabilizing the wall and bottom of the borehole may be manufactured by adding a fat clay or bentonite or one of its derivatives in sufficient amount to the native mud .
When making boreholes in very porous material the Contractor may with the prior consent of the Engineer drive casing to seal the wall of the borehole .
The volume of mud to be calculated at any time shall be no more than is necessary to transport the loosened soil but in no event more than liters per minute when making the borehole in .
millimeter casing .
No rig shall be removed from its position above the borehole nor shall the casing be pulled from the hole until the inspector has been shown a copy of the field log for that hole and has approved the removal of the rig andor of the casing .
D. Changes in Soil At each change in soil as detected by the driller with intervals not to exceed those as stated under Item .
the drilling operation shall cease and the borehole conditioned for sampling by slowing the pump raising the bit off the bottom and circulating the liquid to remove from suspension large particles which might become settled solids and thus a part of the sample .
The bit on the bottom end of the hollow rod shall then be replaced with a . millimeter inside diameter splittube sampler which shall be entered into the undisturbed soil at the bottom of the borehole for the sample .
E. Obstructions Should an obstruction be encountered in a drive sample boring the Engineer may require the Contractor to make additional borings at locations to be determined by the Engineer to attempt to pass the obstruction and complete the boring .
Practical Refusal boulders hard material or rock fill will not be considered an obstruction .
Final determination when and if an obstruction is encountered shall be made by the Engineer .
Borings terminating on obstructions shall be considered trial borings and paid as a drive sample boring .
F. Practical Refusal The term Practical Refusal shall mean failure of the sampler to penetrate at least millimeters when driven blows using a . kilogram mass freefalling millimeters .
In each case the Engineer by observation shall determine that a Practical Refusal actually has been encountered .
A Practical Refusal will not be accepted as the termination of a borehole above the highest bottom elevation as specified on the plans or stated elsewhere. . Drive Sample Borings .
Control Borings and Complementary Borings when required for design andor construction purposes shall be started as drive sample borings and compensated for as hereinafter provided .
Control Borings should be completed and boring reports on same submitted as specified under Subsection .
before any Complementary Borings are started .
All some or none of the Complementary Borings may be required depending on analysis of the Control Boring Data .
A sample shall be obtained at the beginning of each borehole and at each change in a. soil Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
b. consistency of a plastic stratum c. density of a granular stratum In addition to the above samples shall be taken so that no sampling interval exceeds .
meters in a continuous stratum .
However the sampling procedure of obtaining a sample at each change as specified will take precedent .
In addition to taking the samples as mentioned a sample shall also be obtained at specific elevations for certain borings when shown on the boring plans .
These samples from certain elevations shall be placed in as many milliliter jars as necessary to accommodate the contents of the entire sample recovered from the split spoon sampler and all jars shall be properly labeled and preserved as specified in the Standard Specifications .
If a sample is lost during the recovery then the borehole shall be sampled again to recover a suitable sample at the specific elevation or as close to it as possible as given on the plans for certain borings .
An acceptable minimum size sample shall be at least millimeters in length .
This requirement shall not apply if bedrock is encountered above the specified elevation .
A sampler of the size and type specified in Subsection .D shall be driven to obtain the sample .
Between each blow of the driveweight the sampler shall be turned clockwise at least onequarter of a revolution to keep it free .
In no event will washed bucketed or bobbed samples be accepted .
Before sampling the driller shall mark the drill rods in three successive millimeter increments so that the advance of the sampler under the impact of the hammer can be easily observed for each millimeter increment .
During the sampling operation the driller of the boring crew shall count and record the number of blows required to effect each millimeter increment of penetration or fraction thereof for a distance of millimeters using a of .
kilogram mass freefalling millimeters .
The number of blows required to effect each millimeters of penetration or fraction thereof for a distance of millimeters shall be recorded on the field log and final log .
The first millimeters shall be considered to be the seating drive .
The summation of the number of blows for the second and third millimeter increments of penetration shall be the penetration resistance N. The blow counts shall be shown on the final boring log as recorded in millimeter increments or fraction thereof if the sampler fails to penetrate the millimeters with the corresponding sample depth .
The borehole shall be kept completely full of drilling liquid during the sampling and recovery operation .
Each sample immediately upon its recovery shall be placed not jammed in a milliliter glass jar .
Sample jars shall be of the same diameter for their full length and shall have screw tops fitted with gaskets .
Samples of cohesive soils shall be struck even with the top of the jar .
Jars containing samples shall be stored in a cool damp place free from exposure to frost or excessive heat .
Each jar shall be properly labeled and its lid marked to identify its contained sample .
The labeling shall be typewritten and the label glued to the side of the jar .
These labels shall show the following information in a neat legible manner Name and address of boring contractor .
Date the boring was made .
Location and name of project .
Number of each boring as shown on the boring plans and log .
Number of the sample as shown on the boring log .
Depth at which the sample was obtained .
Number of blows required to drive the sampler millimeters using a . kilogram mass free falling millimeters .
Brief description of the classification of the material composing the sample .
All jars shall be packed one tier in clean unused substantial partitioned paperboard cartons .
Each carton shall contain exactly jars .
If the number of jars containing soil samples is less than the remaining spaces in the carton shall be filled with empty jars .
In each carton the jars shall be arranged in successive order as the samples were obtained from each borehole starting in the upper left hand corner which shall be clearly identified with a felt tip marker on the outside then moving from the top to the bottom of each succeeding row until all compartments have been filled .
Jars left over to complete a borehole shall be similarly arranged starting in the next numbered carton .
Cartons shall be numbered successively on both ends with a felt tip marker .
On both ends of each carton shall be glued a typewritten paper label containing in the same format the information required on the boring Record Cards which fully describes its contents .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
Each driller shall sign only the notes for the borings heshe has made .
These notes shall be preserved by the Contractor for future reference .
The Inspector shall sign the field copy of the notes also .
At the completion of the boring work the Contractor shall prepare a boring report containing a graphic representation or log of the results obtained .
The log for each boring shall be a continuous vertical column without discontinuity or offset and plotted to not less than a scale .
The logs for all borings for each structure or construction unit shall be plotted to the same scale on a type of transparent paper such as onion skin size A and contain one log per sheet .
The boring report shall contain the following minimum information and be typewritten Date location and name of project .
Boring number or other designation .
Survey station and offset .
Starting grade of each boring to be supplied by the Engineer .
Depth and a brief proper classification by visual and manual inspection of each type of material including rock successively encountered in each borehole .
Granular soils shall be classified by apparent grain size and state of denseness clay soils by color and state of consistency either as hard medium or soft and silts as organic or inorganic all in accordance with the Departments Visual Identification of Soils Table .
Abbreviations shall not be used on the final typewritten log .
The resistance offered to penetration of the sampler when sampling each stratum of soil as represented by the number of blows required to drive the specified sampler millimeters or the designated fraction or multiple thereof with a . kilogram mass free falling millimeters .
Special Note CHANGED LOCATION shall be made on each boring log to indicate any field change from survey layout and an explanation of the reason for the change .
Distance below starting grade to the surface of water in the borehole at its completion and at other times if any as required in the Special Provisions and any unusual behavior of groundwater observed during the boring operation .
Every unusual condition noted during the entire operation .
When boulders or cobbles are encountered the driller shall note this on the log and how the boring was made through the boulders or cobbles .
Below each boring log shall be noted the hour and date of start and completion the actual hours worked to complete the borehole and the name of the driller and inspector . .
Hollow Stem Auger Borings .
This type of Boring when specified by the Engineer will be made in accordance with the specifications and the special provisions of the Contract .
When Hollow Stem Augers are used the type samplers specified under Section .D shall be used .
A center rod plug and pilot bit will be in place unless otherwise directed while advancing the hole by rotation but to a depth no greater than the sampling interval .
The center rod plug and pilot bit shall be removed and the sample obtained by driving the sampler millimeters into the undisturbed material below the bottom of the auger .
When sampling below the water table the Hollow Stem Auger shall be kept full of water or drilling fluid unless otherwise directed .
The auger flights shall be .
meters in length and the maximum sampling interval shall not be greater than .
meters .
However the sampling procedure of obtaining a sample at each change shall take precedent as specified in Section ..
If the hollow stem auger encounters cobbles boulders or similar material and fails to penetrate the material after an attempt has been made then the Engineer may direct the contractor to make the boring by other methods such as a drive sample boring .
However the Engineer will decide when and if this procedure will be employed .
Logs samples and other pertinent information will be as specified in Section contained herein . .
Core Borings .
This type of boring is made after the casing has been sealed on bedrock to prevent loose material from entering the hole and to prevent the loss of drilling fluid return regardless of the type or types of material encountered .
Core Borings into bedrock shall be accomplished by the diamond bit rotary drilling method .
The minimum distance of coring Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
into bedrock shall be meters .
The minimum diameter of acceptable core shall be .
millimeters .
Where rock cores are required the coring shall be done with a Double Tube Core Barrel in runs of .
meters or less .
Every effort and precaution shall be made by the Contractor to insure the best possible recovery and preservation of the rock cores .
Should the recovered length of core be less than of the depth cored the Contractor shall adopt measures as may be necessary to improve the percentage of recovery .
Measures to improve recovery may include changes in Type of diamond bit .
Rate of feed .
Speed of rotation .
Volume of cooling water .
Style of core barrel .
Depth of coring for each removal of core .
Machine operator .
Type of machine .
All recovered cores including fragments shall be carefully handled to avoid breakage .
They shall be placed in wooden boxes furnished by the Contractor .
Boxes shall be in accordance with details furnished by the Department .
Cores shall be placed in the box in consecutive order as they are removed from the core barrel .
The trough containing each core shall be fully identified and marked to show the top and bottom of the core .
Upon completion of each core boring all information obtained including a brief description of the rock type length or run length recovered percentage recovered coring time type of barrel used etc .
shall be added to the log of the corresponding boring .
The boxed cores and completed logs shall be delivered to the Research Materials Engineer as required under Subsection .. All lengths and percentages recovered shall be verified by the Inspector. . ThinWall Steel Tube Drive Samples .
Where organic and inorganic clay or other soils are encountered while making a borehole the Engineer may require the Contractor to obtain thinwall steel tube drive samples .
The tube shall not be less than .
millimeters in diameter nor less than millimeters long and need not be sharpened .
The diameter of the thinwall tube shall be specified in the special provisions .
Making the borehole shall follow the procedure outlined under Subsection .C .
The steel tube shall be driven its full length into the material to be sampled .
The loaded steel tube shall be sealed marked for identification and handled in the manner described under Subsection .. . Undisturbed Sample Preparatory Borings .
The results of Drive Sample borings will determine whether Undisturbed Samples are required and the elevations at which they can be obtained .
The applicable parts of Subsection .C shall be followed in making this type of boring .
The volume of mud circulated shall be increased just enough to transport the loosened soil from the borehole .
The last millimeters of borehole above the elevation at which an undisturbed sample is to be obtained shall be made with a bit built to deflect the flow of mud from a downward direction .
Final preparation of the borehole to the top of each undisturbed sample shall be accomplished with a properly constructed and operated cleanout auger .
The borehole shall be free of soil particles soil shavings and settled solids to the surface of undisturbed soil and shall be full of mud to the overflow nipple at the top of the casing .
Drilling Procedure .
Open hole techniques may be allowed for advancement of the borehole .
When casing is used the diameter shall be at least .
millimeters larger than the diameter of the undisturbed sample called for .
Independent of the hole advancement technique casing or open hole selected heavyweight drilling fluid with a unit mass between and kilograms per cubic meter will be required .
The unit mass employed will be selected by the Engineer or hisher representative in the field based on hole depth and soil characteristics .
The purpose of the drilling Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
fluid is to maintain hole stability and minimize sample disturbance .
Drilling Fluid .
Drilling Fluid shall be produced using clean water and bentonite or one of its derivatives .
The drilling fluid shall be mixed to a uniform consistency acceptable to the Engineer .
A drilling fluid net mass of to kilograms per cubic meter as determined by the Engineer shall be obtained and thereafter maintained during execution of the borings from which undisturbed samples are obtained .
The boreholes shall be filled with drilling fluid the fluid level shall be maintained above the ground or water surface at all times until the last sample is taken from the drill hole .
Drill Rods Drill rods provided for drilling washing and sampling within the borehole shall be of such a size that sufficient fluid flow as determined by the Engineer can be delivered to the bottom of the hole to permit complete flushing of soil when drilling at maximum depth .
Drill rod fittings shall be provided to permit attachment of the drill rods to the thin wall tube sampler .
Pump The Contractor shall furnish a suitable pump capable of pumping and recirculating the weighted drilling fluid use for the depth and diameter of boring required .
The use of casing for Undisturbed Sample Preparatory Boring shall follow the procedure outlined under Subsection .B .
The casing shall have a nominal diameter at least .
millimeters larger than that of the undisturbed sample called for in the Special Provisions .
Drive Samples shall be obtained as directed by the Engineer .
Immediately after recovery of an undisturbed sample as described in Subsection .
the Inspector will examine the ends of the tube for adequacy and condition of the sample .
If unacceptable the borehole shall be reprepared and additional samples taken until a satisfactory recovery is made. . Undisturbed Samples .
Undisturbed samples shall be obtained with a stationary piston thinwall steel tube sampler operated by a separate piston rod actuating rod and a sampler head with an appropriate spring and piston rod cone check .
The diameter of the undisturbed samples shall be as specified in the Special Provisions .
The sampler must be kept in perfect mechanical condition and operated at all times in a manner that will produce acceptable undisturbed samples .
The Osterberg method for obtaining an undisturbed sample may be substituted for the stationary piston method if approved by the Engineer .
The seamless steel tube shall have a wall thickness not greater than .
millimeters .
It shall be of a proper length to produce a net sample millimeters long .
Its bottom edge shall be drawn and reamed knifesharp to an internal diameter approximately .
less than the inside diameter of the tube .
The tube shall be free of all scale or other deleterious material and may have a coat of thin enamel paint lacquer teflon or other similar material .
Just before being lowered to sample the inside of the tube shall be wiped dry .
Tubes with rusted surfaces shall not be used .
After being fully assembled and lowered to sampling position the sampler shall be entered into the undisturbed soil by a rapid continuous movement without rotation .
A rest period of not less than minutes shall be allowed for the sample to develop friction on the inside of the tube .
The loaded tube shall then be rotated by turning the top of the drillrod .
A direct slow and steady pull accompanied by rotation shall remove the loaded tube from the soil .
Raising the tube to the surface shall be done without quick starts sudden stops or vibrations .
The borehole is to be kept full of mud during the entire recovery operation .
To free the loaded tube from the samplerhead without damaging the sample the vacuum breaker shall be opened .
Immediately after the tube is freed its end shall be inspected and if found satisfactory shall be sealed against loss of moisture .
The top and bottom of the tube shall be sealed with molten beeswax or a microcrystalline petroleum wax heated to a temperature not higher than its melting point .
The total thickness of seal shall be approximately millimeters .
Any space remaining at either end shall be filled to within millimeters of the end of the tube with firmly pressed damp sand .
Sealing wax shall then be poured flush with the end of the tube which shall be covered with several layers of electricians tape .
A paper label on which is recorded in ink all pertinent information as required in Subsection .
relating to the contained sample shall be glued to the tube .
The same data shall be printed directly on the tube with a felttip marker Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
of a contrasting color .
The loaded tubes shall be packed in well built wooden boxes at the sampling site .
Each box shall contain not more than one millimeter nor more than two .
millimeter or four .
millimeter tubes .
Each tube shall be surrounded by at least millimeters of resilient packing .
A record of its contents shall be marked on the lid of each box with a felttip marker .
The boxes shall be delivered at the completion of each borehole as directed in writing by the Engineer .
An acceptable undisturbed sample for laboratory tests shall when split in two longitudinally and partially dried disclose no observable distortions in its stratifications andor shear planes that can be reasonably attributed to the sampling and handling operations .
The Engineer may direct the Contractor to alter the cutting edge clearance of the sampling tube .
Where undisturbed samples are to be taken over water tidal or otherwise the Contractor shall have the necessary equipment to properly obtain an undisturbed sample on water and have the necessary devices to stabilize the barge or raft while making an undisturbed sample. . Vane Shear Test Preparatory Borings .
The borehole shall be made under applicable parts of Subsection .C and .
to a point .
meters above the elevation at which a vane shear test is to be made .
The next millimeters of borehole shall be made with a bit built to deflect the flow of mud from a downward direction .
By means of a cleanout auger built for the purpose all soil and shavings shall be removed to an elevation millimeters above the position of the top of the vane tool during the test .
Drive samples shall be obtained as directed by the Engineer. . Vane Shear Test .
The inplace shear strengths of cohesive soils shall be measured by means of field vane shear tests .
The Contractor shall have the required vanes as specified in the contract .
The penetrating edge of the vane blade shall be sharpened having an included angle of degrees .
A ball bearing casing guide shall be attached to the drill rods millimeters above the vane and additional ball bearing casing guides shall be provided for each meters of drill rods required thereafter .
All drill rods shall be made up tightly .
The vane shall be pushed into the soil below the bottom of the hole in a manner that will prevent rotation during insertion .
The bottom of the vane shall be inserted millimeters into the undisturbed soil at the bottom of the hole .
After insertion the drill rods shall be clamped securely to a thrust type ball bearing reacting against the casing this bearing should support the entire weight of the vane and rods during test .
A rotation of the vane shall be accomplished by means of a mechanical gear driven mechanism which shall produce a uniform rate of rotation of about degree every seconds degrees per minute .
Accurately calibrated torque mechanism or proving rings with maximum readings of newtonmeters shall be provided to measure the applied torque .
Acceptable equipment is the Acker Precision Drive Barros Geonor Sprague Henwood or approved equal in good working condition .
Torque wrenches will not be allowed .
Calibration of Vane Shear Equipment by an acceptable organization capable and specializing in this work will be required .
If said equipment has been calibrated and checked within the last six months by a recognized laboratory no additional calibration will be necessary .
Certificate of Proof will be required .
A friction check will be run prior to each test when directed by the Engineer .
One man shall rotate the vane while the Engineer observes the torque gauge .
Special attention shall be given to determine the maximum torque registered .
Following the determination of the maximum torque the remolded shear strength shall be determined in the same manner after rapidly rotating the drill rods about revolutions .
The determination of the remolded strength should be started immediately after completion of the rapid rotation and in all cases within one minute after the remolded process .
During the tests readings of time applied torque and angular rotation should be recorded at sec .
intervals unless otherwise directed until the maximum torque is achieved .
The maximum torque in newtonmeters the time and angle of rotation measured from the start of the test to the development of maximum torque shall also be recorded .
A complete description of the apparatus and detailed dimensions of the vane shear tool shall be submitted with the test report .
Completion of the procedure described above including determination of the remolded shear strength shall Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
constitute one field vane shear test for payment purposes .
If the Contractor is unable to push or drive the vane into the soil below the bottom of the hole after lowering the drill rods and vane to the required depth or if the Contractor is unable to rotate the vane to determine the maximum torque due to the stiffness of the soils or due to an obstruction compensation will be considered included in the Unit Bid Price per meter for Vane Shear Test Preparatory Boring and no further compensation will be made. . Auger Borings .
Auger borings shall be made where directed to obtain large volume soil samples for laboratory testing .
The borings shall be made to depths required by the Engineer with an earth auger not less than millimeters in diameter either manually or power operated .
The auger section shall not exceed .
meters in length and shall be removed from the auger hole each time its hollows have become filled with soil. . Auger Boring Samples .
Large volume soil samples for laboratory testing shall be obtained from auger borings .
Each sample shall have a mass of at least kilograms and shall be preserved in an approved container .
The number of samples required at each borehole shall be determined by the Engineer .
The container for each sample shall have positive identification of the contents either by typewritten gluedon label by wiredon tag or by felttip marker .
The following information shall be shown .
Name and address of boring contractor . .
Date sample was taken . .
Location and name of project . .
Location of auger borehole by station and offset or identifying number of auger borehole if so identified on plan . .
Depth below ground surface at which sample was obtained . .
Ground Water Observation Wellpoints .
Type I A . millimeter minimum diameter hole shall be advanced by the Contractor by whatever method heshe chooses to the elevation specified regardless of type of material encountered such as boulders Practical Refusal material rock fill etc .
with the exception of bedrock .
When the bottom of the hole has reached the elevation specified for the tip of the wellpoint it shall be purged to its full depth with clean water .
The wellpoint shall have ample clearance so that it may be lowered freely in the borehole .
The screen shall be micrometer mesh unless otherwise stated .
The minimum dimension of the wellpoint shall be millimeters x millimeters .
The riser rigidly fastened to the wellpoint shall be millimeter galvanized pipe .
A galvanized pipe plug or a cap with a vent hole shall be furnished to close the top of the riser .
After the wellpoint has been lowered to the specified elevation the annular space between the wellpoint and riser pipe and the millimeter casing shall be filled with clean dry sand unless otherwise directed .
This sand shall be retained on a micrometer sieve and shall pass a micrometer sieve .
It shall be poured in slowly to fill the annular space as the casing is pulled .
During the pulling of the casing the wellpoint shall not be raised from its original position .
At completion the top of the riser pipe shall be closed wrench tight with a vented pipe plug or cap .
Type II Ground Water Observation Wellpoints Type II may be installed in a completed borehole after all samples and information have been obtained from these holes .
Prior to placing the wellpoint these holes shall be purged to their full depth with clean water .
Where the bottom of the borehole is lower than the highest bottom elevation of the wellpoint that portion of the borehole below the bottom of the wellpoint shall be backfilled with a clean dry sand to the elevation of the bottom of the wellpoint unless otherwise directed .
If the bottom of the casing is below the highest bottom elevation of the wellpoint when the sand has reached the elevation of the bottom of the casing the backfilling and pulling of casing shall be carried out simultaneously to the highest bottom elevation of wellpoint and continued as directed for Type I Ground Water Observation Wellpoints unless otherwise directed .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
Backfilling of boreholes below bottom of wellpoint where required shall be included in the cost of Ground Water Observation Wellpoints Type II .
Where bedrock is encountered the diameter of the borehole and rock core shall be large enough to accommodate a wellpoint and riser pipe .
Type III Ground Water Observation Wellpoints Type III wellpipe and screen shall be installed as described in these specifications for Type I Ground Water Observation Wellpoints except that the wellpipe and screen used shall be millimeter P.V.C .
schedule threaded flush joint wellpipe and wellscreen .
Wellscreen slot width shall be .
millimeter .
A suitable threaded plug shall be installed at the bottom of the wellscreen .
A suitable vented thread cap shall also be installed at the top of the well pipe when requested by the Engineer .
No cementing will be allowed .
The length of the wellscreen for each Type III Ground Water Observation Wellpoint will be designated on the plan by the Engineer .
Separate payment will be made for the wellpipe used and the wellscreen used .
The hole made shall be of sufficient diameter to accommodate the wellpipe and screen .
Type IV Ground Water Observation Wellpoint Type IV wellpipe and wellscreen may be installed in a completed borehole after all samples and information have been obtained from these holes .
The method of installation shall be the same as described in these specifications for Type II Ground Water Observation Wellpoints except that the wellpipe and screen used shall be millimeter P.V.C .
schedule threaded flush joint wellpipe and wellscreen .
Wellscreen slot width shall be .
millimeter .
A suitable threaded plug shall be installed at the bottom of the wellscreen .
A suitable vented threaded cap shall be installed at the top of the well when requested by the Engineer .
No cementing will be allowed .
The length of the wellscreen for each Type IV well will be designated on the plan by the Engineer .
The borehole shall be of sufficient diameter to accommodate the wellpipe and screen .
If bedrock is encountered the corehole shall be large enough to accommodate the wellpipe and screen .
When directed by the Engineer sand may be omitted on all types of well installation. . Mobilization and Dismantling of Boring Equipment .
This work shall include the furnishing at the site of all men and equipment necessary to properly complete the work detailed in the Proposal including the moving of men and equipment from one project site to another and the restoration of each site after the boring equipment has been removed .
It shall also include all special tools and equipment necessary to perform the work in or on water and in other places not readily accessible. . Test Pits .
Dimensions of Test Pits will be such that a kilogram sample can be obtained at depths specified .
The pit can be dug by hand or machine at locations as directed by the Engineer .
In no case will the depth of pit be more than .
meters .
Test Pits shall be properly sheeted to protect the workers as required in Subsection .
Paragraph F and shall be large enough to allow the inspection of soil conditions andor the procurement of kilogram bag samples .
Maximum number not to exceed three .
Each sample shall have a mass of at least kilograms and shall be preserved in a suitable and approved container .
The container for each sample shall have positive identification of contents either by typewritten gluedon label by wiredon tag or by felttip marker .
The label shall be covered completely with a transparent material such as tape plastic etc .
The following information shall be shown .
Name and Address of Boring Contractor . .
Date Sample was taken . .
Location and name of Project . .
Location of Test Pit by Station and Offset or Identifying No .
if so identified on plan . .
Depth below ground surface at which the sample was obtained .
When the test pit is completed and required samples taken and approved by the Engineer it shall be backfilled and compacted in an approved manner so as not to cause a hazardous condition .
Test Pits Through Pavements When test pits are required where the Contractor must break through pavements heshe shall make as small a test Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
pit as possible .
After the Contractor obtains the proper number of samples required heshe shall backfill the test pit with suitable material and compact it in accordance with the Standard Specification .
The test pit then shall be brought to the proper grade with the last millimeters being bituminous concrete or cement concrete whichever is applicable .
The cost of patching where required shall be included in the cost of the test pit .
Test pits made through pavements shall be cut on a neat line by a jack hammer saw or other mechanical means .
The cost of cutting the pavement on a neat line by jack hammer saw or other mechanical means and patching the pavements as required shall be included in the unit bid price for test pits made through pavements .
COMPENSATION .
Method of Measurement .
Drive Sample Borings and Hollow Stem Auger Borings when completed as such will be measured by the meter of borehole made in original and trial borings below the ground surface regardless of the type of materials encountered such as boulders Practical Refusal material rockfill etc .
with the exception of bedrock .
Core Borings will be measured by the meter cored into bedrock .
Undisturbed Sample Preparatory Borings and Vane Shear Test Preparatory Borings will be measured by the meter of borehole made below the ground surface to the lowest undisturbed sample made or Vane Shear Test performed .
Thinwall Steel Tube Drive Samples Undisturbed Samples Auger Boring Samples and Vane Shear Tests will be measured for each acceptable sample recovered or test made .
Auger Borings will be measured by the meter of borehole made below the ground surface .
Ground Water Observation Wellpoints Type I and Type II will be measured by the meter from the tip of the wellpoint to the top of the riser pipe but not more than millimeters above the ground surface regardless of the type of materials encountered such as boulders Practical Refusal material rockfill etc .
with the exception of bedrock .
Ground Water Observation Wellpoints Type III and IV wellpoint will be measured by meter from the top of the wellscreen to the top of the riser pipe but no more than millimeters above the ground surface regardless of the type of materials encountered such as Practical Refusal Boulders Rock Fill etc .
with the exception of bedrock .
Ground Water Observation Wellpoints Type III and IV wellscreen will be measured by the meter from the bottom of the wellscreen to the top of the wellscreen or the actual length used regardless of the type of materials encountered such as Boulders Practical Refusal Rock Fill etc .
with the exception of bedrock .
Test Pits will be measured by each Test Pit made . .
Basis of Payment .
Drive Sample Borings Hollow Stem Auger Borings Core Borings Undisturbed Sample Preparatory Borings and Vane Shear Test Preparatory Borings will be paid at the contract unit price per meter for the kind of boring completed as required payment to include installation of casing as required including telescoping and spinning of casing when necessary recovered cores and drive samples .
Payment for Undisturbed Preparatory andor Vane Shear Test Preparatory will only be made to the lowest undisturbed sample made or to the last Vane Shear Test performed .
If the boring is continued beyond this point it shall be paid as a Drive Sample boring or other type for the remainder of the borehole or as specified in the Special Provisions .
When borings are located on the water payment shall be made at the contract unit price per meter for the type of boring made only for the depth of hole below the river lake stream etc .
bottom .
Auger Borings will be paid at the contract unit price per meter completed as required .
The cost of any materials required to restore the site to its original condition will be included in the unit price of the item .
Ground Water Observation Wellpoints Type I and Type II will be paid at the contract unit price per meter which shall include full compensation for a log and all materials left in place .
Ground Water Observation Wellpoints Type III and IV wellpipe and wellscreen will be paid at the contract unit bid price per meter which shall include full compensation for a log and all materials left in place .
ThinWall Steel Tube Drive Samples Undisturbed Samples Auger Boring Samples and Vane Shear Tests will Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
be paid for at the contract unit price for each acceptable sample or test completed as required .
Mobilization and Dismantling of boring equipment will be paid for at the contract lump sum price for Item .
Test Pits will be paid at the contract unit price for each test pit actually dug .
The contract unit price shall include all labor equipment supplies tools and incidentals required to dig the test pits .
The cost for any material to restore the site to its original condition and cutting through pavements will be included in the Item .
The Unit Bid Price shall also include the cost of obtaining kilogram bag samples maximum number of as directed and all other incidental work thereto including a log. . Payments Items. . Drive Sample Boring Meter .
Hollow Stem Auger Borings Meter .
Core Boring Meter .
Undisturbed Sample Prep .
Boring Meter .
Undisturbed Sample Each .
Vane Shear Test Prep .
Boring Meter .
Vane Shear Test Each .
Auger Boring Meter .
Auger Boring Sample Each .
Thin Wall Steel Tube Drive Sample Each .
Test Pit Each .
Test Pits through Pavements Each .
Ground Water Observation Wellpoint Type I Meter .
Ground Water Observation Wellpoint Type II Meter .
Ground Water Observation Wellpoint Type III Solid Pipe Meter .
Ground Water Observation Wellpoint Type III Wellscreen Meter .
Ground Water Observation Wellpoint Type IV Solid Pipe Meter .
Ground Water Observation Wellpoint Type IV Wellscreen Meter .
Mobilization and Dismantling of Boring Equipment Lump Sum Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
SECTION DRAINAGE SECTION BASINS MANHOLES AND INLETS DESCRIPTION .
General .
This work shall consist of the construction of manholes inlets and basins in accordance with the specifications and in close conformity with the lines and grades shown on the plans or established by the Engineer .
MATERIALS .
General .
Concrete for these structures shall meet the requirements of Section Cement Concrete Masonry .
Other materials shall meet the requirements specified in the following Subsections of Division III Materials .
Clay Brick M .. Cement Concrete Blocks M .. Precast Units M .. Cement Mortar M ..
Reinforcing Bars M .. Iron Castings M .. Steel Castings M .. Dry Stone Masonry M .. CONSTRUCTION METHODS .
General .
Basins manholes and inlets shall be built to the lines grades dimensions and design shown on the plans and as directed with the necessary frames gratings covers hoods etc .
and in accordance with these specifications .
Basins and inlet grates other than Cascade type may be Type A or A but only one type may be used throughout the project .
Sanitary Sewer Manholes shall be constructed according to the specifications of the Municipality as designated in the Contract .
Castings shall be obtained as directed without cost to the Contractor at the site of the improvements from existing structures from the Party of the First Part at the Town or City Yard from the Massachusetts Correctional Institute of Walpole furnished under Section or furnished as a contract item .
It will be the Contractors responsibility to determine prior to submitting hisher bid from which of the above mentioned sources heshe will obtain the castings .
Transportation delivery and installation of all castings will be included in the contract unit bid price for the kind of structure involved. . Excavation .
See Subsection .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II . .
Laying Brick and Blocks .
Brick and concrete blocks shall be soaked in water before laying .
All joints in brick structures shall be thoroughly flushed full of mortar and no joint on the inside face shall be greater than millimeters .
After the bricks are laid the joints shall be pointed on the outside .
As brick walls are laid up the outside of the structure shall be plastered with millimeter thick mortar coat .
As circular concrete block walls are laidup the horizontal joints and keyways shall be flushed full with mortar .
As rectangular blocks are laid up all horizontal and vertical joints shall be flushed full with mortar .
Plastering of the outside of block structures will not be required .
The joints in precast units shall be wetted and completely mortared immediately prior to settling a section .
No structure shall be backfilled until all mortar has completely set .
When the floors of structures are made of concrete sectional plates the opening in the floor shall be filled with brick chips and mortar cement concrete or left open as directed . .
Placing Castings .
Frame castings for basins manholes and inlets shall be set in full mortar beds true to the lines and grades as directed .
Where directed the castings shall be temporarily set at such grades as to provide drainage during the construction .
The castings of structures located within the pavement area shall not be completely set to the established grade until the bottom course of pavement has been laid .
The final setting of all other castings shall be performed at the proper stage of construction as directed .
Cement concrete collars shall be placed around the castings after the final setting as shown on the plans and as directed .
Hoods shall be installed in catch basins only when required by Special Provisions. . Weep Holes .
Unless otherwise directed or specified in the Special Provisions weep holes shall be built into the walls of all new basins precast units and in Types C CF D and DF drop inlets as shown on the plans .
Each weep hole shall consist of a section of millimeter pipe or equivalent opening to carry water through the wall of the structure .
The ends of the pipe if used shall be saw cut and left flush with the walls of the structure .
The outside end of the pipe or opening shall be covered with a . millimeter mesh galvanized wire screen micrometer satisfactorily fastened against the wall .
The drain to the weep hole shall be excavated and backfilled with .
cubic meters of crushed stone conforming to Material Section M. The stone shall be placed against and over the end of the pipe or opening to prevent the entrance of the finer filling material .
Only one type of weep hole shall be used throughout the project. . Backfilling .
Backfilling requirements shall conform to the Provisions of Subsections .B .
and ..
COMPENSATION .
Method of Measurement .
Measurement for catch basins leaching basins manholes and drop inlets Types C and D will be based on a standard unit having a depth of meters for drop inlets Types A and B having a depth of .
meters as measured vertically at the center of the structure from the top of the grating or cover to the top of the floor in the case of basins and inlets and the invert in the case of manholes .
When the measured depth exceeds the standard unit the number of units paid for will be in the proportion of the measured depth to the standard depth down to meters .
Basins manholes or drop inlets having a depth less than this standard unit will be counted as one unit .
Each gutter inlet shall be counted as one unit .
Measurement for manholes more than meters down to a depth of meters will be based on a standard unit depth of meters as measured vertically at the center of the structure from the top of the cover to the Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
invert .
Measurement for manholes more than meters down to a depth of meters will be based on a standard unit depth of meters as measured vertically at the center of the structure from the top of the cover to the invert .
When items for Manholes meters to meters Depth or Manholes meters to meters Depth do not appear in the Proposal the standard unit of depth for all structures shall be meters .
Special manholes will be measured as complete units regardless of depth .
Transportation delivery and installation of all castings will be included in the contract unit bid price for the kind of structure involved . .
Basis of Payment .
The accepted quantities of manholes inlets and basins will be paid for at the contract unit price each complete in place which shall not include the cost of castings .
Payment for the concrete collars shall be included in the contract unit price of the structure involved .
Extra depth excavation below the proposed bottom of structure to obtain a stable foundation will be paid for as Class B Trench Excavation .
When directed the castings of drainage structures on roadways opened to traffic will be set to a temporary grade and the unit will be considered complete in place and paid for at the contract unit price for the type of structure involved .
At such time as the casting or structure and casting is adjusted to final grade the work shall be done and payment made under the provisions of Section .
Crushed stone for weep holes will be included in the price of the structure .
If the material for backfill is obtained from borrow it will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic meter or metric ton for the kind of borrow required .
Furnishing new castings will be paid for at the contract unit price each under the items for Frame and Grate or Frame and Cover or ___ millimeter Hood. . Payment of Items. . Catch Basin Each .
Manhole Each .
Manhole meters to meters Depth Each .
Manhole meters to meters Depth Each .
Special Manhole Each .
Gutter Inlet Each .
Leaching Basin Each .
Drop Inlet Type A Each .
Drop Inlet Type AF Each .
Drop Inlet Type B Each .
Drop Inlet Type BF Each .
Drop Inlet Type C Each .
Drop Inlet Type CF Each .
Drop Inlet Type D Each .
Drop Inlet Type DF Each .
Drainage Structure Adjusted Each .
Frame and Cover Each .
Frame and Grate Each .
Frame and Grate MHD Cascade Type Each .
___ millimeter Hood Each .
Class B Trench Excavation Cubic Meter .
Class B Rock Excavation Cubic Meter .
Gravel Borrow Cubic Meter .
Crushed Stone for Drainage Revetment and Water Work Foundation Metric Ton Pipe or appurtenance size will be included as part of the item number in order to differentiate between the sizes .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
SECTION ADJUSTMENT REBUILDING AND REMODELING OF DRAINAGE STRUCTURES .
General .
The work shall consist of rebuilding removing replacing and adjusting the masonry and castings of present structures as required to conform to newly proposed line and grade changes to change in type of structure or changes in type of castings all in accordance with these specifications and in close conformity with the lines and grades shown on the plans or established by the Engineer .
MATERIALS .
Materials .
Such materials as will be required shall conform to Subsection .. CONSTRUCTION METHODS .
General .
When the line or grade or both the line and grade of the structure changes by millimeters or less the structure shall be adjusted to line and grade .
The masonry shall be removed to such depth as directed by the Engineer and new masonry shall be constructed to conform to the proposed design and in conformity with the requirements of the applicable parts of Section .
When the line or grade or both the line and grade of the structure changes more than millimeters the structure shall be remodeled .
The sloped masonry and the vertical masonry shall be removed to such depths as directed by the Engineer and new masonry shall be constructed to conform to the proposed design and in conformity with the requirements of the applicable parts of Section .
When a change in type of structure is required as converting a basin to a manhole the masonry shall be removed to such a depth as directed by the Engineer and new masonry including a brick invert shall be constructed to conform to the proposed design .
When in the judgment of the Engineer the masonry shows deterioration the structure shall be rebuilt .
The casting and deteriorated masonry shall be removed in a neat manner until a clean sound base is obtained upon which concrete blocks and clay bricks may be set to rebuild the structure .
Gravel borrow shall be furnished for backfill where required when excavated material is unsuitable .
The casting shall be set to line and grade with a concrete collar and surfaced with a minimum of one and one half inches of Class I Bituminous Concrete Top Course as directed .
The new masonry construction replacing of castings highly early strength concrete collars backfilling around structures and other incidental work shall be as specified in Section . . Protection of Work .
The Contractor will be held responsible for the protection of the castings .
Any frames grates or covers damages in any manner during the progress of the construction shall be replaced with new castings by the Contractor at hisher expense .
Prior to the actual removal of the present castings a count will be made and recorded of all castings which are in satisfactory condition for reuse .
The Contractor shall supply the number of castings recorded in the initial count when they are required for reuse or when they are to be removed from the project by the Owner .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
COMPENSATION .
Method of Measurement .
Adjustment of structures to line or grade or both line and grade when the change is millimeters or less will be measured in place by the unit each complete and approved .
When the adjustment of structures to line or grade or both line and grade is greater than millimeters the structure will be included in the item for structures remodeled .
Structures changed in type will be measured in place by the unit each complete and approved .
Structures remodeled will be measured in place by the unit each complete and approved .
Structures rebuilt shall be measured by the average height in vertical meters and to the nearest millimeter increment from the bottom row of rebuilt masonry to the bottom of the casting .
The removal and resetting of the casting will be measured by the unit each complete and approved for all work described above .
Transportation delivery and installation of all new castings will be included in the contract unit bid price for the kind of structure involved . .
Basis of Payment .
Adjustment of structures to line andor grade or both line and grade when the change is millimeters or less will be paid for at the contract unit price each under the item for Drainage Structure Adjusted .
Structures changed in type will be paid for at the contract unit price each under the item for Drainage Structure Change in Type .
Structures remodeled will be paid for at the contract unit price under the item Drainage Structure Remodeled .
Structures rebuilt will be paid for at the contract unit price per vertical meter .
Castings removed and reset for Drainage Structures Rebuilt will be paid for at the contract unit price each under the item Frame and Grate or Cover Removed and Reset .
Furnishing new castings will be paid for at the contract price each under the items for Frame and Grate or Cover ___ millimeter Hood. . Payment Items. . Drainage Structure Adjusted Each .
Drainage Structure Rebuilt Meter .
Drainage Structure Change in Type Each .
Drainage Structure Remodeled Each .
Sanitary Structures Adjusted Each .
Frame and Cover Each .
Frame and Grate Each .
Frame and Grate MHD Cascade Type Each .
Frame and Grate or Cover Removed and Reset Each .
___ millimeter Hood Each Pipe or appurtenance size will be included as part of the item number in order to differentiate between the sizes .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
SECTION CULVERTS STORM DRAINS AND SEWER PIPES DESCRIPTION .
General .
This work shall consist of the construction of culvert storm drains sewer pipes hereinafter referred to as Pipe and flared end sections for Reinforced Concrete or Metal Pipe in accordance with these specifications and in close conformity with the lines and grades shown on the plans or established by the Engineer .
MATERIALS .
General .
Materials shall meet the requirements specified in the following Subsections of Division III Materials Corrugated Metal Pipe M .. Asphalt Coated Corrugated Metal Pipe Arch M ..
Corrugated Metal Pipe Aluminum M .. Asphalt Coated Smooth Steel Liner Helically Corrugated Shell Metal Pipe M .. Cement Concrete Pipe M .. Clay Pipe M .. Reinforced Concrete Pipe M .. Ductile Iron Pipe M ..
Structural Plate for Pipe and PipeArch M .. Jointing Materials for Pipe M .. Mortar for Pipe Joints M .. Reinforced Concrete Pipe Flared Ends M .. Metal End Sections M .. Polymeric Precoated Corrugated Metal Pipe M ..
Corrugated Plastic Polyethylene Pipe M .. CONSTRUCTION METHODS .
General .
Excavation See Subsection .. . Bedding Pipes .
The bedding for the pipe shall be shaped to conform reasonably close to the lower of the pipe and recesses excavated for bells of bell and spigot pipes .
All pipe shall be laid to the specified line and grade with a firm bearing throughout each length and with bell ends uphill . .
Pipe Joints .
The joints of clay cement concrete and reinforced concrete pipe shall be formed by caulking into the ball a Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
gasket of jute or oakum and then filling the remainder of the joint with cement mortar .
The invert shall be kept smooth and free of any obstructions .
In the case of concrete pipe the surfaces to be joined shall be thoroughly cleaned and wetted with water before the joint is made .
Corrugated metal pipe and corrugated plastic polyethylene pipe shall be firmly joined with an approved coupling .
When rubber type ring gaskets are used the pipe ends shall be designed so that the gasket will be confined on all sides and will not support the weight of the pipe .
Regardless of the type of joint used the interior surfaces of abutting pipes shall form a smooth grade when pipe laying is completed .
Where water tight joints are required respective pipes shall be joined as follows Clay pipe shall employ a compression joint consisting of a plastic material applied to the bell and spigot ends of the pipe and a compression ring of elastomeric material conforming to ASTM C Type III .
Cement concrete or reinforced cement concrete pipe shall be joined using flexible water tight rubber gaskets conforming to ASTM C . Any alternative joint design must be preapproved by the Departments Research and Materials Engineer .
In designated areas as directed certain joints may be left open to allow for entrance of underground water into the pipe line . .
Structural Plate Pipe and PipeArch .
A. Excavation .
See Subsection .. B. Bedding .
The pipe or pipearch structure shall be placed on a prepared foundation carefully shaped to fit the lower plate or plates of the structure so that the flow line will conform to the required grade .
The arch structure shall be placed on a foundation as shown on the plans .
Each side of the arch shall rest on a galvanized channel as detailed on the plans securely embedded in the substructure .
C. Erections .
The plates for the structure shall be assembled according to the manufacturers assembly instruction .
Pipe or pipearch structures may be assembled in their final location or adjacent to it and then placed on the prepared foundation as a complete unit .
Arches shall be erected in place upon the prepared substructure .
When completed all bolts shall be effectively tightened .
D. Elongation of Pipe .
All pipe shall be fabricated elliptically so as to increase the vertical diameter percent and decrease the horizontal diameter percent .
These dimensions shall be subject to manufacturing tolerances .
E. Coating .
The entire outside surface and the inside bottom half of the pipes and the entire outside and inside of the bottom and corner plates of pipe arches shall be covered with a coat of bituminous material conforming to Subsection M .. of Division III Materials .
When the structure is erected in the final location the bottom of all plates that are to be in contact with the ground shall be coated and allowed to dry before they are placed in the structure .
For arches the entire outside surface shall be covered with one coat of bituminous material as specified above .
The metal bearing channel shall be filled with an approved asphalt filler to the level of the concrete after erection of the arch and before backfilling is started .
F. Backfilling .
Backfilling requirements shall conform to the provisions of Subsections .B .
and .. G. Flared End Sections .
The unit shall be accurately aligned on a prepared bed on the existing ground or if so directed by the Engineer on compacted gravel fill .
COMPENSATION .
Method of Measurement .
A .
Pipes shall be measured in place and the quantity to be paid for shall be the length actually constructed as directed within the limits specified below .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
For measurement purposes the end of pipe in closed structures shall be considered at the inside face of the wall and at masonry headwalls it shall be considered to be at the face of the headwall .
Pipe bends for Corrugated Metal pipe shall be in accordance with current Standard Construction Drawings and the length of pipe sections containing bends shall be measured along the centerline and shall be paid for as straight sections of pipe .
Reinforced Concrete Pipe Flared Ends and Metal End Sections will be measured in place by the unit each complete and approved .
Trench excavation in excess of .
meters and rock excavation shall be measured as specified in Subsection .
for Class B Trench Excavation and Class B Rock Excavation respectively .
B .
Structural plate pipe or pipe arches shall be measured in place and the quantity to be paid for shall be the length actually constructed as directed and to the following limits For structural plate pipe the length shall be the average of the top and bottom center line length for pipe arches the bottom center line length and for arches the average of the springing line lengths .
Trench Excavation in excess of .
meters and Rock Excavation for structural plate pipe arches and pipe arches shall be measured in accordance with the relevant provisions of Subsection .
for Class B Trench Excavation and Class B Rock Excavation . .
Basis of Payments .
Pipe culverts pipe drains and pipe sewers will be paid for at the contract unit price per meter of the kind of pipe required installed and complete in place .
Reinforced Concrete Pipe Flared Ends and Metal End Sections will be paid for at the contract unit price each for the size and kind of pipe end specified .
Trench excavation for pipe culverts pipe drains pipe sewers structural plate pipe arches and pipe arches greater than a depth of .
meters and rock excavation will be paid for as specified in Subsection .
for Class B Trench Excavation and Class B Rock Excavation .
No payment for trench excavation for pipes will be made within the limits of millimeters outside the base section of catch basins manholes or leaching basins .
Backfill for trenches .
meters or less in depth for pipe culverts pipe drains structural plate pipe arches and pipe arches and pipe sewers shall be included in the various items of pipe .
Backfill for that part of a trench which is more than .
meters in depth shall be included in the item for Class B Trench Excavation .
If the material for backfill is obtained from borrow it will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic meter or metric ton of the kind of borrow required .
Masonry ends and foundations will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic meter of the kind of masonry required .
Gravel Borrow will be paid in accordance with Subsection .. . Payment Items. . ___ millimeter Corrugated Metal Pipe ___ micrometer Meter .
___ millimeter Corrugated Metal Pipe End Section ___ micrometer Each .
___ millimeter Corrugated Metal Pipe Aluminum ___ micrometer Meter .
___ millimeter Asphalt Smooth Steel Linear Meter Helically Corrugated Steel Metal Pipe ___ micrometer of outer shell Meter .
___ millimeter Corrugated Metal Pipe Aluminum End Section ___ micrometer Each .
Asphalt Coated Corrugated Metal PipeArch ___ micrometer Meter .
Cement Concrete Pipe Meter .
___ millimeter Drainage PipeOption Meter .
Ductile Iron Pipe Meter .
Structural Plate Pipe Meter .
Structural Plate PipeArch ___ micrometer Meter .
___ millimeter Reinforced Concrete Pipe Meter to . . ___ millimeter Reinforced Concrete Pipe Flared End Each Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
to . . ___ millimeter Corrugated Plastic Polyethylene Pipe Meter .
Polymeric Precoated Corrugated Metal Pipe Meter .
___ millimeter Polyethylene Pipe Meter .
Class B Trench Excavation Cubic Meter .
Class B Rock Excavation Cubic Meter .
Gravel Borrow Cubic Meter .
Crushed Stone for Drainage Foundation Metric Ton .
MPa mm kg Cement Concrete Masonry Cubic Meter .
Field Stone Masonry in Cement Mortar Cubic Meter Pipe or appurtenance size will be included as part of the item number in order to differentiate between the sizes .
SECTION STONE FOR PIPE ENDS DESCRIPTION .
General .
Stone for pipe ends shall consist of a protective covering of angular shaped stones laid on slopes in front of and around drainage ends to insure protection of the pipe ends and the embankment and shall conform to the Department Standard Stone for Pipe Ends .
MATERIAL .
General .
Stone for pipe ends shall comply with the provisions of Subsection M CONSTRUCTION METHODS .
General .
The stone shall be placed to line and grade as shown on the plans or as directed on a prepared bed of embankment material or existing materials .
Each stone shall be carefully placed by hand normal to the slope and firmly bedded thereon .
The larger stones shall be placed directly at the drainage end to prevent erosion and displacement .
Each stone shall have a mass of not less than kilograms nor more than kilograms and at least of the volume shall consist of stones having a mass of not less than kilograms each .
The remainder of the stones shall be so graded that when placed with the larger stones the entire mass will be impacted with a minimum percentage of voids and minimum thickness of millimeters .
COMPENSATION .
Method of Measurement .
Stone for pipe ends will be measured in place by the square meter .
No allowance will be made beyond the dimensions indicated or as directed . .
Basis of Payment .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
Payment for the above work will be at the contract unit price per square meter complete in place including all excavation material and labor. . Payment Item. . Stone for Pipe Ends Square Meter SECTION CRUSHED STONE FOR BLEEDERS DESCRIPTION .
General .
The work under this item consists of constructing foundation drains using crushed stone filter material in accordance with these specifications and in close conformity with the lines and grades shown on the plans or established by the Engineer .
MATERIALS .
General .
Crushed Stone shall comply with the provisions of subsections M .. and M CONSTRUCTION METHODS .
General .
The trench for crushed stone bleeder shall be excavated to the specified line and grade .
The width and the depth shall be as shown on the plans .
The sides of the trench shall be vertical .
Crushed stone shall be placed and rough graded after the Special Borrow has been placed but before the subbase or surface course except as otherwise directed .
COMPENSATION .
Method of Measurement .
Measurement of the above work shall be the quantity of Crushed Stone actually used .
The weight slips shall be countersigned on delivery by the Engineer and no weight slip not so countersigned shall be included for payment . .
Basis of Payment .
Payment for the above work shall be made at the contract unit price per metric ton for the quantity of crushed stone actually used which shall include full compensation for the excavation and other materials necessary to satisfactorily complete the work. . Payment Item . .
Crushed Stone for Bleeders Metric Ton Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
SECTION SUBDRAINS DESCRIPTION .
General .
This work shall consist of constructing subdrains using pipe and crushed stone filter material in accordance with the plans and these specifications and in close conformity with the lines and grades shown on the plans or established by the Engineer .
The kind of pipe to be used shall be as designated on the plans and in the Proposal under the item for the particular kind of subdrains required .
If the item calls for a choice of pipe Bidder shall insert hisher price for the kind of pipe heshe will supply in the proper space provided .
MATERIALS .
General .
Materials shall meet the requirements specified in the following Subsections of Division III Materials Perforated Corrugated Metal Pipe M .. Perforated Corrugated Aluminum Pipe M ..
Crushed Stone M .. SlotPerforated Corrugated Plastic Pipe M .. CONSTRUCTION METHODS .
Excavation .
See Subsection .
The drain trench shall be excavated to the depth designated on the plans or if directed to a stratum of impervious material .
Where no structure is to be placed at the ends of the subdrain pipe the trench shall be excavated a distance of meter beyond the end of the pipe .
The excavation shall proceed in advance of the actual drain construction only to the extent the Engineer directs .
The width of the trench for pipe of more than millimeters in diameter shall be millimeters greater than the nominal diameter of the pipe .
The width of the trench for pipe millimeters or less in diameter shall be millimeters .
Where rock is encountered in the excavation no part of any rock remaining in the trench shall come within millimeters of any portion of the pipe . .
Laying Pipe .
Perforated subdrain pipe of the type specified shall normally be laid with the perforations located as shown on the Construction Standard Drawings however the Engineer may direct that the perforations be located otherwise if conditions warrant .
Joints shall be grouted or sealed unless otherwise specified on the plans or in the Special Provisions . .
Filling Drain Trench .
The pipe shall be laid on a millimeter bed of crushed stone and the space about above and in the Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
meter beyond the ends of the pipe shall be filled with millimeter or millimeter crushed stone .
The Contractor shall be responsible for keeping the backfill material clean and free of objectionable material from a line millimeters below the flow line of the pipe to the top of the trench. . Protection of Inlets and Open Outlets .
Inlets and open outlets of subdrains shall be covered with a micrometer galvanized wire screen of .
millimeter mesh satisfactorily fastened to the pipe .
COMPENSATION .
Method of Measurement .
Subdrain pipe shall be measured in place and the quantity to be paid for shall be the length of pipe actually constructed plus an allowance of meter for open ends .
Trench excavation greater than a depth of .
meters and rock excavation shall be measured as specified in Subsection .
for Class B Trench Excavation and Class B Rock Excavation respectively . .
Basis of Payment .
The above work will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear meter under the appropriate item for Subdrains with the specified size and kind of pipe complete in place .
Trench excavation greater than a depth of .
meters and rock excavation will be paid for as specified in Subsection .
for Class B Trench Excavation and Class B Rock Excavation. . Payment Items. . ___ millimeter Perforated Corrugated Metal Pipe ___ micrometer Subdrain Meter .
___ millimeter Perforated Corrugated Aluminum Pipe ___ micrometer Subdrain Meter .
___ millimeter Pipe Subdrain Option Meter .
___ millimeter SlotPerforated Corrugated Plastic Pipe Subdrain Meter .
Class B Trench Excavation Cubic Meter .
Class B Rock Excavation Cubic Meter Pipe or appurtenance size will be included as part of the item number in order to differentiate between the sizes .
SECTION PIPES REMOVED AND RELAID OR STACKED DESCRIPTION .
General .
This work shall consist of removing present pipes and relaying or stacking them in accordance with these specifications and in close conformity with the lines and grades shown on the plans or established by the Engineer .
MATERIALS .
Material for Pipe Joints shall conform to the requirements of Subsection .. Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
CONSTRUCTION METHODS .
Removal of Pipe .
A trench of sufficient width and depth shall be excavated so that the present pipe can be removed without damage to the pipe .
All joints shall than be opened and the pipe removed in its original sectional lengths .
Existing pipe in good condition which is damaged in removing or other handling due to carelessness of the Contractor shall be replaced with new pipe at the Contractors expense. . Relaying .
The construction methods for relaying the pipe in its final location shall conform to the requirements of Subsections .
to .
inclusive .
In the case of corrugated metal pipe culverts the Contractor shall furnish and place new collars and bolts and repair the coating of the pipe as directed. . Stacking .
The Contractor shall accept and hold entire responsibility for the removal handling stacking at a location convenient for removal by the owner and protection of all pipe until its final removal by others as designated and in accordance with the following Any pipe lost or damaged through lack of protection or carelessness by the Contractor shall be replaced with satisfactory pipe at hisher expense .
The Contractors responsibility will cease upon final acceptance of the work or days from the time a certified notice with copy to Engineer is sent by Contractor to owner of material that al material is available for removal. . Backfilling Trenches .
The trench left by the removal of the pipe shall be backfilled in conformance with the relevant provisions of Subsection ..
COMPENSATION .
Method of Measurement .
Pipes removed and relaid as directed will be measured in place after being relaid and quantity to be paid for shall be the length actually relaid .
Any remaining pipe not required to be stacked shall become the property of the Contractor and shall be removed from the work without additional compensation .
Pipes removed and stacked as directed will be measured as the actual length of pipe removed and stacked in good condition .
Trench excavation greater than a depth of .
meters and rock excavation will be measured as specified in Subsection .
for Class B Trench Excavation and Class B Rock Excavation respectively . .
Basis of Payment .
Pipes removed and relaid will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear meter of the kind of pipe required to be removed and relaid installed and complete in place .
Pipes removed and stacked will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear meter of the kind of pipe required to be removed and stacked .
Masonry ends will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic meter of the class of masonry required .
Trench excavation for both removing and relaying greater than a depth of .
meters and rock excavation for relaying will be paid for as specified in Subsection .
for Class B Trench Excavation and Class B Rock Excavation .
Backfill for trenches .
meters or less in depth shall be included in the various items of pipe .
Backfill for that Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
part of a trench which is more than .
meters in depth shall be included in the item for Class B Trench Excavation .
If borrow material is used for backfilling it well be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic meter of the kind of borrow required. . Payment Items . .
Pipe Removed and Relaid Meter .
Pipe Removed and Stacked Meter .
Class B Trench Excavation Cubic Meter .
Class B Rock Excavation Cubic Meter .
Gravel Borrow Cubic Meter .
Crushed Stone for Drainage Revetment andor Metric Ton Water Works Foundation .
MPa mm kg Cement Concrete Masonry Cubic Meter .
Field Stone Masonry in Cement Mortar Cubic Meter Pipe or appurtenance size will be included as part of the item number in order to differentiate between the sizes .
SECTION WATERWAYS DESCRIPTION .
General .
This work shall consist of the construction of waterways in accordance with these specifications and in close conformity with the lines and grades shown on the plans or established by the Engineer .
MATERIALS .
General .
Materials shall meet the requirements specified in the following Subsections of Division III Materials .
Gravel Borrow M ..
Type b Bituminous Concrete M .. Cement Concrete M .. Preformed Expansion Joint Filler M .. Welded Steel Wire Fabric M .. Load Transfer Assembly M .. Lubricant M .. CONSTRUCTION METHODS .
General .
A. Excavation See Subsection .. B .
Foundation .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
The gravel may be placed in one layer and compacted See Subsection .. . Bituminous Concrete Waterways .
Bituminous mixture shall be spread in courses on the prepared gravel base and compacted by tamping or rolling. . Cement Concrete Paving Waterways .
The cement concrete shall be mixed placed finished protected and curved in conformity with requirements of Section except that consolidation of the cement concrete in paved waterways may be accomplished by rodding without vibration .
COMPENSATION .
Method of Measurement .
The actual area of the exposed surfaces will be measured on paved waterways . .
Basis of Payment .
The paving of waterways together with the construction of a gravel foundation fine grading and compacting will be paid for at the contract unit price per square meter respectively under the item for Bituminous Concrete or Cement Concrete Paving complete in place .
Excavation except rock will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic meter under the item for Class A Trench Excavation as specified in Subsection .. Rock Excavation will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic meter under the item for Class B Rock Excavation if not already paid for under previous rock excavation. . Payment Items. . Bituminous Concrete Waterway Square Meter .
Cement Concrete Paving Waterway Square Meter .
Class A Trench Excavation Cubic Meter .
Class B Rock Excavation Cubic Meter Appurtenance size will be included as part of the item number in order to differentiate between the sizes .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
SECTION WATER SYSTEMS SECTION WATER SYSTEMS DESCRIPTION .
General .
Work under this section shall consist of making alterations in existing municipal water main systems or constructing new sections of existing systems affected by highway and bridge construction .
The work includes furnishing and installing new water pipe and appurtenances and removing and resetting existing materials in the same or new locations in accordance with these specifications and in close conformity with the lines and grades shown on the plans or established by the Engineer. . Workmen .
All personnel employed by the Contractor on this work shall be experienced and skilled in water main installation. . Protection of Underground Structures .
All conduits pipes or structures uncovered during excavation whether or not they are shown on the plans shall be protected and if damaged by the Contractor shall be repaired by himher or the utility company at the expense of the Contractor .
The Contractor shall not abandon any existing conduits pipes or structures without the prior approval of the Engineer . .
Notices .
Prior written notice of at least hours shall be given by the Contractor to affected Municipal Water and Fire Departments with a copy of such notice submitted to the Engineer before any water main is shut off and in no case shall a gate or hydrant be opened or shut without proper authorization .
MATERIALS .
General .
Materials shall meet the requirements specified in the following Subsections of Division III Materials .
Thrust Blocks Cement Concrete M .. Water Pipe and Fittings Cast Iron for Water Systems M .. Copper Tubing M .. Ductile Iron Pipe and Fittings M .. Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
Insulation and Waterproof Jackets M .. Cellular Glass M ..
Fiber Glass M ..
Expanded Polystyrene M .. Urethane M .. Jointing Materials for Pipes M .. Waterproof Jackets M ..
Valve boxes service boxes corporation cocks air relief valves yokes and tierods curb stops plugs and any other materials which are required shall be the type used by the particular municipality involved or as specified in the Special Provisions .
Air relief valves shall be installed at the high points of the main or where and as directed .
CONSTRUCTION METHODS .
General .
The installation or removal and reinstallation of water systems or parts thereof shall conform to the following construction procedures A .
Pipe Fittings etc .
All pipe fittings valves hydrants and other heavy accessories shall be carefully handled by the use of hoists or skidways to avoid shock or damage .
Pipe handled on skidways shall be not skidded or rolled against pipe already on the ground .
The Contractor shall replace or repair at hisher own expense any materials that have been damaged due to hisher negligence .
Where pipes are required in less than standard lengths the cutting shall be done in a neat and workmanlike manner without damage to the pipe .
B. Excavation .
See Subsection .. C. Bedding Pipe .
See Subsection .. D. Bridging .
Where required the Contractor shall provide suitable bridges for traffic to cross open trenches at streets and driveways .
E. Cleaning and Plugging Pipe .
The pipes and fittings shall be thoroughly cleaned before being laid and shall be kept clean until accepted in the finished work .
The ends of all uncompleted lines shall be tightly closed with temporary plugs at all times when the pipe laying is not in progress and no trench water or debris shall be permitted to enter the pipe .
F. Removal of Castings .
In the work of removing hydrants and other castings to be reset or stacked for the municipality the castings shall be exposed care being taken that they are not damaged by excavating or other machinery the joints shall then be opened and the castings carefully removed .
Any materials damaged during this work due to the Contractors negligence shall be replaced by the Contractor at hisher own expense .
G. Laying Pipe .
Proper tools and equipment for the safe and convenient handling and laying of the pipes shall be used .
The Contractor shall exercise reasonable caution during hisher operations in order to avoid damaging the pipes castings or fittings and any which are damaged shall be replaced by himher at hisher own expense .
The Contractor shall furnish the necessary pumps and tools to handle any water encountered in the pipe trench and shall maintain the trench in a satisfactory condition free from water during the laying of the pipe .
The pipe after being laid in place shall not under any circumstances be used as a drain pipe for the trench .
Cast iron pipe sections shall be laid with the bell on the upgrade end unless otherwise directed .
Before laying the pipe the outside of the spigot and the inside of the bell shall be wire brushed and wiped clean and dry .
When placing a length of pipe the yarning material for the joint shall be held around the bottom of the spigot so that it will enter the bell as the pipe is shoved into position .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
H. Setting Gates and Hydrants .
Gates and gate boxes shall be set in the pipe lines as directed .
Care shall be taken to see that the spigot ends are securely seated in the bell ends .
Blocking or supports of a permanent nature shall be placed under each valve to insure against settlement .
The blocking or permanent supports shall conform to Owners Specifications .
Each gate shall be tightly closed before being placed in the line and shall remain so until the joints on each side are completely made .
Gate boxes shall be set for all gates .
They shall be carefully fitted together and to the gate and securely held during backfilling .
The earth around them shall be thoroughly tamped in place and the cover set to the finished grade .
New gate and service boxes and existing gate and service boxes that are designated to be removed and reset or adjusted to line or grade which are located in roadway pavement areas shall have concrete collars constructed around them .
The concrete collars shall conform to the details of design shown in the Departments Standards for Concrete Collars .
Hydrants shall be properly supported and held plumb while the joints are being made and during backfilling .
Crushed stone or screened gravel with a minimum volume of .
cubic meters shall be placed to drain each hydrant drip .
The hydrants shall be satisfactorily braced near the bottom of the stem .
I. Yarning .
The strands of yarn for cast iron bellandspigot joints shall be cut longer than the circumference of the pipe so that the ends will overlap a maximum of millimeters .
The yarning material shall be thoroughly packed into the bell leaving a depth of not less than millimeters for the sealing compound .
Loose or frayed ends shall be left to protrude into the space left for the compound .
J. Jointing .
For cast iron bellandspigot joints the melting furnace shall be kept reasonably close to the point where the joints are being made .
The joint material shall be melted in a pot the top or flange of which will fit snugly into a furnace so designed that heat from a low fire will completely surround the bottom of the melting pot .
The melting pot ladle and pouring pot shall be thoroughly cleaned before melting the joint material .
No dirt or foreign material of any kind shall be allowed to enter the melting pot while in use .
The joint material shall be brought to such temperature that when stirred it will show a rapid change of color and when poured into the joint space will insure a perfect joint .
Before pouring all scum shall be removed from the molten material .
The joint space shall be free from all dirt water mud oil grease or other deleterious material before placing the joint runner .
The joint runner soaked in water and rubbed with clay to prevent adherence to the molten joint material shall be placed snugly against the face of the bell and the outside of the pipe .
The joint runner and the pouring gate shall be clayed to prevent the material from breaking out .
The molten material shall be poured slowly but continuously through the gate until the joint is completely filled to the top of the gate .
After cooling the filled joints shall be caulked with pneumatic tools or hand tools until thoroughly compacted to form watertight joints without overstraining the bells .
K. Thrust Blocks and Pipe Anchors .
Reaction or thrust blocks of concrete shall be constructed at all tees plugs and bends as directed or as detailed on the drawings with MPa mm kg Cement Concrete Masonry .
The blocks shall be poured against undisturbed original ground and shall be so placed that pipe joints will be accessible for any possible future repairs .
Yokes and tierods shall be installed in addition to or in lieu of thrust blocks .
Pipe anchors shall be used when and as directed .
L. Testing .
After completion the trenches shall be partially backfilled leaving the joints exposed for examination and the pipe line then subjected to a hydrostatic pressure of percent above the normal operating pressure .
The pipe shall be tested between points as designated by the Engineer by slowly filling the test section with water by means of a pump connected to the pipe but not before the pipe has been relieved of air through taps made where required .
Any defects in the pipe or joints revealed by this pressure test shall be repaired or replaced and the pipe line again subjected to a hydrostatic pressure test as described above for possible leakage over the allowable limits .
Pump connections gauges and a measuring device shall be furnished by the Contractor .
The pressure test shall be maintained for at least hours during which time all exposed joints fittings valves and hydrants will be carefully examined .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
No pipe installation will be accepted until the leakage during a hour test period measured by pumping at the specified test pressure from a calibrated container into the section of pipe being tested is less than that determined by the formula NDP .
L L Allowable leakage in liters per hour N Number of joints D Nominal pipe diameter in millimeters P Average test pressure in kiloPascals Any defective joints and any defects in new pipe fittings valves or hydrants revealed during the leakage test or before final acceptance of the project shall be removed and replaced with other new material and again tested until the work is satisfactory with no additional compensation .
M. Disinfection .
After testing has been successfully completed the water mains shall be disinfected in accordance with the AWWA Standard Procedure C. N. Adjusting Boxes .
Gate boxes and service boxes shall be adjusted to required grades and shall be securely held during backfilling See Subsection .H .
O. Backfilling .
Subsection .. P. Installing Insulation and Jacket. . General .
Where water pipe is installed or hung on structures the insulating material shall be fiber glass cellular glass expanded polystyrene or urethane .
Section lengths and thickness shall depend on the pipe size and the recommendations of the insulation manufacturers .
When urethane insulating material is used the total thickness shall be not less than millimeters when any other type of insulating material is used the total thickness shall be not less than millimeters. . Construction Requirements .
a .
Cellular glass pipe insulation for use on water pipes shall be applied as follows Insulation shall cover all fittings flanges and pipe clamps .
The pipe shall be covered with the required thickness of cellular glass insulation of the premolded rigid type .
It shall be molded and cut to conform to the size and shape of the pipe .
All joints shall be tightly butted and sealed with adhesive as recommended by the manufacturer .
The cellular glass insulation shall be applied to clean dry pipe surfaces and secured with millimeter x . millimeter stainless steel strapping spaced millimeters on center .
After insulation is in place a tack coat of fibrated adhesive mastic shall be applied at the rate of liters square meters .
Into this a layer of asphalt coated x mesh glass fabric overlapping all edges at least millimeters shall be embedded .
A second layer of the same fabric shall then be applied together with additional adhesive mastic to completely embed the layer of fabric .
Finally apply another coating of mastic at the rate of liters square meters .
A weatherproof seal shall be provided at the ends of the insulation .
Insulation covering flanges fittings and pipe clamps shall be cut to make a tight fit with the pipe insulation overlapping millimeters on each end .
b .
Fiber glass insulation for use on water pipes shall be premolded with an integral vapor barrier jacket and applied as follows The fiber glass insulation shall be applied to the clean dry pipe surface .
Adjoining sections shall be butted firmly together and taped .
The tape shall be composed of a threeply system consisting of layer of creped kraft paper layer of aluminum foil and layer of asphalt impregnated creped kraft paper .
The three layers shall be tightly bonded together with an asphalt adhesive .
The tape shall be applied so that it overlaps the butt joint a minimum of millimeters on each side .
The longitudinal seam of the vapor barrier shall be sealed with a suitable adhesive .
All flanges fittings and pipe clamps shall be insulated with cement applied to the same total thickness as the pipe insulation and covered with millimeters galvanized wire netting stretched tightly over the surface and wired in place with Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
gage galvanized wire .
A weatherproof jacket of .
millimeter thick corrugated aluminum shall be placed over the insulation all edges to lap a minimum of millimeters .
Longitudinal joints shall be placed in the most suitable direction for shedding water .
An adhesive mastic cement shall be applied to all joints and seams making them completely watertight .
The aluminum jacket shall be secured with millimeter x . millimeter stainless steel strapping and stainless steel clips spaced millimeters on center .
c. Expanded polystyrene or urethane insulation for use on water pipes shall be premolded and applied as follows The polystyrene or urethane insulation shall be applied to clean dry pipe surfaces .
All joints shall be tightly butted and sealed with a suitable polystyrene or urethane adhesive .
The insulation shall be secured with millimeter x . millimeter stainless steel strapping and corrugated aluminum with integral vapor barrier shall be applied over the insulation all edges to lap a minimum of millimeters .
Longitudinal joints shall be placed in the most suitable direction for shedding water .
The jacket shall be secured with millimeter x . millimeter stainless steel strapping and stainless steel clips spaced millimeters on center .
A suitable adhesive that is compatible with polystyrene or urethane shall be applied to all joints and seams of the aluminum jacket making them completely watertight .
All flanges fittings and pipe clamps shall be covered with the same insulating material remolded and sized to make a tight fit with the pipe insulation and overlapping the pipe insulation millimeters on each end .
Prior to the application of the aluminum jacket all open ends of insulation covering flanges fittings and pipe clamps shall be covered with a layer of x mesh asphalt coated glass fabric embedded in suitable adhesive mastic cement .
COMPENSATION .
Method of Measurement .
Water pipe will be measured in place along the axis of the pipe without deduction for the space occupied by valves excluding however the length occupied by new fittings .
Where two pipes join measurement will be made to the intersection of the axes excluding the length occupied by new cast iron fittings .
Fittings consisting of bends tees caps wyes sleeves reducers increasers blowoff fittings and other special fittings applies only when new materials are necessary and which are not specifically provided for under other items in the Proposal .
Fittings other than new will not be paid separately but only under the applicable linear meter items .
When new fittings are measured for payment under the kilogram price for Item the length occupied by the fittings will not be measured for payment under the linear meter items .
The fittings excluding accessories comprising Rings Gaskets Bolts Nuts Washers and Clamps will be measured by the kilogram and the quantity to be paid for shall be the weight stated on the invoice of the supplier or the manufacturers rated weight as listed in the catalog whichever is the lesser .
For new special fittings not listed in the catalog the weight payable will be the invoice weight .
The Contractor shall furnish a copy of the Manufacturers catalog at the start of work .
Concrete collars required for gate and service boxes shall be included in the contract unit price for the relevant gate and service box items .
Insulation will be measured by the meter under the applicable water pipe insulation item .
Trench excavation in excess of .
meters in depth and rock excavation shall be measured as specified in Subsection .
for Class B Trench Excavation and Class B Rock Excavation respectively . .
Basis of Payment .
Water system work will be paid for at the contract unit price under the respective items for the kind of work involved as set forth in the Proposal .
New yokes and tierods will be paid for at the contract unit price per kilogram under Item .
Payment for fittings other than new will be paid for at the contract unit price per meter under the relevant pipe items .
The prices shall also include all excavation except rock to a maximum depth of .
meters as measured from the top of the trench to the bottom of the pipe barrel .
Trench excavation greater than .
meters and rock excavation will be paid for as specified in Subsection .
for Class B Trench Excavation and Class B Rock Excavation .
Backfill for trenches .
meters or less in depth shall be included in the various items of pipe .
Backfill for that part of a trench which is more than .
meters in depth shall be included in the item for Class B Trench Excavation .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
If the material for backfill is obtained from borrow it will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic meter of the kind of borrow required .
Payment for the restoration of surfaces over trenches shall be made at the contract unit price for the kind of materials used .
Thrust blocks where required will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic meter under Item MPa mm kg Cement Concrete Masonry .
Insulation will be paid for at the contract unit price per meter under Item Water Pipe Insulation complete in place. . Payment Items . .
Cast Iron Water Pipe Rubber Gasket Meter .
Ductile Iron Water Pipe Rubber Gasket Meter .
Ductile Iron Water Pipe Mechanical Joint Meter .
Cast Iron Water Pipe Cement Lined Meter .
Cast Iron Fittings for Water Pipe Kilogram .
Ductile Iron Fittings for Water Pipe Kilogram .
Cast Iron Water Main Removed and Relaid Meter .
Cast Iron Water Main Removed and Stacked Meter .
Copper Tubing Type K Meter .
Gate Valve Each .
Gate and Gate Box Each .
Gate and Gate Box Removed and Reset Each .
Gate Box Removed and Reset Each .
Gate and Gate Box Removed and Stacked Each .
Gate Box Each .
Gate Box Adjusted Each .
Corporation Cock Each .
Cast Iron Plug Each .
Water Pipe Insulation Meter .
Hydrant Each .
Hydrant Removed and Reset Each .
Hydrant Removed and Stacked Each .
Service Box Each .
Service Box Removed and Reset Each .
Service Box Removed and Stacked Each .
Service Box Adjusted Each .
Curb Stop Each .
Curb Stop Removed and Reset Each .
Class B Trench Excavation Cubic Meter .
Class B Rock Excavation Cubic Meter .
Ordinary Borrow Cubic Meter .
Gravel Borrow Cubic Meter .
Crushed Stone for Drainage Revetment or Water Work Foundations Metric Ton .
MPa mm kg Cement Concrete Masonry Cubic Meter Pipe or appurtenance size will be included as part of the item number in order to differentiate between the sizes .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
SECTION SUBBASE BASE COURSES SHOULDERS PAVEMENTS AND BERMS SECTION GRAVEL SUBBASE DESCRIPTION .
General .
The gravel subbase shall consist of approved gravel placed on the subgrade and in close conformity with the lines and grades shown on the plans or established by the Engineer .
MATERIALS .
General .
Materials shall meet the requirements specified in the following Subsections of Division III Materials Gravel Borrow M ..
Type a or b Processed Gravel M .. CONSTRUCTION METHODS .
Gravel Subbase .
The gravel shall be spread and compacted in layers not exceeding millimeters in depth compacted measurement except the last layer of gravel Subbase course conforming to M ..
Type a or b or M .. will be millimeters in depth compacted measurement and all layers shall be compacted to not less than percent of the maximum dry density of the material as determined by the Standard AASHTO Test Designation T compaction test Method C at optimum moisture content as determined by the Engineer .
If the material retained on the .
millimeter sieve is or more of the total sample this test shall not apply and the material shall be compacted to the satisfaction of the Engineer .
The specific density of the Gravel Subbase shall be maintained by determining the number of passes of a roller required to produce a constant and uniform density after conducting a series of tests either using the sandvolume or the nuclear device .
Any stone with a dimension greater than that permitted for the type of gravel specified shall be removed from the subbase before the gravel is compacted .
Compaction shall continue until the surface is even and true to the proposed lines and grades within a tolerance of millimeters above or below the required cross sectional elevations and to a maximum irregularity not exceeding millimeters under a meter line longitudinally .
In locations when the millimeters of gravel is used as a base for Item this tolerance shall be millimeters under a meter line .
Any specific area of gravel subbase which after being rolled does not form a satisfactory solid stable foundation shall be removed replaced and recompacted by the Contractor without extra compensation .
The gravel foundation for cement concrete surfacing shall be conditioned in accordance with the provisions of Subsection ..
COMPENSATION .
Method of Measurement .
Gravel for subbase shall be measured as specified in Subsection .. Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II . .
Basis of Payment .
Gravel for the subbase will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic meter for Gravel Borrow .
Payment for shaping and compacting of the subbase as specified herein shall be included in the item of Gravel Borrow. . Payment Items. . Gravel Borrow Cubic Meter .
Processed Gravel Cubic Meter SECTION DENSE GRADED CRUSHED STONE FOR SUBBASE DESCRIPTION .
General .
Dense Graded Crushed Stone for Subbase consists of crusherrun coarse aggregates of crushed stone or gravel and fine aggregates of natural sand or stone screenings uniformly premixed and placed on the subgrade or subbase in close conformity with the lines and grades shown on the plans or established by the Engineer .
MATERIALS .
General .
Material shall meet the requirements specified in the following Subsection of Division III Materials Dense Graded Crushed Stone for Subbase M .. CONSTRUCTION METHODS .
General .
Grade control survey shall conform to Subsection ..
The Contractor shall furnish set and maintain all line and grade stakes . .
Spreading and Compacting .
The Dense Graded Crushed Stone shall be spread in layers from self spreading vehicles equipped with automated grade controlled equipment .
Power graders or conventional self spreading vehicles may be used only with prior written approval of the Engineer .
The Dense Graded Crushed Stone shall be placed to the tolerance as stipulated in Section Gravel Subbase .
Suitable watering devices shall be available at the source of supply and on the project for use as directed by the Engineer to prevent segregation in transit and during spreading and to obtain proper density and stability of the mixture .
The specified density of the Dense Graded Crushed Stone shall be maintained by determining the number of passes of a roller required to produce a constant and uniform density after conducting a series of tests either using the sandvolume method or the nuclear device .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
COMPENSATION .
Method of Measurement .
Dense Graded Crushed Stone shall be measured in place to the limits specified on the plans or as directed by the Engineer with no percentage added . .
Basis of Payment .
Dense Graded Crushed Stone for subbase will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic meter complete in place. . Payment Items .
Dense Graded Crushed Stone for Subbase Cubic Meter .
Dense Graded Crushed Stone for Subbase Metric Ton SECTION RECLAIMED BASE COURSE DESCRIPTION .
General .
The work shall consist of manufacturing a stabilized base course through the recycling of the existing pavement structure and a specified depth of acceptable subbase material .
This combination of pavement and subbase material is to be uniformly crushed pulverized and blended then spread graded and compacted to the lines and grades shown on the plans or established by the Engineer .
MATERIALS .
General .
All reclaimed material shall conform to the requirements of Subsection M .. of Division III Materials .
Aggregate for Crushed Stone for Blending used to correct gradation deficiencies shall conform to the requirements of Subsections M .. to M .. of Division III Materials .
Aggregate for Dense Graded Crushed Stone for Subbase shall conform to the requirements of Subsection M .. of Division III Materials. . Sampling and Pretesting .
The Department will take and analyze test pits to the depth to be recycled and provide the following information in the bid proposal for each .
The location of the test pit . .
The depth of existing bituminous material to be recycled . .
The aggregate gradation of the underlying material to be recycled .
The information supplied is intended to be an indication of the existing conditions and in no way releases the Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
Contractor from the responsibility of fulfilling the requirements of this specification .
Any gradation deficiencies in the existing materials as indicated by the test pits shall be corrected by blending the appropriate aggregate sizes into the mixture .
CONSTRUCTION METHODS .
General .
Reclaiming operations shall not be permitted when the existing pavement or subbase contains frost when the subbase is excessively wet as determined by the Engineer nor when the air or surface temperature is below C. Reclaiming operations shall not commence before April and shall terminate on or before October unless otherwise approved in writing by the Engineer .
Prior to the start of reclaiming operations the Contractor shall locate and protect existing drainage and utility structures and underground pipes culverts conduits and other appurtenances .
The limit of each sequence of the reclamation process shall be .
kilometers full width or as directed by the Engineer in order that the placing of pavement structure up to the binder course will be completed before beginning the next sequence of roadway reclamation work. . Equipment .
The recycling equipment shall have a positive depth control to insure a uniform depth of processing .
This equipment shall have the ability to process the complete design depth specified into a homogeneous mass .
It shall also be capable of crushing all oversize material encountered except ledge or boulders larger than millimeters in diameter .
A minimum of fourteen calendar days prior to the proposed start of work the Contractor shall submit in writing to the Engineer for approval a description of the specific equipment and construction methods to be used in performing the work .
The Contractor will be required to demonstrate to the Engineer the ability of the work crew and equipment to produce reclaimed material conforming to specifications at a rate of production consistent with the time allowed under the Contract .
A test section shall be constructed approximately meters long and one lane wide and be located within the project limits at a location determined by the Engineer .
The forward speed and processing direction e.g .
up cutting vs. down cutting of the recycling equipment shall be recorded during construction of the test section .
Representative samples of the reclaimed material shall be taken from this test section for analysis by the Engineer .
Full scale production will not be allowed to commence until the Engineer has reviewed the test results and gives written approval of the equipment and construction methods used in the construction of the test strip .
Failure to meet gradation requirements or an insufficient production rate may be considered cause for rejection of the equipment the construction methods or both .
The Contractor must then submit in writing the proposed changes in equipment andor construction methods and either construct another test section or reconstruct the original section as determined by the Engineer .
This procedure may be repeated until acceptable results are obtained at no additional compensation .
Otherwise failure to meet gradation requirements due to improper equipment or construction methods shall not constitute a reason for any additional compensation for the import and blending of any aggregate to meet the deficiencies .
Approval of equipment includes the speed and processing direction it was operated at during construction of the test section .
Therefore the same operating speed and processing direction must be maintained during normal production .
Changes in the equipments operating speed andor processing direction may only be made with the Engineers written approval .
At least one vibratory roller shall be used on each reclaimed surface and shall have a compacting width of not less than .
meters .
Each roller shall have a gross mass of not less than .
metric tons .
Approved equipment shall be maintained in satisfactory working condition at all times . .
Structure Lowering and Raising .
All work shall be done in accordance with the applicable provisions of Section .
All drainage utility and municipality structures are to be referenced and lowered to a minimum depth Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
millimeters below the bottom of the proposed reclaimed base course .
Lowered structures shall be covered with steel plates conforming to the requirements specified in Subsection ..
The voids remaining after the structures have been lowered are to be filled with a suitable material as determined by the Engineer .
The Contractor will be responsible for the coordination with the respective utility companies for the lowering and raising of privately owned structures and gate boxes .
The reclaiming operation shall not begin until all structures and boxes are lowered .
It shall be the Contractors responsibility to maintain drainage functioning properly in the areas under construction up to the time when the final system is put into use .
All structures lowered will be raised to the binder grade elevation upon placement of the binder course material for that section .
Adjustment of the castings to final grade will not be allowed until the Engineer approves the placement of bituminous concrete top course material throughout the project .
Any drainage structure found to be deteriorated below the plated depth shall be rebuilt from the bottom of the deterioration to the plated depth. . Reclaiming Operations .
Prior to the start of reclamation the existing pavement shall be swept with a power sweeper to remove all trash sand dirt organic matter and other undesirable material to the satisfaction of the Engineer .
Also the existing pavement shall be sawcut full depth within the areas where the adjacent surface is to be protected curb side streets etc .
as shown on the plans andor as directed by the Engineer .
The Contractor shall reclaim only that area of pavement that can be processed and compacted by the end of the same working day at which time it must be opened to traffic with the Engineers approval .
In any section reclamation work shall be done on onehalf the road width at a time .
Oneway traffic will be allowed only during working hours with traffic police present .
Twoway traffic shall be maintained at all other times .
Suitable ramping shall be in place at the beginning and end of work zone to allow for smooth and safe travel .
This shall be considered incidental to the work for this item .
The required density shall be maintained until the bituminous concrete pavement has been placed .
Any imperfections discovered prior to its placement shall be repaired as directed by the Engineer at no additional compensation .
The total thickness of the pavement structure unless otherwise indicated and uppermost portion of the subbase layer shall be recycled to the design depth specified on the typical sections .
The Engineer shall perform a sieve analysis of the reclaimed material for every square meters of material processed or as often as conditions may require as determined by the Engineer .
Test results shall be made available to the Contractor .
If conditions warrant the Engineer may stop work until the required test results become available .
If the Engineer directs due to gradation deficiencies in the existing materials as indicated by the test pits the appropriate crushed stone aggregate sizes shall be blended with the recycled material to produce a uniform mixture meeting the gradation requirements .
Additionally if the Engineer directs dense graded crushed stone shall be added for volume purposes .
Any required modifications to the remaining subbase such as but not limited to cuts fills and grade realignment shall be made .
Existing unsuitable material shall be removed to the lines and grades established by the Engineer and replaced with a suitable material as determined by the Engineer .
Existing surplus reclaimed material shall be used when available at no additional compensation .
All unsuitable material andor excess reclaimed material shall become the property of the Contractor to be properly disposed of outside the project limits. . Compaction and Dust Control .
The reclaimed material shall be rolled compacted and fine graded to the specified cross sections andor grades as shown or as established by the Engineer .
The reclaimed base course shall be tested for compaction and smoothness and accuracy of grade in accordance with the applicable provisions of Subsection ..
The required density shall be measured by a Nuclear Density Gauge supplied by the Department .
If any portions are found to be unacceptable by the Engineer such portions shall be reprocessed regraded and recompacted until the required smoothness and accuracy are obtained .
At the end of each days progress the Contractor shall apply Calcium Chloride in accordance with the applicable provisions of Section .
Water for roadway dust control shall be applied as directed .
A grader roller and water wagon shall be maintained on the project site during the reclamation process .
The Contractor shall submit to the Engineer in writing a twentyfour hour availability telephone number for any Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
emergency maintenance dictated by the weather conditions or as determined by the Engineer for repair compaction and dust control .
COMPENSATION .
Method of Measurement .
Reclaimed Base Course shall be measured in place to the limits specified on the plans or as directed by the Engineer .
No deductions will be made for surface structures .
The lowering and the plating of gates and structures will be considered incidental to this item and no additional compensation will be allowed .
Structures raised from the plated depth of the bituminous concrete binder course elevation or the bituminous concrete top course elevation in one operation shall be measured as a remodeled unit each complete and approved .
Structures adjusted from the bituminous concrete binder course elevation to the finished grade elevation shall be measured as an adjusted unit each complete and approved .
Structures rebuilt shall be measured by the average height in vertical meters and hundredths of a meter from the bottom of the deterioration to the plated depth .
Structures damaged below the plated depth due to the Contractors negligence shall be measured and deducted from the vertical meter measurement .
Raising the structure from the plated depth will be measured as stated above for a remodeled unit . .
Basis of Payment .
The accepted quantity of reclamation as measured above shall be paid for at the contract unit price bid per square meter .
This unit price shall include all compensation for crushing pulverizing blending spreading grading sawcutting the existing bituminous concrete at the direction of the Engineer compacting test section construction blending with aggregate moving the processed material to allow for modifications to the remaining subbase andor subgrade moving reclaimed material from one location to another within the project and any incurred costs resulting from the Contractors decision to process off site .
The unit price bid shall also include compensation for all costs associated with the removal of the castings and the referencing lowering and plating of the structures .
It shall also include full compensation for all labor tools equipment materials and all incidental work necessary to complete the work as specified .
Removal and disposal of unsuitable material surplus reclaimed material or any subbasesubgrade material necessary for grade changes shall be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic meter for Item .
Unclassified Excavation .
Special borrow required to be placed under the reclaimed material shall be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic meter for Item .
Special Borrow .
Grading and compacting the subbase andor subgrade resulting from the removal of unsuitable material shall be paid for at the contract unit price per square meter for Item .
Fine Grading and Compacting Subgrade Areas .
Adjustment of drainage structures shall be paid for at the contract unit price each for Item .
Drainage Structure Adjusted .
Rebuilding of drainage structures shall be paid for at the contract unit price per vertical meter for Item .
Drainage Structure Rebuilt .
Raising of lowered structures shall be paid for at the contract unit price each for Item .
Drainage Structure Remodeled .
Aggregate for providing added volume shall be paid for at the contract unit price per metric ton for Item .
Dense Graded Crushed Stone for Subbase .
Aggregate to correct gradation deficiencies shall be paid for at the contract unit price per metric ton for Item .
Crushed Stone for Blending .
Calcium Chloride for dust control shall be paid for at the contract unit price per kilogram for Item .
Calcium Chloride for Roadway Dust Control .
Water for dust control shall be paid for at the contract unit price per liters for Item .
Water for Roadway Dust Control. . Payment Items .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II. . Unclassified Excavation Cubic Meter .
Special Borrow Cubic Meter .Find Grading and Compacting Subgrade Areas Square Meter .Drainage Structure Adjusted Each .
Drainage Structure Rebuilt Vertical Meter .
Drainage Structure Remodeled Each .
Dense Graded Crushed Stone for Subbase Metric Ton .Reclaimed Base Course Square Meter .
Crushed Stone for Blending Metric Ton .Calcium Chloride for Roadway Dust Control Kilogram .Water for Roadway Dust Control Liters SECTION RECLAIMED PAVEMENT BORROW MATERIAL FOR BASE COURSE DESCRIPTION .
General .
Reclaimed pavement borrow material for Base Course consists of crushed asphalt pavement crushed cement concrete and gravel borrow uniformly premixed and placed on the subgrade or subbase in close conformity with the lines and grades shown on the plans or established by the Engineer .
MATERIALS .
General .
Material shall meet the requirements specified in the following Subsection of Division III Materials Reclaimed Pavement Borrow Material for Base Course M .. CONSTRUCTION METHODS .
Reclaimed Pavement Borrow Material for Base Course .
The reclaimed pavement borrow material shall be spread and compacted in layers not exceeding millimeters in depth compacted measurement except the last layer of reclaimed pavement borrow material conforming to M .. will be millimeters in depth compacted measurement .
The specified density of the Reclaimed Pavement Borrow Material shall be maintained by determining the number of passes of a roller that are required to produce a constant and uniform density after conducting a series of tests either using the sandvolume method or the nuclear device .
The Reclaimed Pavement Borrow Material shall be placed to the tolerance as stipulated in Section Gravel Subbase .
COMPENSATION .
Method of Measurement .
Reclaimed Pavement Borrow Material shall be measured in place to the limits specified on the plans or as directed by the Engineer with no percentage added .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II . .
Basis of Payment .
Reclaimed Pavement Borrow Material for Base Course will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic meter complete in place. . Payment Items. . Reclaimed Pavement Borrow Material for Base Course Cubic Meter SECTION GRAVEL BASE COURSE DESCRIPTION .
General .
Gravel base course shall consist of approved gravel placed upon the subgrade or subbase as directed and in accordance with these specifications and in reasonable close conformity with the lines and grades shown on the plans or established by the Engineer .
MATERIALS .
General .
Materials shall meet the requirements specified in the following Subsection of Division III Materials Gravel Borrow M ..
Type b Reclaimed Pavement Borrow Material for Base Course meeting Subsection M .. may be substituted for Gravel Borrow .
CONSTRUCTION METHODS .
Spreading and Compacting .
The gravel shall be spread in layers upon the prepared subbase or subgrade from selfspreading vehicles or with power graders of approved types or by hand methods .
Gravel shall be spread in layers not more than millimeters thick compacted measure .
The gravel shall be compacted and placed to the tolerance as stipulated in Section Gravel Subbase .
COMPENSATION .
Method of Measurement .
Gravel used for base course will be measured as specified in Subsection .. .
Basis of Payment .
Gravel for base course will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic meter of Gravel for Base Course Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
complete in place. . Payment Items. . Gravel for Base Course Cubic Meter SECTION CLASS I BITUMINOUS CONCRETE BASE COURSE TYPE I DESCRIPTION .
General .
This type of base course shall be composed of mineral aggregate mineral filler and bituminous material .
The base course shall be constructed in one or more courses as shown on the plans and as directed on the prepared or existing subbase in accordance with these specifications and in close conformity with the lines grades compacted thickness and typical cross section shown on the plans .
The Engineer may require the Contractor to remove and replace at hisher own expense any defective mix not conforming to the specified job mix formula within the stipulated tolerances on the basis of the Department testing .
Samples of the actual mixture in use will be taken as many times daily as necessary and the mixtures shall be maintained uniform for the project as specified herein .
The Engineer may suspend further approval for use of the Plant mixtures in Department work if the mixtures are not uniformly furnished as specified until any necessary changes have been made so that the mixtures do conform to the specified requirements . .
Composition and Compaction Acceptance Tests .
Where plant inspection is maintained the material will be considered acceptable for use when the specified tests from samples obtained at the production plant indicate conformance to M Pavement density shall be determined as outlined in M The bituminous mixture and the labor for obtaining these samples in the field shall be furnished without charge by the Contractor .
The samples shall be taken in accordance with AASHTO T . MATERIALS .
General .
Material shall meet the requirements specified in Section M .. of Division III Materials and the following Subsections Mineral Aggregate M ..
Mineral Filler M .. Bituminous Materials M ..
Composition of Base Course Mixture see Table A M CONSTRUCTION METHODS .
General .
The bituminous concrete base course shall be constructed in accordance with relevant provisions of Section for Class I Bituminous Concrete Pavement Type I. Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
The equipment for spreading and finishing shall be mechanical selfpowered pavers capable of spreading and finishing the mixture true to line grade width and crown by means of fully automated controls for both longitudinal and transverse slope .
The use of any other type of equipment for spreading and finishing shall require the prior written approval of the Engineer .
COMPENSATION .
Method of Measurement .
Bituminous concrete shall be measured by the metric ton and shall be the actual and verified tonnage complete in place and approved .
The quantity shall be determined only by weight slips that have been properly countersigned by the Engineer at the time of delivery .
Bitumen used for prime coat if required by plans or specifications or ordered by the Engineer will be measured as specified in Subsection .. .
Basis of Payment .
The bituminous concrete determined as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price per metric ton of the kind of bituminous concrete required complete in place .
Bitumen as specified herein to be paid for as prime coat if required will be paid for at the contract unit price per liter under the item for Bitumen for Prime Coat complete in place. . Payment Items. . Class I Bituminous Concrete Base Course Type I Metric Ton .
Bitumen for Prime Coat Liter SECTION CEMENT CONCRETE BASE COURSE DESCRIPTION .
General .
Cement concrete base course shall be constructed in one course on the prepared subbase in accordance with these specifications and in close conformity with the lines and grades shown on the plans or established by the Engineer .
MATERIALS .
General .
Materials shall meet the requirements specified in the following Subsections of Division III Materials MPa mm kg Cement Concrete M .. Preformed Joint Filler M ..
Hot Poured Joint Sealer M ..
The concrete shall have a slump of millimeters with a tolerance of plus or minus millimeters .
CONSTRUCTION METHODS Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II. . General .
The cement concrete base course may be constructed by the SlipForm Method or the FixedForm Method .
Equipment and tools necessary for handling materials and performing all parts of the work shall be approved by the Engineer as to design capacity and mechanical condition .
Grade control survey and staking shall conform to Subsection ..
The Contractor shall furnish set and maintain all line and grade stakes for grading and paving. . Side Forms .
The forms where required shall be an approved wood or metal type of a width equal to the depth of the concrete true to line free from warp and of sufficient strength when staked to resist the pressure of the concrete without springing and so designed that the various sections may be fastened together in such a manner as to prevent the vertical or horizontal movement of the ends .
The forms shall be jointed neatly and tight shall be set true to line and grade well staked and braced and shall have uniform bearing on the subbase through their entire length .
In general the setting of forms shall proceed at least meters in advance of the mixing and placing of concrete .
The form shall be thoroughly cleaned before any concrete is placed against them and shall be made tight to prevent the leaking of mortar from the concrete. . Fine Grading .
The fine grading of the foundation shall conform to Subsection .. .
Joints .
The Contractor shall construct weakened plane transverse contraction joints in the concrete base course every to meters or as shown on the plans .
These joints shall consist of surface slots constructed in accordance with the requirements of Subsection .C for transverse contraction joints .
Expansion joints shall be formed about all structures and features projecting through or into the pavement and between the pavement slab and adjacent curbing .
Unless otherwise indicated such joints shall be millimeters in width and shall be filled with preformed joint filler as specified in Subsection M .. and sealed with joint filler compound as specified in Subsection M .. in the same manner as specified for transverse expansion joints in Subsection .B .
There will be no additional compensation of joints . .
Placing Concrete .
Concrete shall be placed on a moist firm and smooth subbase in accordance with the requirements of Subsection .
except that it shall be placed in one layer. . Finishing Concrete .
The surface of the concrete shall be struck off with a template shaped so as to leave the concrete with a smooth even contour surface and crown as shown on the plans and in the typical cross section .
The template shall be so constructed that it shall have sufficient strength to retain its shape under all working conditions .
This template shall be moved with a longitudinal and crosswise motion and always in the direction in which the work is progressing .
The surface of the concrete shall be finished to the elevations contours and crowns required with a tolerance allowance of millimeters in meters .
The surface of the concrete shall be made free of footprints ruts depressions or other imperfections and shall then be lightly broomed as directed with approved stable or wire brooms. . Protection and Curing .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
The pavement shall be protected and cured as required in Subsection .
except that membrane compounds not compatible with bituminous materials shall not be used .
COMPENSATION .
Method of Measurement .
Cement concrete base course will be measured in place by the square meter conforming to the length width and depth required by the plans or as directed .
The Contractor shall have no claim for extra payment if thickness of pavement exceeds that shown on the plans or as directed . .
Basis of Payment .
Standard cement concrete base course will be paid for at the contract unit price per square meter under the item for Cement Concrete Base Course .
High early strength concrete base course will be paid for at the contract unit price per square meter under the item for High Early Strength Cement Concrete Base Course .
The price paid per square meter shall also include all sprinkling or treating the roadway to keep down dust. . Payment Items. . Cement Concrete Base Course Square Meter .
High Early Strength Cement Concrete Base Course Square Meter SECTION ROADWAY DUST CONTROL DESCRIPTION .
General .
This work shall consist of furnishing and applying approved dust control material to the surface of the subgrade or elsewhere as directed in accordance with these specifications .
MATERIALS .
Materials .
The material for this work shall be of the kind shown on the plans and shall meet the requirements of the following Subsections of Division III Materials Sand M ..
Type a Calcium Chloride M .. Bituminous Material Cutback Asphalt M .. Asphalt Emulsion M .. Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
CONSTRUCTION METHODS .
General .
The required material shall be properly applied where directed by the Engineer and distributed uniformly at the rate specified or ordered .
The means of distribution shall depend upon the kind of material used and the method and equipment used shall be satisfactory to the Engineer .
The number and frequency of applications shall be as determined by the Engineer . .
Treatment with Calcium Chloride .
Calcium chloride shall be uniformly applied at the rate of gramssquare meter or at any other rate as directed by means of a mechanical spreader or other approved methods . .
Treatment with Bitumen .
Bituminous material shall be applied by means of an approved pressure distributor of a type that will distribute the material uniformly under a pressure of not less than kilopascals without streaks or spots .
It shall be so designed as to enable its operator to cut out any portion of the roadway to control the flow and to avoid any surplus deposit of the material on the roadway or elsewhere .
The bitumen shall be applied at the rate specified on the plans or as directed by the Engineer . .
Sand Cover .
When and if directed by the Engineer the bitumen shall be covered with a sufficient quantity of sand to absorb all surplus bitumen . .
Treatment with Water .
Water shall be applied at locations at such times and in the amount as directed by the Engineer .
Quantities of water wasted or applied without authorization will not be paid for .
Watering equipment shall consist of pipelines tanks tank trucks or other devices approved by the Engineer which are capable of applying a uniform spread of water over the surface .
A suitable device for a positive shutoff and for regulating the flow of water shall be located so as to permit positive operator control .
COMPENSATION .
Method of Measurement .
Calcium chloride will be measured by the kilogram .
Bituminous material will be measured by volume in liters in accordance with the provisions of Section .
Sand will be measured by the cubic meter by load measurement .
The quantity shall be the volume of the load as measured divided by .. Water will be measured for payment by the number of liters .
The water will be measured in tanks or tank trucks of predetermined capacity or by means of satisfactorily installed meters .
Any and all measuring devices shall be furnished by the Contractor . .
Basis of Payment .
Calcium chloride will be paid for at the contract unit price per kilogram under the item for Calcium Chloride for Roadway Dust Control complete in place .
Bituminous material will be paid for at the contract unit price per liter of Bitumen for Roadway Dust Control complete in place .
Sand will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic meter under the item for Sand Borrow Cover complete in place as specified .
Water will be paid for at the contract price per liters for Water for Roadway Dust Control which price shall Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
include all water labor tools and equipment required to furnish and measure the water applied to surfaces designated by the Engineer and at the times specified. . Payment Items. . Calcium Chloride for Roadway Dust Control Kilogram .
Bitumen for Roadway Dust Control Liter .
Water for Roadway Dust Control Liters .
Sand Borrow Cover Cubic Meter SECTION SHOULDERS DESCRIPTION .
General .
Shoulders shall be constructed of approved materials in accordance with these specifications and in conformity with the lines grades and typical cross sections shown on the plans .
Shoulders shall be composed of excavated material or borrow of the kind required or as shown on the plan .
Where shown on the plans the top portions of shoulders shall be paved with surfacing material of the kind specified .
MATERIALS .
General .
Materials shall meet the requirements specified in the following Subsections of Division III Materials Ordinary Borrow M .. Gravel Borrow M ..
Type c Loam Borrow M .. Sodding Field M ..
Seed M .. .
Surfacing Materials .
The surfacing materials for paving the top portion of shoulders shall conform to the requirements of the particular sections of these specifications relating to the kind of pavement or surfacing required .
CONSTRUCTION METHODS .
General .
The subgrade for shoulders if required shall be prepared as required in Section Subgrade .
Portions of the shoulders of sufficient width to hold the pavement in its proper place shall be built in conjunction with the pavement and shall be rolled to a width of at least millimeters with each rolling of the roadway base course or surface course .
Whenever the plan shows that sodding loaming paving or other similar work affecting shoulder construction adjacent to the roadway pavement is required the Contractor will be required to construct temporary shoulders of suitable Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
material to support the roadway pavement adequately during rolling operations .
After the pavement is constructed the temporary shoulders shall be carefully removed and satisfactorily disposed of by the Contractor prior to construction of the permanent shoulders .
Where necessary temporary shoulders shall be constructed in conjunction with the construction of paved shoulders in the same manner as prescribed above for roadway pavement .
When shoulders are to be loamed and seeded the construction method shall be as specified in Section for such work .
Sodding of shoulders shall be done in conformity with the requirements of Section for Field Sodding .
Ordinary borrow gravel borrow and loam shall be furnished placed and rolled in accordance with the requirements of Section and as specified herein .
Paving of shoulders shall be done in the manner specified in the particular section of these specifications relating to the kind of pavement or surfacing to be used in this work .
At all times construction shall be so carried on that effective and adequate drainage will be provided .
The full widths of all shoulders except paved or sodded areas shall be reformed trimmed raked and rolled before the final completion of the work and the surface when finished shall conform to the proposed grade and cross section .
COMPENSATION .
Method of Measurement .
All borrow materials for shoulders will be measured by the cubic meter in accordance with the provision of Subsection ..
Surfacing materials for paving shoulders will be measured as specified in the particular section for the kind of pavement required .
Sodding will be measured by the square meter as specified in Subsection .. .
Basis of Payment .
Payment for grading of shoulders composed of material obtained from excavation will be included in the price paid for removal and disposal of the type of excavation used .
When composed of borrow shoulders will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic meter of borrow of the kind required as specified in Subsection ..
Compensation for the removal and disposal of temporary shoulder material will be included in the contract unit price under the item for the kind of material used in the roadway pavement or permanent shoulder .
When shoulders are paved with surfacing materials such materials will be paid for at the contract unit prices for the kinds of materials used in the pavement as specified in the particular section relating to the kind of pavement or surface ordered .
When sodding is used on shoulders it will be paid for at the contract unit price per square meter under Item for Field Sodding complete in place as specified in Subsection ..
The finegrading and rolling of the subgrade upon which shoulders are constructed will be paid for at the contract unit price per square meter under Item Fine Grading and Compacting In Subgrade Areas .
SECTION CLASS I BITUMINOUS CONCRETE PAVEMENT TYPE I DESCRIPTION .
General .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
This type of pavement shall be composed of mineral aggregate mineral filler and bituminous material .
The pavement shall be constructed in courses as shown on the plans and as directed on the prepared or existing base in accordance with these specifications and in close conformity with the lines grades compacted thickness and typical cross section shown on the plans . .
Composition and Compaction Acceptance Tests .
Where plant inspection is maintained the material will be considered acceptable for use when the specified tests from samples obtained at the production plant indicate conformance to M The densities of the completed pavement shall not be less than of the density obtained from Laboratory compaction of a mixture composed of the same materials in like proportions .
Laboratory compaction will be performed by Department Standard Methods as outlined in M The bituminous mixture and the labor for obtaining these samples in the field shall be furnished without charge by the Contractor .
The samples shall be taken in accordance with AASHTO T . MATERIALS .
General .
Materials shall meet the requirements in the following Subsection of Division III Materials Mineral Aggregate M ..
Mineral Filler M .. Bituminous Materials M .. CONSTRUCTION METHODS .
General .
The Engineer may require the Contractor to remove and replace at hisher own expense any defective mix not conforming to the specified job mix formula within the stipulated tolerances on the basis of the Department testing .
Samples of the actual mixture in use will be taken as many times daily as necessary and the mixture shall be maintained uniform for the project as specified herein .
The Engineer may suspend further approval for use of the Plant mixtures in Department work if the mixtures are not uniformly furnished as specified until any necessary changes have been made so that the mixtures do conform to the specified requirements .
If at any time before the final acceptance of the work any soft imperfect places or spots shall develop in the surface all such places shall be removed and replaced with new materials and then compacted until the edges at which the new work connects with the old become invisible .
Grade control survey shall conform to Subsection ..
The Contractor shall furnish set and maintain all line and grade stakes necessary to guide the automated grade control equipment .
Where required these control stakes shall be maintained by the Contractor and used throughout the operations from the grading of the subbase material up to and including the final layers of the pavement .
With prior approval of the Engineer and with no increase in cost a plant may substitute a limited amount up to metric tons per project of binder mix for black base .
The substitution will be only within the station limits locations depths and tonnage as permitted by the Engineer .
The Contractor will supply an approved dial type asphalt thermometer range of C to C for each paving machine in operation on the project .
The thermometers will remain the property of the Contractor upon completion of the project .
Under normal conditions where more than one course of bituminous concrete is to be constructed the use of the stringline for grade control may be eliminated or discontinued after the construction of the initial layer of bituminous concrete .
For resurfacing projects where only one course of bituminous concrete is to be constructed the use of the stringline for grade control may be eliminated .
The use of an approved ski may then be substituted for the stringline where lines and grades are found to be satisfactory by the Engineer .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
On each contract specifying metric tons of pavement or more the Contractor shall submit for approval a schedule of proposed paving and compaction equipment .
The schedule shall project approximate daily production for the paving train and provide sufficient data for proper evaluation of paving and compaction procedures. . Transportation and Delivery of Mixtures .
The mixtures shall be transported from the plant to the work in vehicles previously cleaned of all foreign materials .
During transportation of the mixture from the plant to the spreader on the work each load shall be fully covered at all times without exception with canvas or other suitable material of sufficient size and thickness to furnish complete protection .
The mixture shall not be transported such a distance that segregation of the ingredients takes place or that any crust if formed on the surface bottom or sides of said mixture which will not crumble or flatten out when the mixture is dumped or shall otherwise be deleterious to the mixture in place on the roadway .
The vehicles for transporting the mixture shall be tight and inside of the bodies shall be evenly and lightly coated with a suitable thin oil or approved soap solution but no excess of lubricant shall be allowed to accumulate in low spots in the body .
During paving operations the Contractor shall provide continuous radio communication between the plant and the project to insure immediate response due to breakdowns emergencies such as accidents and to insure the best quality results possible .
When necessary proper insulation of the vehicles transporting the mixture shall be made to insure that the mixture is delivered for placing at the proper temperature .
The dispatching of trucks from the plant shall be so arranged that all material which is to be delivered at or on the road surface during any day may be placed and shall have received final compaction before nightfall of the same day unless artificial light satisfactory to the Engineer is provided .
The temperature of the mixture within a tolerance of plus or minus C when delivered at the project site will be governed by the temperature of the base upon which the mix is placed as follows Mat Thickness in millimeters Base temperature in C on which mix is placed . . or Greater . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Tack Coat .
When it is required that the existing hardened surface shall be utilized as a base for the new pavement a tack coat of bituminous material of the kind and grade shown on the plans shall be uniformly applied by mechanical means to the present surface at the rate of application of either .
liters per square meter or that and by the method indicated on the plans or as directed by the Engineer immediately prior to laying the bottom course of the new pavement .
When and if the surface is in a condition which in the Engineers judgment is unsatisfactory for the direct placement of the surface course it shall be sprayed as specified above with tack coat in the amount and by the method Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
directed by the Engineer .
When a tack coat is required and its need is found to be the direct fault of the Contractor the surface shall be treated with a tack coat as directed by the Engineer and the entire cost for such treatment shall be entirely borne by the Contractor .
The existing surface shall be cleaned of all foreign matter and loose material and shall be dry before the tack coat is placed . .
Spreading and Finishing .
The equipment for spreading and finishing shall be mechanical self powered pavers capable of spreading and finishing the mixture true to line grade width and crown by means of fully automated controls for both longitudinal and transverse slope .
The pavers shall be equipped with hoppers and distributing screws of the reversing type to place the mixture evenly in front of adjustable screeds .
They shall be equipped with a quick and efficient steering device and shall have reverse as well as forward traveling speeds .
The pavers shall employ mechanical devices such as equalizing runners straight edge runners evener arms or other compensating devices to adjust the grade and confine the edges of the mixture to true lines .
They shall be capable of spreading the mixture without segregation in layers to the depths and widths required .
They shall be equipped with automatic joint matching attachment for use on adjacent mat or curb automatic grade and slope control with a floating beam mobile reference system with minimum length of beam ski of meters for averaging longitudinal errors in the grade over which paving is being performed .
The joint matching attachment and floating beam mobile reference system shall be employed on all paving courses unless otherwise directed by the Engineer .
When extensions are added to the paver they shall be provided with the same vibrating screed or tamper action as the main unit of the paver except for paving variable width areas .
The extensions shall also be equipped with a continuation of the automatically controlled spreading augers .
The screed and any extensions shall be provided with an approved method of heat distribution .
The screed shall be adjustable for profile and shall have an indicating level attached .
An approved device will be required for heating the screed to the temperature required for the laying of the mixtures without pulling or marring .
The term screed includes any strikeoff device operated by cutting crowding or other practicable action which is effective on the mixtures at permissible workable temperatures without tearing shoving or gouging and which produces a finished surface of the evenness and texture required .
The pavers employed on projects requiring in excess of metric tons shall be capable of operating by the use of a sensing grid for operation to a stringline and matching shoe for joints .
The pavers shall operate while bituminous mixture is being spread at a speed which will produce a uniform surface texture free of any rippling or unevenness .
The paver employed on deep lift construction shall be capable of satisfactorily feeding the mix without intermittent stopping during the discharge of the mix from the trucks into the paving machine .
If during construction it is found that the spreading and finishing equipment in use leaves tracks or indented areas or produces other permanent blemishes in the pavement which are not satisfactorily corrected by the scheduled operations the use of such equipment shall be discontinued and other satisfactory spreading and finishing equipment shall be provided by the Contractor .
The mixtures shall be placed and compacted only at such times as to permit the proper inspection and checking by the Engineer .
The mixtures shall only be placed in the work when they can be efficiently and satisfactorily placed by the methods stipulated herein .
Unless otherwise permitted by the Engineer for special particular conditions only machine methods of placing shall be used .
The construction of bituminous concrete pavement shall terminate November and shall not be resumed prior to April except as determined and directed in writing by the Engineer depending upon the necessity and emergency of attendant conditions weather conditions and location of the project .
When the air temperature falls below C extra precautions shall be taken in drying the aggregates controlling the temperatures of the materials placing and compacting the mixtures .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
No mixture shall be placed unless the breakdown and intermediate rolling can be completed by the time the material has cooled to C and provided that the density of the completed pavement attains at least of the laboratory compacted density .
The mixtures shall be placed only upon approved surfaces that are clean from foreign materials and dry and when weather conditions are suitable .
The Engineer may however at the entire responsibility of the Contractor permit work to continue when overtaken by sudden rain but only with material which may be in transit from the plant at the time and then only when the temperature of the mixture is within the temperature limits specified and the existing surface on the roadway is not excessively wet .
A tack coat shall be applied where required as per Subsection ..
The bituminous concrete shall be placed in courses as shown on the plans as specified and as directed by the Engineer .
When an existing surface or new base upon which the bottom course is to be placed contains unsatisfactory irregularities in the Engineers judgment such irregularities shall be eliminated by an adequate placing and compaction of mixture so as to furnish a surface with true contour and grade before placing any specified course of mixture .
The contact surfaces of bridge curbings manholes catch basins or other appurtenant structures in pavement shall be painted thoroughly with a thin uniform coating of bitumen Specification RS just before any mixture is placed against them .
Special attention shall be given to proper testing of the surface of each course with a straightedge .
The finished surfaces shall be even and uniform throughout .
See Subsection .
for Testing Surfaces Any mixture which becomes loose or broken mixed with dirt or in any way defective shall be removed and replaced with new mixture which shall be compacted to conform with the surrounding area .
Areas of .
square meter or more showing an excess of bitumen shall be removed and replaced .
The methods of spreading the bituminous concrete mixtures shall be as follows A .
Machine Spreading .
All mixtures shall be deposited in an approved mechanical spreader and immediately spread thereby and then struck off in a uniform layer to the full width required and of such depth that each course when compacted shall have the required thickness and shall conform to the grade and cross section contour specified .
The mixture shall be deposited in the center of the hoppers and care exercised to avoid overloading and spilling .
The pavers shall operate while the mixture is being spread at a speed which will produce a uniform surface texture .
Immediately after any course is screeded and before roller compaction is started the surface shall be checked any irregularities adjusted any accumulation from the screed removed by rake or lute and all fat spots in any course removed and replaced with satisfactory material .
Irregularities in alignment and grade along outside edges shall be corrected by the addition or removal of mixture before the edges are rolled .
Indiscriminate casting of mix on the new screeded surface where irregularities are not evident shall not be permitted .
All edges shall be true and uniform .
B .
Hand Spreading .
Spreading by hand methods will be permitted only for particular locations in the work which because of irregularity inaccessibility or other unavoidable obstacles do not allow mechanical spreading and finishing. . Compaction .
After the paving mixture has been properly spread initial compaction shall be obtained by the use of power rollers of approved design and mass per millimeter width of roller .
The rollers shall be steel wheeled supplemented with pneumatictired rollers where required or where permitted by the specifications vibratory rollers .
Steel wheel rollers for initial and intermediate rolling shall have a mass of not less than .
kilograms per millimeter width of tread .
Pneumatictired rollers when conditions warrant shall be provided with devices capable of varying tire pressures .
When the mixture being spread by each paver requires more than the minimum number of steel wheel rollers at least one of the additional rollers for each paver shall be a pneumatictired roller except where the use of a vibratory roller is permitted .
When using a pneumatictired roller care shall be taken in that initial rolling by the steel wheel roller be restricted to one pass where upon the pneumatictired roller shall immediately follow the initial Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
steel wheel rolling .
Vibratory rollers may be used on base binder and surface courses subject to the conditions set forth herein .
Vibratory rollers to be used may be of the single drum type with pneumatictired drive wheels or the double steel drum type with vibratory mechanism in one or both drums .
All vibratory rollers shall have a static mass of at least .
metric tons and shall be equipped with an automatic disconnect device to disconnect the vibratory mechanism when the roller is not in motion .
They shall also be equipped with a manual override device to disconnect the vibratory mechanism if the automatic device should fail .
All vibratory rollers shall also be equipped with the following equipment a large and clearly visible speed indicator an amplitude setting indicator and a frequency setting indicator .
They shall also have instructional plates attached which shall include operational instructions and recommended amplitude and frequency settings .
A vibratory tachometer shall also be provided with each roller for use by the Engineer .
Vibratory rollers shall not be used on bridges or other structures and their use in urban areas may be restricted .
They shall not be used on thin overlays millimeters or less in thickness except that vibratory rollers of the double drum type may be used in a static condition to compact such overlays provided that when so operated they shall be able to obtain the degree of density and smoothness required to conform to the specifications .
When vibratory rollers are used for the compaction of base and binder material they shall be operated at a high amplitude setting and a low frequency setting in the range of to VPM .
When used for the compaction of surface courses they shall be operated at a low amplitude setting at a minimum frequency setting of at least VPM or higher if a higher frequency setting is recommended by the manufacturer of the roller .
The use of a vibratory roller incapable of being operated at a frequency setting of at least VPM will not be permitted on surface courses .
No deviation from this latter requirement will be allowed .
In compacting surface courses a vibratory roller shall not be operated at a speed in excess of kilometers per hour .
A vibratory roller shall be operated with the vibration drum or drums in the direction of the paver and the vibrating action of the roller shall be completely shut off during change of direction .
Due care shall be exercised to start the vibratory action only when the roller is in motion .
During the rolling of layered pavement in order to prevent creeping and aggregate crushing care shall be taken not to exceed two passes with the vibrator in action .
For deep lift pavements these passes shall normally not exceed two in each direction except that the number of vibratory passes in either direction may be varied in order to obtain the required density .
The final rolling of all courses shall be performed with a steel wheeled roller of sufficient mass for final smoothing of the surface .
The use of a vibratory roller may be suspended by the Engineer if in hisher opinion satisfactory results are not being obtained and no further amount of mix shall be spread in such case until a sufficient number of approved rollers are on the project site to satisfy compaction requirements .
A plate shall be attached to each conventional roller which shall show the ballasted and unballasted mass per millimeter of tread .
The number of rollers required shall be governed by the tonnage of hotmix being placed daily .
A sufficient number shall be provided to compact the mixture in accordance with the specifications .
The number of passes required may be varied and shall be governed by compaction results .
The Engineer may require that a standby roller be provided if in hisher opinion it is necessary in the event of a breakdown .
Each roller shall be operated by a competent experienced roller operator and shall be kept in a nearly continuous operation as practicable while work is underway .
The mixture shall be rolled longitudinally diagonally and transversely as may be necessary to produce the required contour for surface .
Longitudinal rolling shall start at the side and proceed toward the center of the pavement except on superelevated curves where the rolling shall begin on the low side and progress to the high side overlapping on successive trips by at least millimeters .
The rolling shall be continued and so executed that all roller marks ridges porous spots and impressions are eliminated and the resulting surface has the required grade and contour .
The motion of the rollers shall at all times be slow enough to avoid any displacement of the hot mixture .
Any displacement or marring of the surface occurring as a result of reversing the direction of the rollers or from any other cause shall be corrected .
To prevent adhesion with the mixture the wheels of the steel rollers shall be kept lightly moistened with water but excess water will not be permitted .
The use of oil for this purpose will not be allowed .
To prevent rolloff of the pavement edges and longitudinal joints on deep lift paving the outer millimeters of the deep lift mixture shall be left unrolled until the temperature of the mix ranges between C and C whereupon it shall be compacted by the steel roller .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
Along curbs structures and all places not accessible with a roller the mixture shall be thoroughly compacted with mechanical tamping devices .
The surface of the mixture after compaction shall be smooth and true to the established line and grade .
The densities of the completed pavement shall not be less than of the density obtained from Laboratory compaction of a mixture composed of the same materials in like proportions .
Laboratory compaction will be performed by Department Standard Methods . .
Joints .
Placing of the mixture shall be as nearly continuous as possible and the roller shall pass over the unprotected end of the newly placed mixture only when the placing of the course is to be discontinued for such length of time as would permit the mixture to attain initial stability .
In all such cases including the formation of joints as here specified provision shall be made for proper bond with the new surface for the full specified depths of the courses .
All transverse joints all longitudinal joints of the surface course and all longitudinal joints in the Dense Binder Course under Open Graded Friction Course or Open Graded Friction CourseModified shall be treated prior to laying the next lane of bituminous concrete as follows The joint shall be coated with a hot poured rubberized asphalt sealant meeting the requirements of Federal Specification Number SSS .
When using pavers in tandem the use of the hot poured rubberized asphalt sealer may be omitted at the discretion of the Engineer if the temperature of the mixture at the longitudinal joint does not fall below C prior to the placement of the adjacent mat .
No reheating of the joint shall be permitted .
The hot poured rubberized asphalt shall be applied to the joints from a double jacketed heating kettle with a positive drive gear pump that is connected to a suitable applicator .
The nozzle of the applicator shall be set to deliver sufficient sealant to effectively bond and seal the transverse and longitudinal paving joint between two adjacent lanes of bituminous concrete .
Longitudinal and transverse joints shall be made in a careful manner well bonded and sealed and true to line and grade .
Where and as directed transverse joints for all courses and longitudinal joints for the top course placed under this or previous contracts shall be cut back to expose the full depth of the course and when the laying of the course is resumed the exposed edge of the joint shall be treated as above .
In making joints along any adjoining edge such as curb gutter or an adjoining pavement and after the mixture is placed by the mechanical spreader just enough of the hot material shall be placed by hand method to fill any space left open .
These joints shall be properly setup with the back of a rake at the proper height and level to receive the maximum compaction .
The work of settingup these joints shall be performed only by competent workers .
Where and as directed the first width of any course shall be placed not less than millimeters wider than the first width of top course and successive widths of top and as any other courses shall be so placed that there will be at least a millimeter overlap between the joints in the top course and the other course .
The rolling of the successive widths of courses shall overlap and shall be performed so as to leave smooth uniform joints and cross sections. . Pavement on Bridges .
The bituminous concrete mixtures for protective course paving on bridges shall consist of Dense Binder Course as specified hereinbefore for such mix and work performance requirements .
The mixtures shall be treated with an approved antistripping compound as specified under M The protective course over any area shall be placed within hours after the membrane waterproofing over the area has been placed unless exception is granted by the Engineer .
The use of smaller rollers may be permitted with the approval of the Engineer for compaction of the protective course only .
No vehicular traffic shall be permitted over any bare membrane waterproofing except as provided for under Subsection ..
The top course of pavement on bridges shall consist of Modified Top Course and be placed only after the curbing and edging are in place in the work .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II . .
Testing Surfaces .
The plane of the finished surfaces of the base courses andor binder course and the top course of the compacted mixtures shall be tested with a meter straightedge except that a meter straightedge may be used on vertical curves .
The straightedge shall be carefully applied immediately after first compaction by rolling and from then on as may be necessary until and after the final compaction of the material in place .
The straightedge shall be held in successive positions parallel to the road centerline and in contact with the road surface and the entire area checked from one side to the other of the pavement .
The top course of resurfaced streets which contain manhole covers water gate boxes etc .
shall be tested as specified hereinbefore except that a meters straightedge shall be used .
Any irregularities which vary millimeters from a true finished surface or millimeters from a true surface in base or binder course shall be corrected .
Irregularities which may develop before the completion of rolling and while the material is still workable may be remedied by loosening the surface mixture and removing or adding material as necessary .
Should any irregularities or surface defects remain after final compaction the defective work shall be corrected by removing and replacing the new material as specified to form a true and even surface of regular texture .
All minor surface projections joints and minor honeycombed surfaces shall be ironed out smoothly to grade as may be directed .
Adequate and approved straightedges shall be furnished and used by the Contractor with supervision and inspection by the Engineer .
The Contractor shall provide or designate a competent employee whose duty shall be to carefully use the straightedge to check the compacted surfaces .
The entire cost for furnishing adequate and approved straightedges with the use of same and the repair or removal and replacement of pavement as may be required by the Engineer shall be borne by the Contractor as part of the payment made to himher for the relevant contract items . .
Opening to Traffic .
No vehicular traffic or loads shall be permitted on the newly completed pavement until adequate stability has been attained and the material has cooled sufficiently to prevent distortion or loss of fines .
If the climatic or other conditions warrant it the period of time before opening to traffic may be extended at the discretion of the Engineer .
COMPENSATION .
Method of Measurement .
Bituminous concrete shall be measured by the metric ton and shall be the actual and verified metric tonnage complete in place and approved .
The quantity shall be determined only by weight slips that have been properly countersigned by the Engineer at the time of delivery .
Bitumen used for tack coat if required by plans or specifications or ordered by the Engineer will be measured as specified in Subsection ..
Measurement for sealing of longitudinal joints in bituminous concrete shall be by the meter of joint sealed . .
Basis of Payment .
The metric tonnage of bituminous concrete determined as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price per metric ton of the kind of bituminous concrete required complete in place including butt joint sealant if required .
Bitumen as specified herein to be paid for as tack coat if required will be paid for at the contract unit price per liter under the item for Bitumen for Tack Coat complete in place .
Sealing of longitudinal joints in bituminous concrete will be paid for at the unit bid price and shall be complete payment for sealing the edge of the previously laid mat with hot poured rubberized asphalt sealer and all incidentals required to complete the item. . Payment Items .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II. . Class I Bituminous Concrete Pavement Type I Metric Ton .
Class I Bituminous Concrete Pavement Type I Open Graded Metric Ton .
Class I Dense Bituminous Concrete Type ST Metric Ton .
Class I Dense Binder Course for Bridges Metric Ton .
Bitumen for Tack Coat Liter .
Hot Poured Rubberized Asphalt Sealer Meter SECTION STRESS ABSORBING MEMBRANE INTERLAYER DESCRIPTION .
General .
This work consists of the application of hot rubberized asphalt to a paved surface and immediately embedding aggregate therein by spreading and rolling in accordance with these specifications .
This item may also be referred to as SAMI .
MATERIALS .
General .
Asphalt Asphalt cement for the asphalt rubber mixture shall be AC or AC complying with the requirements of M If AC is used the SAMI shall be overlayed within ten days .
Rubber The granulated rubber shall be a vulcanized rubber product from the ambient temperature processing of pneumatic tires .
The granulated rubber type shall meet the following gradation Sieve Designation Percent Passing .
mm .
mm .
mm m m Aggregate shall conform to the requirements of M .. for crushed stone .
Crushed gravel stone will not be permitted .
Gradation requirements will conform to M Percentage of wear as determined by the Los Angeles Abrasion Test AASHTO T shall be a maximum of .
CONSTRUCTION METHODS .
General .
Preparation of Existing Surface .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
Prior to application of the rubberized asphalt the entire paved surface to be treated shall be cleaned by sweeping blowing and other methods until free of dirt and loose particles .
Pot holes depressions cracks larger than millimeters and other irregularities will be patched with hot bituminous mix and compacted .
No water shall be present on the surface .
A levelling course shall be placed on planed milled or existing surface if required .
Seasonal and Weather Limitations .
Construction shall not proceed when the ambient temperature has been below C within the previous hours when rain is falling or when conditions are unfavorable to obtaining a uniform spread. . Asphalt Rubber Mixing and Reaction The percent of rubber shall be as indicated by the mixture design for specific project requirements by weight of total mixture that is by total weight of asphalt cement plus granulated rubber .
The temperature of the asphalt shall be between C and C at the time of addition of the vulcanized rubber .
The asphalt and rubber shall be combined and mixed together in a blender unit and reacted in the distributor for a period of time as required by the Engineer which shall be based on laboratory testing by the rubberized asphalt supplier .
The temperature of the rubberized asphalt mixture shall be above C during the reaction period .
After the reaction between asphalt and rubber has occurred the viscosity of the hot rubberized asphalt mixture may be adjusted for spraying andor better wetting of the cover material by the addition of a diluent .
The diluent shall comply with the requirements of ASTM D Grade Fuel Oil and shall not exceed .
percent by volume of the hot asphalt rubber mixture .
When a job delay occurs after full reaction the rubberized asphalt may be allowed to cool .
The rubberized asphalt shall be reheated slowly just prior to application but not to a temperature exceeding C. An additional quantity of diluent not exceeding percent by volume of the hot rubberized asphalt mixture may be added after reheating .
Viscosities shall be run by the applicator on each blended load of rubberized asphalt rubber using a Haake Field viscometer .
One viscosity prior to the induction of the diluent and one after the induction of the diluent blended into the asphalt and rubber mixture .
The viscosity of the final product shall be in the range of to Pascal seconds. . Equipment . .
Distributor Truck .
At least two pressuretype bituminous semidistributor trucks in good condition will be required .
The distributor shall be equipped with an internal heating device capable of heating the material evenly up to C have adequate pump capacity to maintain a high rate of circulation in the tank have adequate pressure devices and suitable manifolds to provide constant positive cut off to prevent dripping from the nozzles .
The distribution bar on the distributor shall be fully circulating .
Any distributor that produces a streaked or irregular distribution of the material shall be promptly repaired or removed from the project .
Distributor equipment shall include a tachometer pressure gauges volume measuring devices a thermometer for reading temperature of tank contents and an internal auger to maintain proper mixture and blending of asphalt and rubber .
Controls for spray bar shall be located in cab of truck for controlling width and rate of spray of product .
It shall be so constructed that uniform applications may be made at the specified rate per square meter within a tolerance of plus or minus .
liters per square meter. . Brooms .
Revolving brooms shall be so constructed as to sweep clean or redistribute aggregate without damage to the rubberizedasphalt membrane or surface treatment. . PneumaticTired Roller .
There shall be at least two multiple wheel selfpropelled pneumatictired rollers with provisions for loading to metric tons as deemed necessary .
Pneumatictired rollers shall have a total compacting width of at least .
meters and shall have a minimum tire pressure of kiloPascals .
A minimum of three rollers are required two pneumatic and one steel. . Power Rollers .
Shall be selfpropelled steel rollers weighing between .
and metric tons. . Asphalt Heating Tank .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
To heat the asphalt cement to the necessary temperature for blending with the rubber tank shall be a minimum cubic meter capacity and capable of heating product at a minimum rate of C per hour . .
Mechanical Blender .
For proper proportioning and thorough mixing of the asphalt and rubber together to produce the specified rubber content material .
This unit shall have both an asphalt totalizing meter liters and a flow rate meter liters per minute positive placement auger to feed rubber properly to mix chamber at the specified rate and an auger in mixing chamber running through a static motionless mixer . .
Distributor .
Shall include a tachometer pressure gauges volume measuring devices a thermometer a millimeter auger capable of blending and maintaining proper blending of material and an millimeter dual positive placement gear head pump capable of spraying the rubberized asphalt at a viscosity of to Pascal seconds .
A bootman shall accompany the distributor and ride in a position so that all spray bar nozzles are in hisher full view and readily accessible for unplugging. . Chip Spreader .
This equipment shall be selfpropelled and be adjustable to control and spread accurately the given amounts of cover aggregate per square meter .
It shall have a width of spread of not less than .
meters .
Cut off plates shall be provided to permit the width of spread to be reduced in increments of millimeters from the maximum width specified .
The spreader shall be equipped with a hitch at the rear so it can lock onto the hauling trucks while they are discharged into the spreader .
Two conveyor belts shall supply aggregate from the hopper to the element which spreads the cover aggregate over the road surface .
Screen below screw auger at bottom of hopper shall be in place. . Construction Requirements .
The rubberized asphalt mixture shall be applied at a temperature of C to C at a rate of . . liters per square meter .
Transverse joints shall be constructed by placing building paper across and over the end of the previous rubberized asphalt application .
Once the spraying has progressed beyond the paper the paper shall be removed immediately and disposed of as directed by the Engineer .
Longitudinal joints shall be overlapped from to millimeters .
If rubberized asphalt is applied directly to an old existing Portland Cement Concrete pavement bandaid strips shall be placed prior to the rubberized asphalt treatment on all transverse and longitudinal joints .
The strips shall be Pave Prep Polygard RolGlas or equal and shall be placed millimeters wide .
The SAMI shall be applied within four days of the placement of the bandaid strips . .
Application .
No application shall be made to any area which can not immediately be covered with aggregate .
The application from the distributor shall be stopped before the tank is empty to be sure the application does not run light .
At all starts intersections junctions at transverse joints with previous spreads or other pavements provision shall be made to ensure that the distributor nozzles are operated at full force when the application begins .
Building paper or other suitable devices shall be used to receive the initial application from the nozzle before any material reaches the surface at the transverse joint .
The paper shall be removed immediately after use without spilling surplus material on the surface .
Longitudinal joints shall be reasonably true to line and parallel to centerline .
The overlap in application of asphaltrubber material shall be minimum to assure complete coverage .
Where any construction joint occurs the edges shall be broomed back and blended so there are no gaps and the elevations are the same and free from ridges and depressions .
During application adequate provision shall be made to prevent marring and discoloration of adjacent pavements structures vehicles foliage or personal property . .
Aggregate Application .
The application of aggregate shall follow as close as possible behind the application of the hot rubberized asphalt which shall not be spread further in advance of the aggregate spread that can be immediately covered .
Construction equipment or other vehicles shall not drive on the uncovered rubberized asphalt .
The dry aggregate precoated with .
to .
of AC shall be spread uniformly by a selfpropelled spreader at a rate of spread directed by the Engineer generally between and kilograms per square meter .
Any deficient areas shall be covered with additional material .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
Prior to application the aggregate shall be preheated to a temperature between C to C and coated with .
to .
of asphalt grade AC. . Rolling .
Rolling shall commence immediately following spread of aggregate .
There shall be at least three complete passes by the pneumatic tired rollers to embed the aggregate particles firmly into the rubberized asphalt followed by an additional pass of the steel roller . .
Sweeping .
When the maximum of aggregate has been embedded into the rubberized asphalt and the pavement has cooled all loose material shall be swept or otherwise removed at such time and in such a manner as will not displace any embedded aggregate or damage the rubberized asphalt. . Curing .
The rubberized asphalt surface treatment should be overlaid immediately following completion of sweeping .
If traffic must travel over the surface treatment it shall be allowed to cool and speed controlled so as not to exceed kilometers per hour .
COMPENSATION .
Method of Measurement .
Stress Absorbing Membrane Interlayer will be measured by the square meter and shall be the actual number of square meters applied as directed by the Engineer . .
Basis of Payment .
Stress Absorbing Membrane Interlayer shall be paid at the contract unit price per square meter and payment shall be full compensation for all labor materials and equipment required to complete the work to the satisfaction of the Engineer. . Payment Items. . Class I Bituminous Concrete Pavement Type I Metric Ton .
Stress Absorbing Membrane Interlayer Square Meter SECTION PEASTONE COVER FOR BITUMINOUS CONCRETE PAVED SHOULDERS DESCRIPTION .
General .
Peastone cover for bituminous concrete paved shoulders will consist of an application of bitumen on the finished surface of the shoulder and then a cover of peastone spread and rolled in accordance with these specifications .
MATERIALS .
General .
Materials shall meet the requirements of the following Subsections of Division III Materials Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
Crushed Stone Aggregate M .. Peastone Cover Gradation M .. Bituminous Material Asphalt Cement M .. Asphalt Emulsion M .. Cationic Emulsified Asphalt M ..
Cutback Asphalts M .. CONSTRUCTION METHODS .
General .
The width of the treatment shall be as shown on the plans and as directed .
The surface to be treated shall be clean and cleared of all leaves twigs and other foreign or objectionable material with brooms or other approved method . .
Applying Bitumen .
The bitumen shall be applied uniformly at the specified rate with a pressure distributor .
Distributors shall be in good mechanical condition with an accurate tachometer and capable of spraying satisfactorily for a width of not less than .
meters at a pressure of between and kiloPascals .
The distributor shall be equipped with a system for heating evenly the entire volume of the bitumen under efficient and positive control at all times .
Distributors shall also be equipped with satisfactory thermometers for measuring the temperature of the material to be applied and shall have either a steam or airkerosene system for the clearing of the lines and pumps .
Evidence of fluxing with kerosene or emulsification by steam will be sufficient cause for rejection of the delivery .
Deliveries of bitumen will be refused when the above conditions are not fulfilled .
A hose attachment on the distributor shall be used to apply bitumen wherever necessary to touch up any areas missed or inaccessible to the distributor .
The bitumen shall be applied at the temperature recommended in Section M Division III for the type of asphaltic material being used .
No bituminous work shall be done during rainy weather or when weather conditions as to temperature or otherwise are in the Engineers judgment unfavorable for obtaining satisfactory results . .
Spreading and Rolling Stone .
The bitumen shall be immediately covered with a sufficient amount of millimeter peastone to take up the excess bitumen and then thoroughly rolled .
The peastone shall be spread evenly by means of a mechanical or box type chip spreader .
Spreading shall not be done with a power grader or directly from trucks .
The application of peastone shall be performed in conjunction with the application of the bitumen and at a rate to assure proper bonding before cooling takes place .
Rolling shall be performed with a steel wheel roller having a mass of not less than .
kilograms per millimeter of tread or an approved pneumatic tired roller .
The surfaces of the wheels of the roller shall be kept clean at all times .
Precautions shall be taken to prevent the depositing of dirt or other foreign material on the shoulders .
Only enough rolling will be done to set the stone and bond it to the shoulder .
Excess rolling that will crush the stone will be permitted .
The stone shall be free of all deleterious materials and if in the opinion of the Engineer it is deemed necessary for the proper bonding to the bitumen the stone shall be lightly treated at the plant with a cutback asphalt or other suitable vehicle .
No trucks or other vehicles shall be allowed to pass over a section for at least hours after the stone has been placed .
COMPENSATION .
Method of Measurement .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
Peastone for cover will be measured by the metric ton .
The weight slips shall be countersigned on delivery by the Engineer and no weight slip not so countersigned shall be included for any payment under the contract .
Bitumen delivered in tank trucks or tank feeders shall be weighed on scales and the volume computed on the basis of the current tabulation of Mass per Liter of Bituminous Materials as approved by the Department .
Scales used in weighing shall be standard scales furnished by and at the expense of the Contractor .
Such scales shall be sealed as often as necessary to insure their accuracy at the expense of the Contractor .
A sworn weigher to be compensated by the Contractor shall weigh all bitumen required to be weighed .
The weighing of such materials may be witnessed by the Engineer .
Bitumen delivered in tank cars when not actually weighed shall be measured by volume at the loading temperature and this quantity converted to the volume at the applying temperature .
The coefficient of expansion or contraction per degree C shall be .
for asphalt .
for asphaltic emulsions .
for cutback asphalt and .
for tar .
In no case shall the total number of liters of bituminous material for any car be in excess of the United States Interstate Commerce Commissions rating for the car plus the expansion based on the volumetric change between the loading and the specific application temperature . .
Basis of Payment .
Peastone for Cover will be paid for at the contract unit price per metric ton under the item for Crushed Stone for Peastone Cover .
Bitumen for Peastone Cover will be paid for at the contract unit price per liter under the item for Bitumen for Peastone Cover applied complete in place. . Payment Items . .
Crushed Stone for Peastone Cover Metric Ton .
Bitumen for Peastone Cover Liter SECTION CLASS I BITUMINOUS CONCRETE BERMS DESCRIPTION .
General .
Bituminous concrete berms shall consist of Class I Bituminous Concrete Type I in accordance with the details of design as shown on the plans . .
Composition of Mix .
The materials to be incorporated in the mix and the composition of the mix shall conform to the relative requirements of Section M .. for either top course or dense mix .
CONSTRUCTION METHODS .
Foundation .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
The foundation for bituminous concrete berms shall be as shown on the plans or as directed conforming to the requirements for the particular type of berm specified . .
Placing of Mixture .
The mixture shall be placed and compacted with a machine acceptable and approved by the Engineer for type of berm required .
COMPENSATION .
Method of Measurement .
The quantity of bituminous concrete berms will be measured by the metric ton complete in place .
The quantity shall be determined only by weight slips that have been properly countersigned by the Engineer at the time of delivery . .
Basis of Payment .
Class I Bituminous Concrete Berms will be paid for at the contract unit price per metric ton under the item for Class I Bituminous Concrete Berms complete in place. . Payment Items. . Class I Bituminous Concrete Berm Type A Metric Ton SECTION BITUMINOUS CONCRETE FOR PATCHING DESCRIPTION .
General .
This type of pavement shall be composed of mineral aggregate mineral filler and bituminous material .
MATERIALS .
General .
Materials shall meet the requirements specified in the following Subsections of Division III Materials General Composition of Mixture M ..
Mineral Aggregate M .. Bitumen MC or MC M .. Hydrated Lime M .. Plant Requirements M .. Curing of Mixture This bituminous concrete mixture for patching shall be cured by placing in a stock pile for a period of Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
week or more prior to delivery .
CONSTRUCTION METHODS .
General .
When directed by the Engineer to use bituminous concrete for patching the Contractor shall obtain Class I Bituminous Concrete material as required under Section .
If this material is not available the Contractor may then use the material specified hereof in Section .
The bituminous concrete shall be laid to the thickness directed and compacted to the satisfaction of the Engineer .
COMPENSATION .
Method of Measurement .
Bituminous Concrete for Patching will be measured as required in Section . .
Basis of Payment .
Bituminous Concrete for Patching will be paid for at the contract unit price per metric ton complete in place .
This price will include full compensation for the satisfactory removal and disposal of the material at a later date if required except as follows When the required bituminous concrete patching material is placed in areas of proposed roadway excavation the removal and satisfactory disposal of the patching material will be paid for under the item of Roadway Earth Excavation. . Payment Item. . Bituminous Concrete for Patching Metric Ton SECTION CEMENT CONCRETE PAVEMENT DESCRIPTION .
General .
This work shall consist of a pavement composed of air entrained Portland cement concrete plain or reinforced as specified constructed on an approved foundation in accordance with these specifications and in close conformity with the lines grades thicknesses and typical cross sections shown on the Plans or established by the Engineer .
MATERIALS .
General .
Materials shall meet the requirements of the following Subsections of Division III Materials Concrete Air Entrained MPa mm kg M ..
Scored Concrete Pavement Air Entrained MPa mm kg M .. Steel Reinforcement Reinforcing Bars M .. Welded Steel Fabric M .. Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
Steel Bar Mats M ..
Tie Bars and Bolts M .. Load Transfer Assembly M .. Preformed Joint Filler M .. Joint Filler Compound M .. Polyurethane Joint Sealer M .. Asphaltic Paint RC M .. RS M .. Curing Materials Impervious Liquid Membrane M .. Waterproof Paper M .. Burlap M .. Polyethylene Coated Burlap M .. White Polyethylene M .. B Base Stabilization Materials Portland Cement M .. Bitumen M .. Fine aggregate for use in concrete to be placed with a slipform paver shall meet the grading requirements as specified for fine aggregate for cement concrete except that the maximum passing the micrometer sieve may be increased to and a maximum of passing the micrometer sieve may be established in order to increase the cohesiveness of the cement concrete .
Also the concrete when tested in accordance with AASHTO Designation T shall have a slump of not more than millimeters nor less than millimeters .
CONSTRUCTION METHODS .
General .
The cement concrete pavement may be constructed by the SlipForm Method or the FixedForm Method .
Equipment and tools necessary for handling material and performing all parts of the work shall be approved by the Engineer as to design capacity and mechanical condition .
The equipment shall be at the job site sufficiently ahead of the start of construction operations to be examined thoroughly and approved .
Any equipment or tools which are not maintained in full working order or which as used by the Contractor prove inadequate to obtain the results prescribed shall be improved or new equipment or tools substituted or added as directed .
Grade control survey and staking shall conform to Subsection ..
The Contractor shall furnish set and maintain all line and grade stakes for grading and paving . .
Preparation of Grade .
The subbase shall consist of gravel or dense graded crushed stone conforming to Section or Section or of soil cement and shall be as specified on the plans .
The subbase shall be conditioned and perfected not less than meters in advance of the placing of the concrete .
If any traffic is allowed to use the prepared grade the grade shall be checked and corrected immediately ahead of the placing of the concrete .
Subbase prepared for the slipform method shall be placed to a compacted depth approximately millimeters higher than the grade called for on the plans to allow for planing by approved mechanical means to the proper profile .
It shall also be placed to a width meter greater millimeters on each side than the required pavement slab width .
After the subbase has been placed and compacted to the required density and will adequately support the subgrade machine and the slipform paver the track areas shall be cut to the proper elevation by the use of a mechanical form grading machine .
Behind the form grading machine the track areas shall be rolled to a smooth firm and uniform surface .
The grade on which the pavement is to be constructed shall then be brought to the proper profile by means of a track mounted subgrade machine operation on the prepared track line or by other mechanical means approved by the Engineer .
When concrete is placed the surface of the subbase shall not be above nor more than millimeters below the Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
plan subgrade elevation .
If the density of the subgrade is disturbed by the subgrade machine it shall be corrected by additional compaction before concrete is placed .
The subbase after being conditioned shall provide a firm unyielding support which will not be displaced under the movement of the paver .
If the subbase is displaced by the movement of the paver to the extent that the finished pavement will be affected the two areas that will support the slipform paver tracks shall be stabilized as provided herein .
The areas to be stabilized will be immediately outside the edge lines of the pavement slab on both sides and are each to be not less than millimeters in width measured from the exterior edges of the proposed pavement slab .
If cement is used for stabilization the material to be stabilized shall be loosened and pulverized before any cement is added .
Cement shall be uniformly spread on the loosened and pulverized material at the rate of approximately kilograms per square meter .
The final depth of stabilization shall be not less than millimeters in the completed track area after it is brought to proper elevation .
The exact amount of cement to be used to adequately harden the mixture of cement and subgrade material will be determined by the Engineer .
The cement and subgrade material shall be thoroughly mixed by means of a power driven mixer until the mixture is of a uniform color throughout the full required depth .
After the cement and subgrade material have been mixed water shall be added to the mixture and mixing continued until the water is uniformly distributed throughout the mixture .
The amount of water to be added will be determined by the Engineer .
The moist mixture when ready for compaction shall be near its optimum moisture content .
The mixture shall be uniformly compacted for the full depth until it is firm and unyielding and within hours after the addition of the water .
Compaction shall be with a metric ton three wheeled or tandem roller approved rubbertired roller or approved mechanical vibrator .
After compaction the surface of the area that will support the paver tracks shall be cut to true profile and elevation by approved mechanical equipment and then rolled to obtain a smooth true surface .
The stabilization shall be protected from drying by the application of approved bituminous material approximately .
liter per square meter or cover of straw sand or earth .
If straw sand or earth is used for cover it must be broomed off before the area is used in further operations .
The curing material shall be applied immediately after final rolling and maintained for at least days .
In lieu of the above method and procedure for stabilization of the track area other proven methods and materials will be considered subject to equivalent and acceptable performance .
Regardless of the method materials and procedures used the burden or responsibility for the acceptability of work shall rest with the Contractor .
If stabilization of the track areas is required such stabilization will not be paid for separately but will be included under Item Cement Concrete Pavement .
Where fixedform construction is specified the use of a subgrade machine may follow form setting .
When side forms have been securely set to grade the subbase shall be brought to proper cross section .
The fine grading shall be compacted by means of approved equipment to a condition similar to that of surrounding grade .
A sub base check template shall be used as a final check .
The surface of the subbase shall not be above nor more than millimeters below the plan subbase elevation .
Any deviation from the required subbase surface exceeding this tolerance shall be corrected .
The template shall span the width being paved and be supported on the side forms .
It may be power or hand operated with scratch teeth or pins which can be adjusted readily to the required cross section and supported in a frame of sufficient weight and strength to withstand the loads .
The points of the teeth or pins shall be adjusted to be at the plan sub base elevation .
High areas shall be trimmed to proper elevation .
Low areas shall be filled and compacted to a condition similar to that of surrounding grade except that areas which are not more than millimeters below subbase elevation may be filled with concrete integral with the pavement .
The finished grade shall be maintained in a smooth and compacted condition until the pavement is placed .
The subbase shall be uniformly moist when the concrete is placed .
When the subbase is dry it shall be sprinkled with as much water as can be readily absorbed immediately in advance of placing concrete .
It shall also have been similarly sprinkled not less than hours or more than hours before concrete is placed thereon. . Forms and Form Setting .
Where fixedform construction is specified the straight side forms shall be made of metal and shall be furnished in sections not less than meters in length .
Forms shall have a depth equal to the prescribed edge thickness of the Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
concrete without horizontal joint and a base width equal to the depth of the forms but not less than millimeters .
Flange braces shall extend outward on the base not less than the height of the form .
Flexible or curved forms of proper radius shall be used for curves of meter radius or less and be of a design acceptable to the Engineer .
Satisfactory wooden forms as approved by the Engineer may be used for curves of meter radius or less or where the design of pavement is such that the metal forms can not be used .
Forms shall be provided with adequate devices for secure setting so that when in place they will withstand without visible spring or settlement the impact and vibration of the consolidating and finishing equipment .
Forms with battered top surfaces and bent twisted or broken forms shall be removed from the work .
Repaired forms shall not be used until inspected and approved by the Engineer .
The top face of the form shall not vary from a true plane by more than millimeter in meter and the upstanding leg shall not vary from a true plane by more than millimeter in meter .
The forms shall contain provisions for locking the ends of abutting form sections together tightly and for secure setting .
Forms to be used for concrete which is to be furnished by hand shall have a base not less than millimeters in width .
The foundation under the forms shall be hard and true to grade so that the form when set will be firmly in contact for its whole length and at the specified grade .
Any grade which at the form line is found below established grade shall be filled to grade with granular material in lifts of millimeters or less for a distance of millimeters on each side of the base of the form and thoroughly compacted .
Imperfections or variations above grade shall be corrected by tamping or by cutting as necessary .
After the forms have been set to correct grade the grade shall be thoroughly tamped mechanically or by hand at both the inside and outside edges of the base of the forms .
Forms shall be joined neatly and tightly and staked securely with not less than pins for each meter section .
A pin shall be placed at each side of every joint .
Form sections shall be tightly locked free from play or movement in any direction .
If any play or movement of the forms occurs additional pins shall be required by the Engineer .
The entire base of forms shall be directly in contact with the finished subbase .
If a form does not have satisfactory bearing area for its full length it shall be removed the bearing area of subbase reshaped and compacted and the form replaced .
Building of pedestals of earth or other materials upon which to reset the forms in order to bring them to the required grade is not permitted .
Forms shall be set at least meters in advance of the point of placing concrete .
They shall be thoroughly cleaned and greased or soaped before concrete is placed against them .
No excessive settlement or springing of forms under the finishing machine will be tolerated .
The forms shall be set to correct line and grade .
Smooth alignment and grade shall be checked by sighting and with an approved meter straightedge .
The alignment and grade elevations of the forms shall be checked and corrections made by the Contractor immediately before placing the concrete .
When any form has been disturbed or any grade has become unstable the form shall be reset and rechecked .
Use of a straightedge will not be required on vertical curves .
A mechanical tamper of approved type and design will be permitted for use in the preparation of a firm even subbase for form installation. . Batching and Mixing Concrete .
The materials shall be batched at a central plant .
The batch plant site layout equipment and provisions for transporting material shall be such as to assure a continuous operation of the paver employed on the project .
The work shall be done in accordance with the relevant provisions of Subsection M Concrete may be mixed at the site of construction or at a central point .
Mixers shall conform to the applicable requirements of Subsection M Concrete mixed at a central plant shall be hauled to the paving site by agitation trucks or other approved haul units in accordance with the relevant provisions of Subsection M Concrete mixed completely in truck mixers in accordance with Subsection M .. A may be allowed when approved by the Engineer .
The Contractor shall obtain approval of hisher proposed central mix plant site its capacity concrete materials sources hauling equipment proposed haul routes etc .
prior to moving said equipment onto project .
Concrete mixed in pavers at the site shall be mixed for a period of not less than seconds including transfer time but no less than seconds exclusive of transfer time after all materials except water are in the drum .
The mixer shall be operated at drum speed shown on the manufacturers name plate .
The manufacturers guaranteed capacity of the mixer shall not be less than cubic meter .
Except by written permission of the Engineer the mixer shall not be operated in excess of its guaranteed capacity nor by more than above its rated capacity as shown on the standard rating plate on the machine when operating on grades not exceeding .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
The batch shall be so charged into the drum that a portion of the mixing water shall enter in advance of the cement and aggregates .
The flow of water shall be uniform and all water shall be in the drum by the end of the first seconds of the mixing period .
The entire contents shall be removed from the drum before the succeeding batch is introduced .
The inside of the drum shall be kept free from hardened concrete .
The skip and throat of the mixer drum shall be kept clean and free of accumulation or encrustations of inert materials and the admission of these materials to the mixer shall be cause for rejection of the batch in which they are included .
The concrete as discharged from the mixer shall be uniform in composition and consistency .
If this condition is not produced with the maximum size of batch the size of the batch shall be reduced or the mixing time increased or both until an acceptable mixture is obtained .
As required above all materials except water shall be admitted to the mixer simultaneously and thereafter no additional amount of any ingredient shall be admitted to the mixer except on specific instructions of the Engineer or hisher representative for each individual batch .
Such instructions shall not be given for more than three consecutive batches after which the proportions of the mix shall be correct prior to the initial charging of the mixer and further such instructions shall not relax the following restrictions concerning the retempering of concrete .
Retempering of concrete by the addition of water will not be permitted .
The addition of water to the batch in the mixer after minutes have elapsed after the initial charging or the addition of water to the concrete after removal from the mixer shall be construed as retempering .
Batches of concrete prepared contrary to these restrictions shall be rejected and immediately removed from the site .
The concrete shall be mixed only in the quantity required for immediate use and concrete not in place within minutes from the time the ingredients were charged into the mixing drum or that has developed initial set shall not be used .
The concrete shall have a slump of between and millimeters if not vibrated or between and millimeters if vibrated throughout as measured in accordance with AASHTO Designation T . Batches shall be discharged in a manner to facilitate placing the concrete in its final position with a minimum of rehandling and without damage to forms concrete previously placed or other parts of the work .
The interval between loads shall be controlled in order that concrete in place will not become partially hardened prior to placing succeeding batches and in no case shall it exceed minutes .
Plant capacity and transportation facilities shall be sufficient to insure delivery of concrete at the rate required .
Samples of concrete for test and test specimens will be taken from transportation units at the point of discharge or from the concrete in place as determined by the Engineer .
When cement concrete paving operations are done during cold weather the stipulations as outlined in Subsection .
shall apply . .
Placing Concrete .
Concrete shall be placed only on an approved subbase .
The Contractor shall notify the Engineer at least hours in advance of placing the concrete .
In the event the Contractor desires to operate after the daylight hours the Contractor shall provide a lighting system sufficiently adequate to illuminate all of the operations to the satisfaction of the Engineer .
No finishing of the concrete will be permitted after daylight hours unless an adequate and approved lighting system is provided by the Contractor and operated in a satisfactory manner .
Approval of the lighting system by the Engineer must be obtained prior to its use .
At least meters of foundation shall have been prepared ahead of the mixer or concrete operations at all times .
The depositing of concrete on excessively wet subgrades or subbases or a frozen foundation will not be permitted .
No concrete shall be placed around manholes or other structures until they have been installed to the required grade and alignment .
During dry weather when traffic on the foundation or adjacent roadways would deposit windblown dust and dirt on the freshly placed concrete before it can be protected the Contractor shall sprinkle the foundation or adjacent roadways with water or otherwise apply satisfactory treatment to keep down the dust .
Unless otherwise permitted by the Engineer all equipment used for mixing hauling and placing the concrete shall be operated outside of the area being paved .
Should operation of such equipment be permitted on the prepared foundation suitable planks or platforms shall be provided and used for the equipment to run on so that the foundation will be maintained in an approved condition .
The concrete shall be deposited on the grade in such a manner as to require as little handling as possible .
Concrete shall be distributed in such a manner that when consolidated and finished the slabthickness and surface grade Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
required by the plans will be obtained at all points .
Unless truckmixers truckagitators or nonagitating hauling equipment demonstrate that they will discharge concrete without segregation of the materials the concrete shall be unloaded into an approved spreading device and mechanically spread on the grade in such a manner as to prevent segregation of the materials .
Placing shall be continuous between transverse joints without the use of intermediate bulkheads except as specified under Subsection .
for construction joints .
Necessary hand spreading shall be done with shovels not rakes .
Workmen shall not be allowed to walk in the freshly mixed concrete with boots or shoes coated with earth or foreign substances .
The concrete shall be deposited carefully at and around contraction and expansion joints .
It shall be shoveled against both sides of expansion joints simultaneously maintaining equal pressure on both sides .
Care shall be taken that the concrete is worked under all metal parts of the load transfer assemblies .
The concrete shall not be dumped directly upon or against the joints in any manner which displaces the load transfer assemblies or joint material from the true position .
Should any concrete materials fall on or be worked into the surface of a completed slab they shall be removed immediately by approved methods .
Where concrete is to be placed adjoining a previously constructed lane of pavement and mechanical equipment will be operated upon the existing lane of pavement that lane may be opened to traffic when curing operations have been completed provided that beam tests show that the concrete has attained a modulus of rupture of at least .
megaPascals .
Curing operations will not be considered completed unless a curing period of at least days has elapsed since the concrete was placed .
However the pavement may be used at the end of days if only rubbertired finishing equipment is permitted to operate upon it and the concrete has attained a modulus of rupture of at least .
megaPascals .
When high early strength concrete is used mechanical equipment may be operated upon the pavement after a shorter period of curing or as beam tests show that the concrete has attained a modulus of rupture of at least .
megaPascals .
Pavers will not be permitted to operate on the finished pavement unless permission is given by the Engineer .
Gaps in the pavement for crossovers will not be permitted .
Should crossings be necessary suitable bridging of slabs or sand cushioning will be provided as approved by the Engineer . .
Spreading and StrikeOff of Concrete .
As soon as concrete has been placed on the subbase it shall be immediately struckoff accurately by means of an approved mechanical spreading device leaving a surface uniform in texture true to grade elevation and contour .
The strikeoff shall be so adjusted for elevation that when the concrete is consolidated as herein designated sufficient material remains above grade as is required for the final finished surface of the pavement .
When reinforced concrete pavement is placed in two layers the entire width of the bottom layer shall be struck off to such length and depth that the sheet of fabric or bar mat may be laid full length on the concrete in its final position without further manipulation .
The reinforcement shall then be placed directly upon the concrete after which the top layer of the concrete shall be placed struckoff and screeded .
Any portion of the bottom layer of concrete which has been placed more than minutes without being covered with the top layer shall be removed and replaced with freshly mixed concrete at the Contractors expense .
A. SlipForm Method .
The slipform paver shall be an approved machine designed to spread consolidate screed and float finish the freshly placed concrete in one complete pass of the machine in such manner that a minimum of hand finish will be necessary to provide a dense and homogenous pavement in conformance with the plans and specifications .
The slipform paver shall be of the selfpropelled type equipped with crawler type tracks not less than .
meters in length .
The machine shall vibrate the concrete for the full width and depth of the strip of pavement being placed .
Such vibration shall be accomplished with vibrating tubes or arms working in the concrete or with a vibrating screed or pan operating on the surface of the concrete .
The sliding forms shall be rigidly held together laterally to prevent spreading of the forms .
The forms shall trail behind the paver for such distance that no appreciable slumping of the concrete will occur and that necessary final finishing can be accomplished while the concrete is still within the forms .
The slipform paver shall be adjustable as to crown and superelevation and shall shape and compact the concrete to the required cross section as shown on the plans .
Such adjustments shall be readily controllable for accuracy in transitions .
No tractive force shall be applied to the machine except that which is controlled from the machine .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
The concrete shall be of uniform consistency such that there will be no appreciable slumping at the edge of the pavement after the slipforms have passed .
The following tolerances on edge slump shall apply edge slump exclusive of edge rounding shall not exceed millimeter within millimeters of the edge at the extreme outside limits of the concrete pavement at the longitudinal joint along the pavement crown and along the longitudinal joint between the travel lanes and speed change lanes .
The edges along the longitudinal joint between the two travel lanes of the same crossslope shall be at true finish grade .
Any deviation from these tolerances shall be corrected while the concrete is plastic .
The slipform paver shall be operated with as nearly a continuous forward movement as possible and all operations of mixing delivering and spreading concrete shall be so coordinated as to provide uniform progress with stopping and starting of the paver held to a minimum .
If for any reason it is necessary to stop the forward movement of the paver the vibratory and tamping elements shall also be stopped immediately .
For reinforced pavement and where necessary more than one machine andor complimentary equipment will be allowed subject to the Engineers approval .
B. FixedForm Method .
The spreading machine shall be mechanical selfpropelled and of an approved type .
It shall be capable of spreading the concrete evenly between the side forms without segregation and without introducing thrust on the side form .
It shall be equipped with a spreading device adjustable in height for distributing the concrete longitudinally and transversely and a blade adjustable in height to strikeoff the concrete at the required elevation above or below the top of the side form .
Immediately after the concrete has been struck off it shall be thoroughly consolidated against and along the faces of all forms and along the full length and around all parts of joint assemblies by means of vibrators inserted in the concrete .
Vibrators for full width vibration of concrete paving slabs may be either the surface pan type or the internal type with either immersed tube or multiple spuds .
They may be attached to the spreader or the finishing machine or may be mounted on a separate carriage .
They shall not come in contact with the joint load transfer devices subgrade or side forms .
The frequency of the surface vibrators shall not be less than impulses per minute and the frequency of the internal type shall not be less than impulses per minute for tube vibrators and not less than impulses per minute for spud vibrators .
When spud type internal vibrators either hand operated or attached to spreaders or finishing machines are used adjacent to forms they shall have a frequency of not less than impulses per minute .
Vibrators shall not cause the displacement of the side forms nor cause undue delay due to mechanical difficulties .
Should these problems arise they shall be removed from the work and be replaced by equipment meeting these specifications .
Surface vibrating apparatus shall be used only on the top course or layer of the pavement and must be completely out of use when moving over transverse joints or when spreading the bottom course of concrete in twocourse construction .
It shall not be operated where the surface of the concrete as spread is below the elevation of the finished surface of the pavement . .
Placing Steel Reinforcement .
All reinforcing metal must be kept clean and free from dirt oil paint grease mill scale loose or thick rust or any foreign material which could impair bond of the steel with the concrete .
Welded sheet fabric and clipped bar mats shall be furnished in flat sheets and shall be handled carefully during the placing and kept straight until installed .
The reinforcement shall be placed as shown on the plans .
The reinforcement shall be placed so that the extreme longitudinal member will be located not more than millimeters from the edge of the slab section and the ends of all longitudinal members shall extend to within millimeters of the ends of the slab sections .
Adjacent sheets of welded fabric and clipped bar mats shall be lapped as shown on the plans .
Mats or sheets of reinforcement shall be preformed in accordance with the schedule shown on the plans and placed in the concrete by the strikeoff method without chairs or other supporting devices .
Laps between adjacent mats or sheets and positions of same with respect to longitudinal joints transverse joints and edges of pavement shall be as shown on the plans .
Concreting operations shall be performed in a manner so that the mats and sheets will be left in required position .
When reinforced concrete is specified or permitted by the Engineer to be placed in one layerthe reinforcement may be positioned in advance of concrete placement or it may be placed in plastic concrete by mechanical or vibratory Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
means immediately after the concrete has been spread and struckoff. . Finishing Concrete .
Immediately after placement concrete shall be properly finished .
The sequence of operations shall be as follows strikeoff consolidation transverse screeding longitudinal floating straightedging texturing and finally edging of formed joints .
The machine method of finishing shall be employed except that odd widths or shapes of slab may be finished by hand method .
The addition of superficial water to the surface of the concrete to assist in finishing operations will not be permitted .
A .
Machine Finishing .
When the concrete paver is not designed to screed and float finish the freshly placed concrete the surface shall be struckoff and screeded by an approved finishing machine .
The transverse finishing machine for the pavement shall be mechanical selfpropelled and of an approved type .
It shall be equipped with at least two oscillating screeds .
It shall have an independent screed and traction speeds to permit the operator to choose a combination of speeds that will produce the required finish with the consistency of concrete being used .
The tops of the forms shall be kept clean by an effective device attached to the machine and the travel of the machine on the forms shall be maintained true without lift wobbling or other variation tending to affect the precision finish .
The transverse finishing machine shall consolidate and screed the concrete with no more than two passages over the slab except with the special permission of the Engineer .
The operation of the machine shall be controlled so as to prevent excess mortar and water from being worked to the top of the slab and from forming a watery mortar in the roll of concrete in front of the screeds .
If excess mortar does form it shall be removed from the site and wasted .
It shall not under any circumstances be placed on the subbase or shoveled ahead on top of the slab .
Segregated particles of coarse aggregate which may collect in front of the screed shall be wasted outside the forms .
A uniform depth roll of concrete shall be maintained in front of the screeds at all times in order to secure uniform consolidation and to prevent lifting of the screed by irregular amount or overload of concrete .
When vibration is permitted vibrators for full width vibration of concrete paving slabs shall meet the requirement herein of Subsection .B .
If uniform and satisfactory density of the concrete is not obtained by the vibratory method at joints along forms at structures and throughout the pavement the Contractor shall furnish equipment and methods which will produce pavement conforming to the Specifications .
B. Longitudinal Finishing .
As soon as possible after the transverse finishing has been completed as specified above the surface of the concrete shall be further smoothed and finished by use of an approved longitudinal float .
Mechanical Method The float in contact with the pavement shall be at least .
meters in length and at least millimeters wide .
The type of float and details of its construction shall be approved by the Engineer and it shall be in good working condition .
The tracks from which the float operates shall be accurately adjusted to the required crown .
The float shall be accurately adjusted and coordinated with the adjustments of the transverse finishing machine so that a small amount of mortar is carried ahead of the float at all times .
The forward speed shall be adjusted so that the float will lap the distance specified by the Engineer on each transverse trip .
The float shall pass over each area of pavement no more than twice except with the special permission of the Engineer .
Any excess water or soupy material shall be wasted over the side forms on each pass .
Hand Method When strikeoff and consolidation are done by hand methods and longitudinal floating by hand is required the float shall be not less than meters in length not less than millimeters in width suitably stiffened against flexibility and warping and equipped with suitable handles .
It shall be operated from bridges spanning the pavement .
It shall be operated with a sawing motion parallel to the center line while passing gradually from one side of the pavement to the other .
Movement ahead shall be in successive advances of not more than onehalf the length of the float .
Excess water or soupy material shall be wasted over the side forms of each pass .
C. Alternate Finishing and Floating .
As an alternative to the mechanical finishing and floating method in Subsection .A and B preceding the Contractor may use a long wheel base combination floatfinishing machine in lieu of the transverse finishing machine and Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
longitudinal float providing the combination machine can be adjusted to produce satisfactory results and final finishing is properly timed .
Any combination of screeding floating and finishing machines shall include at least two transverse oscillating screeds .
D. Hand Finishing .
Unless otherwise specified hand finishing methods will not be permitted except under the following conditions In the event of breakdown of the mechanical equipment hand methods may be used to finish the concrete already deposited on the grade when the breakdown occurs .
Narrow widths or areas of irregular dimensions where operations of the mechanical equipment is impractical may be finished by hand methods .
The surface of the concrete shall be struckoff immediately after it is placed and leveled by means of an adjustable steel template millimeters wide and millimeters longer than the width of the pavement .
A second adjustable steel template millimeters wide and millimeters longer than the width of the pavement shall be used directly behind this template .
Both templates shall be constructed to produce pavement of the desired cross section and shall have sufficient strength to retain their shape under all working conditions .
The templates shall be moved forward with a combined longitudinal and crosswise motion fully resting at all times on the forms and during the operation the distance between the two templates shall at no time exceed meters .
The template shall be used until a true surface is obtained .
While the concrete is being struckoff with the first template three or more men shall be at work leveling spading and tamping the concrete in front of the template .
Consolidation shall be attained by the use of a suitable vibrator or other approved equipment .
After the concrete has been struckoff with the hand templates described previously other finishing operations described as following the screeding by the finishing machines shall be carried out .
Straightedging operations following the screeding shall be sufficient to remove surface irregularities or produce a riding surface equivalent to that produced by machine operation .
Experienced skilled operators and concrete finishers shall be employed .
Any laxity in this respect shall be cause for immediate suspension of concreting operations .
E. Finishing at Joints .
The concrete adjacent to joints shall be compacted or firmly placed without voids or segregation against the joint material under and around all load transfer devices joint assembly units and other features designed to extend into the pavement .
Concrete adjacent to joints shall be mechanically vibrated as required in Subsection .. After the concrete has been placed and vibrated adjacent to the joints the machine shall be brought forward operating in a manner to avoid damage or misalignment of joints .
If uninterrupted operation of the finishing machine to over and beyond the joints causes segregation of concrete damage to or misalignment of the joints the finishing machine shall be stopped when the front screed is approximately millimeters from the joint .
Segregated concrete shall be removed from in front of and off the joint the front screed shall be lifted and set directly on top of the joint and the forward motion of the finishing machine resumed .
When the second screed is close enough to permit the excess mortar in front of it to flow over the joint it shall be lifted and carried over the joint .
Thereafter the finishing machine may be run over the joint without lifting the screeds provided there is no segregated concrete immediately between the joint and the screed or on top of the joint .
The edges of the slabs on both sides of the transverse expansion joint shall be finished to the same grade .
The top transverse edges of formed joints shall then be rounded to a radius of millimeters by means of approved edging tools .
The transverse edges of formed joints shall be rounded with an edging tool having a vertical leg of sufficient length to contact the vertical side of the preformed filler .
The lateral edge adjacent to pavement already in place shall be rounded with an edging tool having a vertical leg millimeters wide and slightly longer than that used on the first slab .
Tool marks shall be eliminated .
The finishing of the concrete at joints shall be done from a bridge which shall not rest on the concrete at any point .
The finishers shall use a short straightedge not less than .
meters in length when finishing transverse formed joints to insure that both slab ends will be at the same elevation or grade .
F. Straightedge Testing and Surface Corrections .
Following the longitudinal finishing operations all remaining irregularities shall be eliminated by use of scraping straightedges meters in length equipped with handles millimeters longer than the width of one lane .
Straightedges shall be made of redwood or aluminum .
For wood the cross section shall be millimeters by millimeters tapered from millimeters depth at center to millimeters depth at ends .
For aluminum the preferred shape is the T section with bearing width of not more than millimeters .
For both metal and wood the approximate mass should be .
to kilograms for the meter length exclusive of handle .
The handle shall Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
be attached to form an angle of about degrees with the horizontal so as to present a cutting edge when in operation .
The scraping straightedge shall be employed directly after the longitudinal finisher .
The straightedge shall be placed on the form or edge of completed pavement nearest the operator .
The handle shall be lowered to knee height and pushed transversely over the pavement surface .
When it reaches the opposite form or center of full width paving the handle shall be raised to shoulder height and the straightedge drawn back across the pavement in the same path .
Additional passes shall be made if all irregularities are not removed by these two passes .
Each pass shall be lapped onehalf of the length of the straightedge as the work progresses .
Any depressions found shall be immediately filled with freshly mixed concrete struckoff consolidated and refinished .
High areas shall be cut down and refinished .
Special attention shall be given to assure that the surface across joints meets the requirements for smoothness .
Straightedge testing and surface corrections shall continue until the entire surface is found to be free from observable departures from the straightedge and the slab conforms to the required grade and cross section .
Where a wood straightedge is used the Contractor shall maintain a master straightedge on the job .
Wood straightedges are required to be checked on the master straightedge twice a day once in the morning before use and again at noon .
Any variation from a true plane shall be corrected before further use .
G. Final Finish .
Following the scraping straightedges the final surface texture shall be developed by use of a wet burlap strip dragged longitudinally over the pavement .
The burlap shall be not less than meter nor more than meters wide without seams and the leading edge fastened to a wood pole for purpose of keeping burlap in proper position .
The burlap shall be a minimum of millimeters longer than the pavement width being dragged .
At least millimeters of the burlap drag shall be in contact with the surface when dragging the pavement .
Generally two such drags should be used so that the complete operation may be in a forward direction without backing up .
The drags shall be cleaned of mortar when necessary so as to maintain uniform and satisfactory surface texture .
Drags that can not be cleaned shall be discarded and new drags substituted .
When not in use the drag shall be removed from the pavement surface .
The surface of the concrete after burlap drag operation shall be uniform in appearance with a gritty texture shall have the required grade and contour shall be free from surplus water rough and porous spots irregularities depressions and other objectionable surface features resulting from the improper handling of the tools .
The entire operation shall be executed to the satisfaction of the Engineer .
Mechanically operated wire or plastic bristle brooms shall be used where specified to provide an adequate skid resistant surface .
H. Edging at Forms and Joints .
After the final finish has been completed but before the concrete has taken its initial set the edges of slabs along forms and at formed joints shall be carefully finished and tooled to form a smooth rounded surface of the radius required on the plans .
Corners or edges of slabs which have crumbled and any areas which lack sufficient mortar for proper finishing shall be cleaned by removing all loose fragments and soupy mortar and shall be solidly filled and finished with a mixture of correct proportions and appropriate consistence .
Tool marks shall be eliminated and all edges shall be smooth and true to line .
The surface of the slab shall not be unduly disturbed by tilting of the tool during use .
All concrete on top of the joint filler shall be completely removed . .
Joints .
Joints shall be constructed of the types and dimensions and at the locations required by the plans or specifications or as directed by the Engineer .
They shall be placed to a true alignment as shown on the plans or as directed .
The sides of joints shall be protected during the curing period .
Joint spaces shall be protected against infiltration of foreign materials before the time of sealing .
All joints shall be sealed before the pavement is opened to any kind of traffic .
Dowels tiebars and tiebolts shall be prepared and placed across joints where indicated on the plans .
If joints become adulterated with dirt sand gravel or other foreign material during the construction period they shall be reopened cleaned and resealed prior to opening the job to traffic .
This shall be done in conjunction with final cleanup .
The Contractor shall provide sawing equipment adequate in number of units and power to complete the sawing with a watercooled diamond edge saw blade or an abrasive wheel to the required dimensions and at the required rate and heshe shall provide at least one standby saw in good working order .
An ample supply of saw blades shall be maintained Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
at the site of the work at all times during sawing operations .
The Contractor shall provide adequate artificial lighting facilities for night sawing .
All of this equipment shall be on the job both before and continuously during concrete placement .
The Contractor shall submit for approval by the Engineer hisher proposed equipment for lighting and sawing prior to commencing work on the project .
A. Longitudinal Joints .
Longitudinal joints shall consist of construction joints between adjacent lanes and surface groove joints when the paving is placed more than one lane wide .
They shall be located as shown on the plans or as directed .
Deformed steel bars or tiebolts of specified length size spacing and material shall be placed perpendicular to the longitudinal joints they shall be placed by approved hand or mechanical methods or rigidly secured by chairs or other approved supports to prevent displacement .
Tiebars and tiebolts shall not be painted or coated with asphalt or other material or enclosed in tubes or sleeves .
When fixedforms are used tiebolts shall be placed across longitudinal construction joints as shown on the plans or as directed .
Tiebolts shall be installed in two major parts to form an integral tiebolt unit .
Such device as approved shall result in proper installation as specified and shall conform to all standard requirements specified herein for strength and design .
Tiebars in full width paving shall be of the size and length shown on the plans and placed at right angle to and across the locations of the longitudinal joint .
The midpoint of the tiebar shall be at the longitudinal joint .
When supported above the fine grade before placing concrete the tiebars shall be at the middepth of the pavement .
Tiebars may be placed under the distributed reinforcement by approved hand or mechanical methods before the reinforcement is placed and before the top layer of concrete is placed .
If placed under the distributed reinforcement the tiebars shall be not less than millimeters nor more than millimeters below the finished pavement surface .
Longitudinal construction joints shall extend for the full depth of the pavement be perpendicular to the pavement surface and keyed and tied as shown on the plans .
The upper edges of the slab shall be rounded as shown on the plans .
The slab placed second shall be edged with a tool having a vertical leg millimeters thick and longer than that used in the first slab .
The joint shall be filled with sealing material .
All honeycombed areas on the vertical faces of longitudinal joints shall be cleaned with a wire brush and thoroughly wetted and patched with mortar of the same composition as that used in the pavement .
The faces of the concrete slabs at the longitudinal joints shall be painted with asphaltic material specified in Subsection .
before the adjacent slab is placed against it .
Longitudinal surface groove joints shall be constructed by sawing with an approved concrete saw to the depth width and line shown on the plans .
The width of the cut shall not be less than millimeters and the depth shall not be less than onefourth of the pavement thickness plus millimeters .
Suitable guide lines or devices shall be used to assure cutting the joint on the true line as shown on the plans .
The joint shall be sawed before any equipment or vehicles are allowed on the pavement .
If sawing is done before the end of the curing period the faces of the joint shall be cured as provided for transverse sawed joints .
The joints shall be filled with joint sealer compound as specified under Subsection .. Where there is more than one longitudinal joint the cutting of this joint shall be done by tandem sawing which saws shall be fixed to assure lines parallel and true as shown on the plans .
B. Transverse Expansion Joints .
Transverse expansion joints shall be constructed where shown on the plans or directed by the Engineer .
They shall consist of a preformed filler millimeters thick .
a top sealing cap of poured joint filler compound .
and an approved load transfer assembly ..
The expansion joint filler shall be continuous from edge to edge shaped to the subgrade and to the keyway along the edge .
It shall extend from the subgrade to millimeters below the pavement surface .
Preformed joint filler shall be furnished in lengths equal to the paving width or equal to the width of one lane .
Where more than one section is used in a joint the section shall be securely laced or clipped together .
Damage or repaired joint filler shall not be used unless approved by the Engineer .
A removable metal cap shall be placed over the top of the preformed joint during the concreting operations to maintain proper grade and alignment .
Concrete shall be placed as specified and shall be carefully spaded against the joint filler .
The metal cap shall be removed immediately after the final pass of the finishing machine .
A suitable strip of the exact dimensions of the filler shall then be inserted in the joint as a guide and the concrete edged with a millimeters Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
radius edging tool .
The strip shall then be removed and any rough or torn places in the concrete shall be corrected .
Particular care shall be taken to keep the concrete in exactly the same plane on the two sides of the joint .
No plugs of concrete shall be permitted anywhere within the expansion space .
C. Transverse Contraction Joints .
These joints shall consist of planes of weakness created by sawing grooves in the surface of the pavement at the locations indicated on the plans .
Approved load transfer assemblies shall be installed at each contraction joint as shown on the plans and in accordance with the Specifications .
When approved by the Engineer a vibrating bar may be used to move coarse aggregate off the line of the saw cut .
The vibrating bar shall be used only in plastic concrete and so as not to produce areas of segregated mortar .
The Contractors sawing equipment and method of sawing shall be subject to the approval of the Engineer .
The timing and sawing and the order in which joints are sawed shall be subject to such control by the Engineer as in hisher judgment is necessary to protect the pavement from ravelling spalling cracking or other damage .
Normally contraction joints will be sawed progressively with an approved circular saw at not less than nor more than hours after finishing .
All joints shall be sawed before uncontrolled shrinkage cracking takes place .
If necessary the sawing operations shall be carried on both during the day and the night regardless of weather conditions .
The pavement shall be cut for not less than millimeters in width to a depth at least onefourth of the pavement thickness .
Secondary saw cuts shall be made as necessary so that the final joint width is at least millimeters or as shown on the plans .
In the event of excessive relief of the joint care should be taken to secure this minimum opening .
To control random cracking the Engineer may require that initial curing for the first hours be done with wet burlap .
The sawing of any joint shall be omitted if a crack occurs at or near the joint location prior to the time of sawing .
Sawing shall be discontinued when a crack develops ahead of the saw .
In general all joints should be sawed in sequence .
All contraction joints in lanes adjacent to previously constructed lanes shall be sawed before uncontrolled cracking occurs .
D. Transverse Construction Joints .
Transverse construction joints shall be placed at the end of each days work and when placing concrete will be interrupted for more than minutes .
No transverse construction joint shall be placed closer than meters to another transverse joint .
If sufficient concrete has not been mixed at the time of interruption to form a slab at least meters long the excess concrete back to the last preceding joint shall be removed and disposed as directed .
Substantial temporary wood or metal bulkheads shall be used to form construction joints .
Particular care will be taken to provide a good riding joint and hand finishing shall be kept to a minimum .
Poor riding joints will be corrected .
When the construction joint is placed at a regular location of an expansion or contraction joint a standard load transfer assembly will be used .
When the construction joint is at other than the regular joint location deformed bars will be used to create a bonded tie across the joint .
Minimum tie steel shall be metric round deformed bars .
meters long at millimeters center to center .
E. Load Transfer Devices .
Dowels shall be held in position parallel to the surface and center line of the slab by a metal device meeting the requirements of Subsection .
or shall be placed by an approved mechanical placing device .
The subbase at the locations where expansion contraction and construction joint load transfer assemblies are to be installed shall be trimmed accurately to the required cross section and depth of pavement .
Where used the complete joint assembly shall be carefully placed .
If the subbase is trimmed too low or if there are any open spaces beneath the preformed joint filler the joint assembly shall be removed the subbase correctly graded and tamped and the joint assembly reset .
Onehalf the length of each slipdowel bar of load transfer units shall be rendered bondless with a coat of either a graphite lubricant or a wax base grease meeting the requirements of Subsection M The graphite lubricant shall be applied by daubing mopping or gloved hand to produce a thorough coating approximately millimeters thick .
Brushes shall not be used for the application of the graphite lubricant .
The wax base grease shall be preheated to temperatures of C to C and applied either by dipping or by brush to produce a coating approximately millimeters thick .
Dowels shall be coated at least one hour before the concrete is placed around the dowel assembly .
The assembly shall be held in the required position at line and grade by metal stakes or pins throughout the operation of placing and strikingoff the concrete .
No concrete shall be placed unless the methods and devices used by Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
the Contractor for installing and securing the joint assembly including any joint filler required and finishing the joint meet with the approval of the Engineer .
Immediately prior to depositing the concrete the position of dowels shall be checked and the assemblies tightened if necessary .
The installation of dowel assemblies and the placement of the surrounding concrete shall result in dowels tightly enclosed in concrete and parallel to both the pavement surface and center line at plan locations .
In lieu of using dowel assemblies at contraction joints dowel bars may be placed in the plastic concrete by a mechanical device approved by the Engineer . .
Numbering Slabs .
The pavement slabs shall be numbered consecutively as the work progresses and the last slab placed each day shall be stamped with the date .
The marking shall be on the right hand corner at the beginning of each slab and so placed that it can be read traveling in the direction the pavement was laid .
The figures and letters shall be millimeters high and plainly and neatly stamped after the final finish of the concrete as directed .
When two or more paver mixers are working the distinguishing letter for each mixer shall be stamped adjacent to the number . .
Surface Test .
The entire surface shall be checked while the concrete is still plastic with an approved metal straightedge meters in length and any deviation from the general surface shall be corrected at once .
The surface shall be checked again immediately after the removal of the burlap where an initial burlap covering is used or at the end of hours where hour covering is used .
The straightedge shall be placed at several points across the pavement parallel to the centerline and shall be advanced in .
meter steps .
Areas showing high spots of more than millimeters but not exceeding millimeters in meters shall be marked and immediately ground or rubbed down with an approved tool to an elevation where the area or spot will not show surface deviations in excess of millimeters when tested with a meter straightedge .
This grinding or rubbing shall be conducted carefully so as to avoid loosening coarse aggregate or otherwise damaging the slab .
Where the departure from correct cross section exceeds millimeters the pavement shall be removed and replaced by and at the expense of the Contractor .
Any area or section so removed shall be not less than meters in length nor less than the full width of the lane involved .
When it is necessary to remove and replace a section of pavement any remaining portion of the slab adjacent to the joints that is less than meters in length shall also be removed and replaced. . Curing .
Immediately after the finishing operations have been completed and as soon as marring of the concrete will not occur the entire surface of the newly placed concrete shall be covered and cured in accordance with one of the following methods .
In all cases in which curing requires the use of water the curing shall have prior rights to all water supply or supplies .
Failure to provide sufficient cover material of whatever kind the Contractor may elect to use or a lack of water adequate to take care of both curing and other requirements shall be cause for immediate suspension of concreting operations .
The concrete shall not be left exposed for more than hour between stages of curing or during the curing period .
Whenever fixedforms are not used exceptional care shall be taken in the use of paper or burlap to prevent any damage to the unsupported edges of the pavement .
The curing media shall be applied at the appropriate time and shall be applied uniformly and completely to all surfaces and edges of the pavement .
A. Moist Curing .
Initial Curing Strips of burlap saturated with water shall be placed on the fresh concrete surface carefully so as to avoid marring and the strips shall overlap not less than millimeters .
This burlap shall be kept thoroughly and continuously wet by sprinkling it with a fine spray of water until it is removed .
Initial curing with wet burlap shall be for a period of not less than hours .
Burlap which has been used for any purpose other than curing concrete shall not be used .
Final Curing Following completion of initial curing the curing shall be continued using an additional layer of burlap or cotton mats .
This double layer shall remain in place and shall be kept thoroughly and continuously saturated with water for a period of not less than days .
Cotton mats may be used for final curing if approved by the Engineer .
Such covering shall be as effective in preventing evaporation of mixing water and controlling variance in temperature of the concrete as the two thicknesses of wet burlap .
If cotton mats are used for final curing the burlap shall be removed in such a manner that not more than Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
meters of pavement is exposed at one time followed at once by application of cotton mats .
B. Waterproof Paper Curing .
The top surface and sides of the pavement shall be entirely covered with waterproof paper .
Each paper cover shall be not less than meters or more than meters in length and shall be of such width that when in place it will extend to at least millimeters beyond the edges of the slab to be covered .
Paper covers may be furnished in widths corresponding to that of the slab provided supplemental stringer sheets at least millimeters wide are used in which case such sheets shall be placed along the edge of the slab under the paper covers .
On removal of forms the paper shall be brought down over the slab side and held with a continuous bank of earth .
The junctions between the paper covers shall be lapped approximately millimeters and held in place with a bank of earth .
All rips or holes occurring in the paper covers while in use shall be immediately repaired with a sealed patch to render them airtight .
Covers which have become damaged or soiled to the extent that they will not provide satisfactory curing or will mar the concrete shall not be used .
The paper shall be left in place for a period of hours or longer if necessary to obtain the required strength .
The surface of the pavement shall be moist when the paper is placed .
C. Impervious Membrane Curing .
After finishing operations have been completed and immediately after the free water has left the surface the surface of the slab shall be completely coated and sealed with a uniform layer of white pigmented curing compound .
The compound shall be applied in a coat continuous operation and at a total coverage of not less than .
liters per square meter of surface .
The compound shall be applied by means of a mechanical pressure sprayer mounted on a selfpropelled carriage .
The compound shall form a uniform continuous coherent film that shall not check crack or peel and shall be free from pin holes or other imperfections .
If discontinuities pin holes or abrasion exist an additional coat shall be applied within minutes to the affected areas .
The equipment shall provide adequate stirring of the compound during application .
Also wind protection to the spray fog shall be provided by an adequate shield when the compound is applied to the pavement .
The equipment for applying the compound shall be approved by the Engineer before work is started .
Should the method of applying the compound not produce a uniform film its use shall be discontinued and the curing shall be done by one of the other approved methods specified herein .
The curing compound shall be of such character that the film will harden within minutes after application .
Should the film become damaged from any cause within the required curing period the damaged portions shall be repaired immediately with additional compound .
Liquid membrane material shall not be placed on the faces of joints .
Immediately after the contraction joints are sawed they shall be protected and moistcured with strips of waterproof paper or plastic .
Ropes made of jute or cotton may also be used .
The method used shall insure proper curing of the portion of the slab adjacent to the joints .
Immediately after the forms are removed the entire area of the sides of the slab shall be coated with the curing compound at the rate specified for the pavement surface .
This spraying shall be a continuous process and waiting until all forms have been removed before making the application will not be permitted .
Handspray equipment will be permitted for the application of the curing compound over the sides of the slab .
Care shall be used to prevent coating the ends of sawed contraction joints .
If hair checking develops before the curing compound can be applied the concrete shall be moistcured for at least hours before applying any membrane curing compound .
If rain falls on the newly coated pavement before the film has dried sufficiently to resist damage or if the film is damaged in any other way the Contractor will be required to apply a new coat of material to the affected areas equal to that specified for the original coat .
The treated surface shall be protected by the Contractor from injury for a period of at least days .
All traffic foot or otherwise will be considered injurious to the film of the applied compound .
A minimum of foot traffic will be permitted on the dried film as necessary to carry on the work properly provided any damage to the film is immediately repaired by the application of an additional coat of compound .
D. White Polyethylene Sheeting .
The general requirements for the use of white polyethylene sheets shall be those for waterproof paper curing in Subsection .B .
E. Curing in Cold Weather .
During cold weather when the air temperature may be expected to drop below C a sufficient supply of loose dry hay or straw or other suitable blanketing material for covering shall be provided along the line of the work and at any time when the air temperature may be expected to reach the freezing point during the day or night the material so Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
provided shall be spread to a sufficient depth to prevent freezing of the concrete .
The period of time such protection shall be maintained shall be not less than days or until the concrete has hardened thoroughly .
The use of such hay or straw does not take the place of the burlap or other covering specified herein but shall be applied in addition to the covering .
The Contractor shall be responsible for the quality and strength of the concrete placed during cold weather and any concrete injured by frost action shall be removed and replaced at the Contractors expense . .
Removing Forms .
Forms shall not be removed for hours after the concrete has been placed or for a longer period if directed .
Extreme care shall be taken in removing forms in order that no damage will be done to the concrete .
Under no condition shall any bar pick or other tool be used which depends upon leverage on the concrete for removal of the pins or forms .
As soon as side forms are removed and prior to sealing joints the ends of all joints shall be opened and all mortar or foreign material shall be removed from the joint opening above the filler or other space as provided so that there will be complete freedom for required movement of the joint .
After the forms have been removed the side of the slab shall be cured as outlined in one of the methods indicated previously .
All holes or honeycomb shall be patched promptly with mortar of the same composition as that used in the pavement which has been allowed to set for about onehalf hour after mixing .
Major honeycombed areas will be considered as defective work and shall be removed and replaced .
Any area or section so removed shall not be less than meters in length nor less than full width of the lane involved .
When it is necessary to remove and replace a section of pavement any remaining portion of the slab adjacent to the joints that is less than meters in length shall also be removed and replaced. . Sealing Joints .
Joints shall be sealed after curing and before any kind of traffic is permitted on the pavement .
The sealing of joints shall be undertaken only when the atmospheric temperature is above C and when the weather is not foggy or rainy .
Just prior to sealing each joint shall be thoroughly cleaned of all foreign material including curing compound by means of a mechanical poweroperated concrete grooving machine or a power wire brush .
The concrete grooving machine or wire brush shall be operated in such a manner that the vertical faces of the concrete in the joint opening will present thoroughly clean concrete surfaces for application of the joint sealing compound .
Following this operation each joint shall then be further cleaned by means of a powerful jet of compressed air .
No joints shall be filled when there is any free water in or adjacent to the joints .
Joint walls and all surfaces to which the sealing compound is to be applied shall be surface dry for at least hours prior to placing .
No joints shall be sealed until the joints have been approved by the Engineer as being clean and dry in accordance with the foregoing provisions .
Joints shall be sealed with an approved joint sealing compound conforming to Federal Specifications for Sealer HotPoured Type for Joints in Concrete SSS or an approved elastic opencell compression seal M The melting devices used for heating the joint sealing material shall be of the double boiler indirect heating type using high flash oil for heat transfer .
Constant mechanical agitation during the entire melting period shall be provided and no material shall be subjected for more than minutes to the high temperature required for melting of the material .
Positive temperature control preferably by thermostat of the heating medium of the sealing compound shall be provided at all times .
Hotpoured sealing compound shall not be subjected to temperatures in excess of C at any stage of the melting operation .
Sealing material that has remained in the kettle in a molten state overnight will not be acceptable for use .
Hotpoured filler for use in sealing all joints except expansion joints shall be applied under pressure .
When hot poured filler is applied under pressure the material shall be applied by means of a heavy duty air operated pump or other approved device .
The material shall be discharged through a suitable nozzle in such a way as to fill the joint opening solid and uniformly in a neat and workmanlike manner .
When the atmospheric temperature at the time of sealing is below C the surface of the sealing compound in the finished joint shall be not less than millimeters below the level of the pavement surface .
The sealing shall be done in such a manner that the material will not be spilled on the exposed surfaces of the Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
concrete .
Any excess material on the surface of the concrete pavement shall be removed immediately and the pavement surface cleaned .
In the event paving and construction operations must close down in the Fall because of cold weather and the contract can not be completed until the following year the Engineer shall require the Contractor to clean and seal all joints in the part of the pavement completed at the time of the shutdown in the manner prescribed in this Specification .
Under no circumstances shall any joint remain unsealed between the period of shutdown in the Fall and resumption of construction in the Spring. . Protection of Pavement .
The Contractor shall erect and maintain suitable barricades and employ watchmen to exclude traffic from the newly constructed pavement for the period herein prescribed .
These barriers shall be so arranged as not in any way to interfere with or impede public traffic on any lane intended to be kept open .
Necessary signs shall be maintained by the Contractor clearly indicating the open lanes to the public .
When it is necessary to provide for traffic across the pavement the Contractor shall construct at hisher entire expense immediately after the finishing of the concrete the necessary bridges over the pavement clear of the forms and at least millimeters clear of the concrete and sufficiently strong to carry the traffic .
The Contractor shall maintain these bridges until the concrete has attained the strength required in these Specifications for opening to traffic .
Prior approval shall be obtained from the Engineer for crossing of existing structures with the paving train .
When fixedforms are not used the Contractor shall be required to have available at all times materials for the protection of the edges and surface of the unhardened concrete in order that the concrete may be properly protected against the effects of rain before the concrete is sufficiently hardened .
Such protective materials shall consist of standard metal forms or wood planks having a nominal thickness of not less than millimeters and a nominal width of not less than the thickness of the pavement at its edge for the protection of the pavement edges and covering material such as burlap or cotton mats curing paper or plastic sheeting material for the protection of the surface of the pavement .
An adequate quantity of the materials described above shall be available loaded on vehicles which can be promptly driven or towed to the scene of paving operations and be located not more than one kilometer from the place where the paving operations are in progress .
When rain appears imminent all paving operations shall stop and all available personnel shall begin placing forms against the sides of the pavement and covering the surface of the unhardened concrete with the protective covering .
The Contractor shall have on hand at the paving site sufficient burlap or paper to cover at least square meters of freshly laid pavement as a protection against sudden thunder showers or heavy downpours of rain .
Any part of the pavement damaged by traffic or other causes occurring prior to its final acceptance shall be repaired or replaced by and at the expense of the Contractor in a manner satisfactory to the Engineer .
The Contractor shall protect the pavement against both public traffic and the traffic caused by hisher own employees and agents .
The pavement shall be so protected until the beam test shows a strength of at least .
megaPascals . .
Opening to Traffic .
Upon completion of curing operations as specified the pavement may be opened to traffic provided that beam tests show that the concrete has attained a modulus of rupture of at least .
megaPascals .
However curing operations will not be considered completed unless a curing period of at least days has elapsed since the concrete was placed .
Where highearly strength concrete is used the pavement may be opened to traffic after a shorter period of curing or as beam tests show that the concrete has attained a modulus of rupture of at least .
megaPascals. . Test Specimens .
Test specimens shall conform to the requirements of Subsection M They will be taken in the field from batches used in the pavement to determine the adequacy of control of the materials the proportioning and mixing of the concrete and compliance with the minimum strength requirements .
Test beams shall be millimeters x millimeters x millimeters in length and shall be made cured and used in accordance with Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
AASHTO Designations T and T . At least two beams shall be made for each square meters or fraction thereof of pavement placed .
Payment for the forms material and assistance as the Engineer may require to make cure and test the field specimens will not be paid for directly but shall be included in the contract unit price for the pavement . .
Tolerance in Pavement Thickness .
It is the intent of these Specifications that the pavement shall be constructed in accordance with the thickness shown on the plans .
Before final acceptance of the work or during the progress of the work as may be advisable or necessary the thickness or depth of concrete pavement will be determined by cores taken by the Contractor under the direction of the Engineer or hisher designee and unsatisfactory work shall be repaired replaced or will be paid for at an adjusted unit price .
Where any pavement is found deficient in thickness the following rules relative to replacement of the faulty pavement and adjustment of unit price shall govern .
The thickness of the pavement will be determined by average caliper measurement of cores tested in accordance with AASHTO Designation T . For the purpose of establishing an adjusted unit price for pavement units to be considered separately are defined as not more than meters of pavement in each traffic lane starting at the end of the pavement bearing the smaller station number .
A traffic lane is defined as being between longitudinal joints or between a longitudinal joint and a pavement edge .
The last unit in each lane shall be meters plus the fractional part of meters remaining .
One core will be taken at random in each unit by the Contractor .
When the measurement of the core from a unit is not deficient by more than millimeters from the plan thickness the pavement in the unit represented will be paid for at full unit price .
When such measurement is deficient by more than millimeters but less than millimeters two additional cores at intervals of not less than meters will be taken .
The thickness of the unit will be considered to be the average of the three cores provided none is deficient by millimeters or more .
Payment for the pavement in the unit will be at an adjusted unit price as provided in Subsection ..
In calculating the average thickness of the pavement measurements in excess of the specified thickness will be considered as the specified thickness .
Measurements which are less than the specified thickness by millimeters or more will not be included in the average .
When any core is deficient by millimeters or more additional cores will be taken at .
meter intervals in each direction until a core is found in each direction that is deficient by less than millimeters .
Each such exploratory core will represent the depth of .
meters of pavement one traffic lane in width .
The pavement so represented will be deducted from the unit of pavement being measured and the remaining area cored and measured as described previously .
Pavement deficient by millimeters or more but less than millimeters may be accepted by the Engineer at no payment to the Contractor .
However the Contractor may at hisher own expense remove and replace the pavement which will then be cored and measured for payment as herein provided .
Pavement deficient by millimeters or more shall be removed and replaced by the Contractor at hisher own expense .
Payment for such replaced pavement will be as provided herein .
Other areas such as intersections entrances crossovers ramps etc .
will be considered as one unit and the thickness of each unit will be determined separately .
Small irregular unit areas may be included as part of another unit .
At such points as the Engineer may select in each unit one core will be taken for each square meters of pavement or fraction thereof in the unit .
Thickness of each unit will be determined as described previously except that when additional cores in any unit are required they will be taken at locations as directed by the Engineer .
COMPENSATION .
Method of Measurement .
Cement concrete pavement will be measured by the square meter and the quantity paid for shall be the number of square meters as determined by the actual area of the finished pavement complete in place and accepted but subject to adjusted proportional payment or nonpayment as stated in Subsection .
for all pavement areas found deficient in depth .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
The width for measurement of the pavement shall be as shown on the typical cross sections including additional widening where called for or as otherwise directed in writing by the Engineer .
The length will be measured horizontally along the center line of each roadway or ramp . .
Basis of Payment .
Standard cement concrete pavement will be paid for at the contract unit price per square meter complete in place subject to price adjustments as set forth below .
No additional payment over the contract unit price will be made for any pavement having an average thickness in excess of that shown on the plans .
Average thickness shall be calculated as stated in Subsection .. Where the average thickness of pavement is deficient in thickness by more than millimeters but less than millimeters payment will be made as follows CONCRETE PAVEMENT DEFICIENCY Deficiency in Thickness Determined by Cores Proportional Part of Contract Prices Allowed millimeters or less percent More than millimeters but less than millimeters percent millimeters or more but less than millimeters percent Where core measurements indicate that the pavement is deficient in thickness by millimeters but less than millimeters the pavement may be accepted without any payment being made to the Contractor or it may be replaced at the option of the Contractor with pavement of the specified thickness at hisher entire expense .
If the deficiency in thickness is millimeters or more the Contractor shall be required to remove such deficient areas and replace them with cement concrete pavement conforming with all requirements of these Specifications and to the thickness shown on the plans .
Such areas when accepted will then be duly included in the square meters for which payment shall be made at the contract unit price .
The Contractor shall receive no compensation for materials or labor involved in removing and replacing deficient areas .
When high early strength concrete is specified at the direction of the Engineer in order to expedite the opening of pavement to traffic the high early strength will be obtained by means of an increase in the cement factor and a reduction of the watercement ratio .
The extra cement will be paid for at the actual unit cost per kilogram to the Contractor for the extra quantity of cement actually incorporated in the pavement plus an allowance of of the cost per kilogram which cost shall include all equipment labor storage transportation and work incidental to its inclusion in the concrete and incorporation in the finished pavement. . Payment Items. . Cement Concrete Pavement Square Meter SECTION GRANITE RUBBLE BLOCK PAVEMENT DESCRIPTION .
General .
This item of work shall consist of furnishing and setting granite rubble block pavement on a sand cushion on a concrete base course in accordance with these specifications and in close conformity with the lines and grades shown on the plans or established by the Engineer .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
MATERIALS .
General .
Materials shall meet the requirements specified in the following Subsections of Division III Materials Granite Rubble Block M .. MPa mm kg Cement Concrete Masonry M ..
Expansion and Contraction Joints Performed FillerM ..
Hot Poured Joint Sealer M .. Mortar M ..
Sand Borrow M ..
Type b CONSTRUCTION METHODS .
General .
The subbase below the concrete base course shall be fine graded and thoroughly compacted after forms are in place .
The subbase shall be placed on compacted fill as required under Section . . Forms .
Forms shall be placed if directed to the full depth of the combined granite rubble block sand cushion and concrete base .
They shall be of wood not less than nominal millimeter thickness and dressed on all four sides .
Forms shall be securely staked and braced and shall be constructed and set so as to resist the pressure of the concrete without springing out of alignment .
They shall be oiled before use . .
Placing Concrete .
Concrete shall be deposited with minimum rehandling and in one layer .
Hand spreading and spading shall be done adjacent to forms and joints .
The concrete shall be struck off and floatfinished .
Protection and cutting shall be done as required in Section .
Placing of sand cushion and laying of granite rubble blocks shall not be done until at least hours after the final curing period of the concrete base course .
The forms shall remain in place until the granite rubble blocks are laid in order to confine the sand cushion and mortar . .
Joints in Concrete .
Weakened plane transverse contraction joints shall be constructed in the concrete base course every meters or as shown on the plans .
These joints shall consist of surface slats millimeters deep varying in width from millimeters at top to millimeters at bottom .
Expansion joints shall be formed at all existing expansion joints of existing reinforced concrete surface where this surface is to be used as the base .
Joints shall be millimeters in width and shall be filled with preformed joint filler .
All joints shall be sealed with joint filler compound . .
Laying Blocks .
Blocks shall be carefully laid on a sand cushion over the concrete foundation as shown on the plans and as directed and shall be solidly rammed in position .
Joints between blocks shall be a maximum of Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
millimeters and a minimum of millimeters in width .
Blocks shall be kept perfectly clean and joints between stones shall be clean and open to the full depth of blocks until the joint is filled with mortar .
After a sufficient area of block pavement has been laid the surface shall be tested with a meter straightedge laid parallel with the centerline and any variation exceeding millimeters shall be corrected and brought to proper grade .
Stones disturbed in making replacements or correcting variations shall be settled into place by carefully ramming or tampering to grade by use of a hand tamper applied upon a millimeter plank .
Each section of block surfacing must be acceptable to the Engineer before joints in that section are filled with mortar . .
Filling Joints .
Mortar shall be placed and worked in such a manner as to fill the joint to a depth millimeters below the surface .
The top surface of blocks shall be kept clean of mortar stains .
Immediately after the mortar joints have set sufficiently the granite block pavement shall be swept clean and any marks on the top surface removed .
COMPENSATION .
Method of Measurement .
Granite Rubble Block Pavement will be measured by the square meter for the work complete in place including the required excavation and materials . .
Basis of Payment .
This work will be paid for at the contract unit price per square meter for Granite Rubble Block Pavement complete in place. . Payment Items . .
Granite Rubble Block Pavement Square Meter Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
SECTION CURB AND EDGING SECTION CURB CURB INLETS CURB CORNERS AND EDGING DESCRIPTION .
General .
This item of work shall consist of furnishing and setting curb curb inlets curb corners and edging on a gravel foundation except for bridge curb which is set in full mortar bed and bituminous concrete curb which is placed on a bituminous concrete base in accordance with these specifications and in close conformity with the lines and grades shown on the plans or established by the Engineer .
MATERIALS .
General .
Materials shall conform to the requirements specified in the following Subsections of Division III Materials Granite Curb M ..
Granite Curb Inlets M ..
Granite Curb Corners M ..
Granite Edging M .. Mortar M .. Gravel M ..
Type c Anchors M .. Cement Concrete Precast Units M .. Joint Material Tar Impregnated Felted Paper M .. Preformed Expansion Joint Filler M .. Bituminous Concrete Curb Types M .. Cement Concrete Curb M ..
Liquid Concrete PenetrantSealer M .. CONSTRUCTION METHODS .
Excavating Trench .
The trench for the curb shall be excavated to a width of millimeters .
The subgrade of the trench shall be a depth below the proposed finished grade of the curb equal to millimeters plus the depth of the curbstone . .
Preparing Foundation .
The foundation for the curb shall consist of gravel spread upon the subgrade and after being thoroughly compacted by tamping shall be millimeters in depth .
The gravel foundation for edging shall be as shown on the plans and shall be thoroughly rammed or tamped until firm and unyielding .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
The foundation for the curb inlet shall consist of a full bed of Portland cement mortar on the supporting back wall of the catch basin or gutter inlet and sufficient gravel on each side to support the overhang .
The trench for the gravel foundation shall be at least millimeters in depth and millimeters in width .
This trench shall be filled with gravel thoroughly tamped to the required grade .
The trench for the curb corner shall be excavated so that there shall be constructed a foundation of gravel which when thoroughly compacted will be millimeters in depth and extending millimeters beyond the front and back of curb corner to the full depth of foundation .
Other acceptable material may be used for backing . .
Setting Curb and Edging .
Curbing curb corners or edging shall be set on additional gravel spread upon the foundation .
All spaces under the curb curb corners or edging shall be filled with gravel thoroughly compacted so that the curb curb corners or edging will be completely supported throughout their length .
The curb shall be set at the line and grade required as shown on the plans unless otherwise directed .
Curb curb corners or edging shall be fitted together as closely as possible except for VA curb which shall not fit closer to each other than millimeters .
If curb curb corners curb inlets or edging of different quarries is used on the same project curbing of each particular quarry shall be segregated and set to give uniform appearance . .
Concrete Curb Corners and Edging .
A .
General .
The curb shall consist of concrete castings molded in place in sections meters long millimeters in depth millimeters in width at the top and millimeters in width at the bottom and with front vertical face .
The top front edge of curb shall be rounded to millimeter radius .
The ends of curb sections shall be chamfered millimeters .
The edging shall consist of concrete castings conforming to the size and dimensions shown on plans .
Straight edging shall be cast in lengths of .
meters .
Edging for curves with radii meters or less shall be straight edging but shall be cast in lengths less than .
meters in order to avoid angles at joints .
The ends of all edging shall be normal to the line of face .
The edges of edging face shall be chamfered millimeters .
Corners shall match the adjacent curb in size color and finish .
The front arris line shall extend through of a circle having a radius of millimeters or meter respectively for Type A or Type B curb corner .
The back arris line shall be straight .
The plan of the back shall be normal to the top .
All forms shall be set true to lines and grades indicated on plans and as directed and held rigidly in proper position .
They shall be either of metal or of acceptable planed and matched lumber of such construction that a smooth surface will be provided .
Expansion joints shall be formed at the intervals shown on the plans using preformed expansion joint filler having a thickness of millimeters .
When curb is constructed adjacent to or on concrete pavement expansion joints shall be located opposite or at expansion joints in the pavement .
B. Mixing and Placing Concrete .
The concrete shall be of such consistency and be so spaded and worked that a smooth mortar face will be produced .
C. Protection Curing and Finishing Concrete. . Protection .
The forms shall be left in place for hours or as directed until the concrete has set sufficiently so that they can be removed without injury to the castings .
Particular care will be required to prevent any discoloration of the exposed surface. . Curing .
When the concrete has hardened sufficiently the concrete shall be covered with acceptable burlap or other approved material and kept wet for days or longer .
Under extreme weather or other particular conditions proper curing shall be carried out as directed. . Finishing .
The castings shall immediately upon removal of the forms be rubbed down to a smooth and uniform surface but no plastering will be allowed .
For this work a competent and skillful finisher shall be employed . .
Protective Coating .
The Concrete PenetrantSealer shall conform to the requirements of M After the concrete is at least days old and after a hour minimum drying period a longer period shall be required if castings do not appear dry just prior to the time of treatment the exposed surface shall be cleaned to remove all oil grime and loose Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
particles which would prevent the mixture from penetrating the concrete .
Immediately before the application of the mixture an air blast shall be directed over the surface to be treated so that all dust will be removed .
Unless otherwise directed the temperature of the concrete and air shall be C or higher at the time of application .
For rate of application see Section M .. D. The second application of the surface treatment mixture shall not be made until the concrete in the judgment of the Engineer has regained its dry appearance .
Traffic shall be prohibited from the area until the concrete has regained its dry appearance. . Bituminous Concrete Curb .
The bituminous concrete mixture shall be placed and compacted with a machine acceptable and approved by the Engineer .
The machine shall be capable of spreading the mixture true to line and grade and to the shape stipulated .
The bituminous concrete curb shall be placed as shown in the current Department Standards .
If any time before the acceptance of the work any soft or imperfect spots develop in the exposed surface of the curb such material placed shall be removed and replaced with new material and compacted without additional compensation . .
Filling About Trench .
After the curb curb corners curb inlets and edging is set the space between it and the wall of the trench shall be filled with gravel thoroughly tamped to the depth directed care being taken not to affect the line or grade of the curb curb corners curb inlets and edging. . Bridge Curb .
On bridges after the concrete base has set and before the concrete in back of the curb is placed Type VA curb shall be set to line and grade in full mortar beds and full mortar end joints with the anchors in the stone grouted in place .
Each curb shall be brushed clean and free of loose particles and thoroughly wetted with clean fresh water before setting .
The stone shall be carefully bedded in a full bed of mortar and in such a way as not to slide the stone on the mortar bed .
Each stone shall be held securely in position by steel anchors .
The anchors shall be of the required dimensions and shapes and shall extend millimeters into the curb and millimeters into the concrete .
Care shall be taken in placing the concrete in back of the curb to avoid disturbing the line or grade of the curb .
Wherever plans indicate a construction joint in the sidewalk or paraffin joint in coping the curb shall be laid out so that a joint in the curb will be opposite the joint in the sidewalk or coping . .
Pointing .
The joints between curbstones both front and back or edging shall be carefully filled with cement mortar and neatly pointed on the top and front exposed portions .
After pointing the curbstones or edging shall be satisfactorily cleaned of all excess mortar that may have been forced out of the joints . .
Transition Curb for Wheelchair Ramps Transitions from normal curb settings to wheelchair ramps shall be accomplished with transition curb as directed .
Transitions shall be of the same type curb and similar to that abutting and if on a curve of the same radius .
COMPENSATION .
Method of Measurement .
The length of curb except bituminous concrete curb and edging shall be as measured along the front arris of the curb and edging except that where the edging is set on a curve having a radius of meters or less the measurement will be made along the edging at the lowest exposed level after completion of shoulder or pavement .
The quantity of bituminous concrete curb to be paid for will be the length actually measured along curb at its Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
lowest exposed edge or by metric tonnage actually used complete in place .
Weight slips shall be countersigned upon delivery by the Engineer and slips not countersigned shall not be included for payment .
Each curb corner and curb inlet set complete in place will be considered one unit . .
Basis of Payment .
Curb will be paid for at the contract unit price per meter under the item for the particular type of curb complete in place .
Curved granite curb shall include all curb except curb corners cut to specified radius and set on curve .
The steel anchors used with Type VA curb will be paid for under the Item for VA curb .
Edging will be paid for at the contract unit price per meter for the particular type of edging complete in place .
Where granite edging is set on a curve having a radius of meters or less the work will be paid for at the contract unit price per meter complete in place under the respective item for the particular type of edging required .
Curb inlets will be paid for at the contract unit price each under the respective item for the particular type of inlet either straight or curbed complete in place .
All curb corners will be paid for at the contract unit price for each under the item for the particular type of corner required complete in place .
The initial excavation except Class A Rock Excavation when done in conjunction with excavation for subbase will be paid for under the appropriate excavation item .
The price of the curbing will include compensation for any other required excavation .
Gravel borrow for the foundations and backfilling will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic meter under the item for Gravel Borrow .
Rock excavation if necessary will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic meter under the item for Class A Rock Excavation. . Payment Terms . .
Granite Curb Type VA Straight Meter .
Granite Curb Type VA Curved Meter .
Granite Curb Type VA Straight Meter .
Granite Curb Type VA Curved Meter .
Granite Curb Type VA Straight Meter .
Granite Curb Type VA Curved Meter .
Granite Curb Type VA Straight Meter .
Granite Curb Type VA Curved Meter .
Granite Curb Type VA Straight Meter .
Granite Curb Type VA Curved Meter .
Granite Curb Type VB Straight Meter .
Granite Curb Type VB Curved Meter .
Granite Transition Curb for Wheelchair RampsStraight Meter .
Granite Transition Curb for Wheelchair RampsCurved Meter .
Granite Edging Type SA Meter .
Granite Edging Type SA Radius meters or less Meter .
Granite Edging Type SB Straight Meter .
Granite Edging Type SB Radius meters or less Meter .
Granite Edging Type SC Meter .
Granite Edging Type SC Radius meters or less Meter .
Granite Curb InletStraight Each .
Granite Curb Inlet Curved Each .
Granite Curb Corner Type A Each .
Granite Curb Corner Type B Each .
Concrete Curb Type VA Meter Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II . .
Concrete Curb Corner Type A Each .
Concrete Curb Corner Type B Each .
Concrete Edging Type SA Meter .
Bituminous Concrete Curb Type Meter .
Bituminous Concrete Curb Type Meter .
Bituminous Concrete Curb Type Meter .
Bituminous Concrete Curb Type Metric Ton .
Bituminous Concrete Curb Type Metric Ton .
Bituminous Concrete Curb Type Metric Ton .
Class A Rock Excavation Cubic Meter .
Gravel Borrow Cubic Meter SECTION CURB OR EDGING REMOVED AND RESET REMOVED AND STACKED OR REMOVED AND DISCARDED DESCRIPTION .
General .
This work shall consist of removing the present curb edging curb corners and curb inlets of every type and cross section made of granite concrete or granitefaced and resetting or stacking them or discarding them in accordance with these specifications and in close conformity with the lines and grades shown on the plans or established by the Engineer .
MATERIALS .
Curb Edging Curb Inlets and Curb Corners .
Curb edging curb inlets and curb corners shall consist of so much of the same as is suitable in the Engineers judgment to be reset or stacked. . Gravel .
Gravel shall conform to the requirements of Subsection M ..
Type c of Division III Materials .
CONSTRUCTION METHODS .
Removal .
A trench of sufficient width and depth shall be excavated so that the present curb edging curb corners and curb inlets can be removed without damage. . Protection .
The Contractor shall protect all curb or edging and keep it in satisfactory condition until the acceptance of the entire contract .
Particular care will be required to prevent any unsatisfactory discoloration of the curb or edging .
The Contractor shall replace any existing curb edging curb corners and curb inlets that is to be reset which is lost or damaged as a result of hisher operations or because of hisher failure to store and protect it in a manner that would eliminate its loss or damage .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II . .
Adjustment .
The length of any section of curb or edging shall be altered by cutting in order to fit closures as necessary .
The ends of all stones shall be square with the planes of the top and face so that when the stones are placed endtoend as closely as possible no space shall show in the joint at the top and face of more than millimeters for the full width of the top and for millimeters down on the face. . Relaying .
The construction methods for resetting all curbing or edging in the final location shall conform to the requirements of Section . . Stacking .
The Contractor shall accept and hold entire responsibility for the removal handling stacking at a location convenient for removal by owner and protection of all curbing or edging until its final removal as designated in accordance with the following Any curbing or edging damaged through lack of protection or carelessness by the Contractor shall be replaced at hisher expense .
The Contractors responsibility will cease upon final acceptance of the work or days from the time a certified notice with copy to the Engineer is sent by Contractor to owner of material that all material is available for removal. . Discarding .
Any curb edging curb corners and curb inlets not damaged through lack of protection or carelessness by the Contractor but deemed by the Engineer as unsatisfactory for relaying or stacking will be discarded .
It will be the Contractors responsibility to dispose of any discarded curb edging curb corners and curb inlets without additional compensation .
COMPENSATION .
Method of Measurement .
The quantity of curb and edging to be paid for will be the length actually removed and reset and measured as specified in Subsection ..
The quantity of curb or edging measured will be the length actually removed and stacked and measured along the front arris line at the location stacked .
The quantity of curb or edging removed and discarded will be the length ordered to be removed and actually removed but not included for payment under the items of Removed and Reset or Removed and Stacked .
Each curb inlet or curb corner removed and stacked or discarded will be considered as unit .
Any remaining curb or edging removed which is not included for payment under the items listed above shall be classified under the appropriate excavation item . .
Basis of Payment .
Removing and resetting curb and edging will be paid for at the contract unit price per meter of Curb Removed and Reset or Edging Removed and Reset at new location .
Removing and resetting curb inlets will be paid for at the contract unit price each for Curb Inlets Removed and Reset .
Removing and resetting curb corners will be paid for at the contract unit price each Curb Corners Removed and Reset .
Removing and stacking curb or edging will be paid for at the contract unit price per meter under the respective item .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
Removing and stacking of curb inlets and curb corners will be paid for under the items for Curb Inlets Removed and Stacked and Curb Corners Removed and Stacked respectively .
Removing and discarding curb or edging will be paid for at the contract unit price per meter under the respective item .
Removing and discarding of curb inlets and curb corners will be paid for under the items for Curb Inlets Removed and Discarded and Curb Corners Removed and Discarded respectively. . Payment Items. . Curb Removed and Reset Meter .
Curb Inlet Removed and Reset Each .
Curb Corner Removed and Reset Each .
Edging Removed and Reset Meter .
Curb Removed and Stacked Meter .
Curb Inlet Removed and Stacked Each .
Curb Corner Removed and Stacked Each .
Edging Removed and Stacked Meter .
Curb Removed and Discarded Meter .
Curb Inlet Removed and Discarded Each .
Curb Corner Removed and Discarded Each .
Edging Removed and Discarded Meter .
Class A Rock Excavation Cubic Meter .
Gravel Borrow Cubic Meter Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
SECTION HIGHWAY GUARD FENCES AND WALLS SECTION HIGHWAY GUARD DESCRIPTION .
General .
This work shall consist of the construction of guard rail in accordance with these specifications and in close conformity with the lines and grades shown on the plans or established by the Engineer .
The type of guard rail is designated as follows Highway Guard Steel Beam Type SS .
The construction of guard rail shall include the assembly and erection of all components parts and materials complete at the locations shown on the plans or as directed .
MATERIALS .
General .
Materials shall meet the requirements specified in the following Subsection of Division III Materials Steel Beam Highway Guard Type SS M .. CONSTRUCTION METHODS .
Posts .
Posts shall be set plumb in hand or mechanically dug holes or driven then backfilled with acceptable material placed in layers and thoroughly compacted .
If driven the posts shall be provided with suitable driving caps and equipment used which will prevent battering or injury of posts .
Posts damaged or distorted as a result of driving shall be removed and replaced with approved posts .
Guard posts to be set in areas of proposed bituminous concrete surfacing shall be erected prior to laying the surrounding finished surface unless otherwise permitted by the Engineer. . Spacing of Posts .
Posts shall be spaced as shown on the plans. . Steel Beam Rail .
The rail shall be erected so as to form a smooth continuous rail conforming to the required line and grade .
The rail element shall be spliced by lapping in the direction of the traffic or by other approved methods .
The holes in the rail element nearer the posts shall be slotted to facilitate erection and to permit expansion .
The rail shall make full contact at each splice .
All bolts except where otherwise required at expansion joints shall be drawn tight .
Bolts through expansion joints shall be drawn up as tightly as possible without being too tight to prevent the rail elements from sliding past one another longitudinally .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
COMPENSATION .
Method of Measurement .
Steel beam highway guard will be measured along the top edge of the rail element from center to center of end posts .
The unit of measurement of individual posts will be each post set complete in place .
Single faced steel beam terminal sections and double faced steel beam terminal sections will each be considered as a unit .
Buried ends will be measured as a unit for installation of the .
meters of highway guard as directed .
Leading and Trailing ends will be measured as units for the .
meters of highway guard hardware and necessary work to complete installation as directed . .
Basis of Payment .
Highway guard will be paid for at the contract unit price per meter .
Single faced and double faced steel beam terminal sections will be paid for at the contract unit price each under the items for Steel Beam Terminal Section Single Faced and Steel Beam Terminal Section Double Faced respectively .
Buried ends will be paid for at the contract unit price each .
Leading and trailing ends will be paid for at the contract unit price each .
Where posts occur in waterway aprons the cutting of holes and replacement of aprons shall be done without additional compensation .
Rock excavation if necessary will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic meter under the item for Class B Rock Excavation. . Payment Items . .
Individual Post Each .
St. Bm .
Hwy .
Guard Type SS Single Faced Meter .
St. Bm .
Hwy .
Guard Type SS Single Faced Curved Meter .
St. Bm .
Hwy .
Guard Type SS Buried End Single Faced Each .
St. Bm .
Hwy .
Guard Type SS Double Faced Meter .
St. Bm .
Hwy .
Guard Type SS Double Faced Curved Meter .
St. Bm .
Hwy .
Guard Type SS Buried End Double Faced Each .
St. Bm .
Hwy .
Guard Type SS Single FacedWood Posts Meter .
St. Bm .
Hwy .
Guard Type SS Single FacedWood Posts Curved Meter .
St. Bm .
Hwy .
Guard Type SS Buried End Single FacedWood Posts Each .
St. Thrie Bm .
Hwy .
Guard Type SS Single Faced Meter .
St. Thrie Bm .
Hwy .
Guard Type SS Single Faced Curved Meter .
St. Thrie Bm .
Hwy .
Guard Type SS Buried End Single Faced Each .
St. Thrie Bm .
Hwy .
Guard Type SS Double Faced Meter .
St. Thrie Bm .
Hwy .
Guard Type SS Double Faced Curved Meter .
St. Thrie Bm .
Hwy .
Guard Type SS Buried End Double Faced Each .
St. Bm .
Hwy .
Guard Type SS Single FacedSP Base Anch .
Meter .
St. Bm .
Hwy .
Guard Type SS Double FacedSP Base Anch .
Meter .
St. Thrie Bm .
Hwy .
Guard Type SS Single FacedSP Base Anch .
Meter .
St. Thrie Bm .
Hwy .
Guard Type SS Double FacedSP Base Anch .
Meter .
St. Bm .
Terminal Section Single Faced Each .
St. Bm .
Terminal Section Double Faced Each .
St. Thrie Bm .
Terminal Section Single Faced Each .
St. Thrie Bm .
Terminal Section Double Faced Each .
Special St. Bm .
Terminal Section Single Faced Each .
Leading End for St. Bm .
Hwy .
Guard at Bridge Each .
Trailing End for St. Bm .
Hwy .
Guard at Bridge Each Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II . .
Leading End for St. Thrie Bm .
Hwy .
Guard at Bridge Each .
Trailing End for St. Thrie Bm .
Hwy .
Guard at Bridge Each .
Class B Rock Excavation Cubic Meter SECTION PERMANENT IMPACT ATTENUATORS DESCRIPTION .
General .
This item shall consist of furnishing and installing impact attenuators in close conformance with the specifications of the manufacturer and in close conformance with the locations lines and grades shown on the plans andor designated in the Special Provisions .
MATERIALS .
General .
All materials used in the foundation and anchorage of the impact attenuator shall meet the requirements specified in Division III Materials .
The impact attenuator may be any impact attenuator which meets the requirements of National Cooperative Highway Research Program Report and its subsequent revisions and has been accepted by the Federal Highway Administration in the location intended .
Impact attenuators which have not been accepted by the Federal Highway Administration or which have been designated as approved for experimental use by the Federal Highway Administration shall be rejected by the Engineer .
The manufacturer must provide evidence of the suitability and acceptance by the Federal Highway Administration of the impact attenuator .
The impact attenuator shall be designed to fit within reasonably close tolerance of the dimensions given in the plans or the Special Provisions for a given location .
The manufacturer shall design the impact attenuator for the design speed given on the plans or other such speed designated in the Special Provisions .
Copies of the design shall be given to the Engineer for inclusion in the contract record .
A listing of the parts shall also be given to the Engineer for future maintenance operations .
CONSTRUCTION METHODS .
General .
Excavation for attenuator foundations and anchorage shall be made to the required depth and to a width that will permit the installation and bracing of forms where necessary .
All soft and unsuitable material shall be replaced with gravel borrow .
The impact attenuator shall be installed in accordance with the specifications and recommendations of the manufacturer .
Copies of these specifications and recommendations shall be provided to the Engineer .
COMPENSATION .
Method of Measurement .
Impact attenuators will be measured as a single unit each in place .
There will be a separate bid item for each location . .
Basis of Payment .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
Impact attenuators will be paid for at the contract unit price for each location which includes full compensation for all labor equipment materials foundation and anchorage and all incidental work necessary to complete the work as specified .
Gravel Borrow required for any foundation and anchorage work will be paid for at the contract unit price under Item Gravel Borrow. . Payment Items. . Impact Attenuator for Shoulder Incapable of Redirection Each .
Impact Attenuator for Shoulder Capable of Redirection Each .
Impact Attenuator for Median Incapable of Redirection Each .
Impact Attenuator for Median Capable of Redirection Each .
Gravel Borrow Cubic Meter SECTION CONCRETE BARRIER DESCRIPTION .
General .
This item shall consist of furnishing and placing Portland cement concrete barrier on an accepted prepared subgrade or subbase in accordance with these specifications and in reasonable close conformity with the lines grades and dimensions shown on the plans .
MATERIALS .
General .
Materials shall meet the requirements specified in the following Subsections of Division III Materials Cement Concrete MPa mm kg M .. Steel Reinforcement M .. Epoxy Coated Reinforcing Bars M .. Preformed Joint Filler M ..
Concrete PenetrantSealer M .. Demountable Reflectorized Delineators M .. CONSTRUCTION METHODS .
General .
Concrete barriers shall be either precast or castin place and conform to Section M for MPa mm kg Cement Concrete Masonry .
Excavation for concrete barriers shall be made to the required depth and to a width that will permit the installation and bracing of forms where necessary .
All soft and unsuitable material shall be removed and replaced with gravel borrow .
The subgrade shall be properly shaped and compacted as specified in Section .
The barrier shall be cured according to the relevant requirements of Subsection .
and M .. as herein amended .
If the water method is utilized the units shall be kept moist for a period of seven days .
Under no condition will the use of a curing compound be permitted. . Precast Barrier .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
The precast concrete barriers and transition pieces shall be in lengths of meters and shall be subject to the approval of the Engineer for method of casting handling and setting of the sections .
The reinforcing steel shall be in conformance with Subsection .
and Subsection M .. of Division III Materials as modified to conform to ASTM Designation A Grade .
The millimeter plain dowel bars shall conform to ASTM A and shall be galvanized according to AASHTO M or epoxy coated according to AASHTO M . The units shall be manufactured in a plant approved by the Engineer and subject to hisher inspection and control .
The forms shall be constructed of steel or other approved material and are to conform to the design shown on the plans wood forms will not be allowed .
Reuse of old worn or misshapen forms will not be allowed .
The form release material is to be applied to the forms in an approved manner and of a type that will not reduce the adhesive and or penetrating qualities of the protective coating Concrete PenetrantSealer to the concrete .
The dowel bars shall be accurately set true to a plane at right angles to the plane of the end of the unit .
Lifting holes or devices shall be as indicated on Construction Standards so that no undue stresses are transmitted to the units .
The units shall be cast with the forms in a degree inverted position and compacted with an approved vibrator .
Air holes are to be filled immediately after form removal to the satisfaction of the Engineer. . CastinPlace Barrier .
A. Conventionally Formed Barrier .
Forms shall be accurately set to the required line and grade secured by a method not detrimental to the roadway pavement and maintained in a true position during concrete placement .
Forms may be removed no sooner than hours after placement of concrete .
B. Slipformed Barrier .
Concrete traffic barriers may be constructed by the use of slipform equipment provided that the finished barrier is true to the specified line and grade within a tolerance of millimeters in meters .
The barrier shall present a smooth uniform appearance in its final position and shall conform to the horizontal and vertical lines shown on the plans or as directed by the Engineer .
Any unsatisfactory section of the barrier shall be removed and replaced at the Contractors expense .
The concrete shall be vibrated and worked until adequately consolidated and free of honeycomb .
The concrete shall be of such consistency after slipforming that it will maintain the shape of the barrier without support .
Prior to the beginning of operations the Contractor shall insure that a continuous supply of concrete is available to the slipform machine to minimize starting and stopping .
The slump of concrete shall not exceed millimeters unless directed otherwise by the Engineer .
The slipform machine shall be guided by vertical and horizontal sensors that ride along a wire line .
A grade line gauge or pointer shall be attached to the machine in such a manner that a continual comparison can be made between the barrier being placed and the established grade line .
The slipform machine shall not exceed the speed recommended by the manufacturer .
In lieu of sensor controls the slipform machine may be operated on rails or supports set at the required grade . .
Concrete Median Barrier Cap .
The work consists of constructing a millimeter thick castinplace cap between the single face median barriers as shown on the plans .
The cap shall be cast in place on a gravel foundation with the length of each section being meters .
A millimeter premolded joint filler will be placed between these meter sections .
A millimeter premolded joint filler will be placed around bridge pier columns and along the joints between the barrier and the cap where required. . Placement of Barriers .
Precast concrete barrier units shall be placed on a previously compacted gravel foundation utilizing two millimeter by millimeter by millimeter concrete leveling blocks set flush with the top of the gravel to control setting of the unit to the proper grade .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
The Contractor shall schedule hisher operation and sequence of installation of the barriers so that a minimum amount of closure pieces will be required .
Expansion and constructions joints shall be as shown on the Construction Standards .
Any units showing cracks or other damages due to curing transportation installation or other acts of the Contractor shall be removed and replaced by the Contractor at no additional compensation . .
Concrete PenetrantSealer .
Concrete PenetrantSealer shall be applied to the exposed faces of the cement concrete barriers and concrete median barrier cap by the method described below and as directed by the Engineer .
The compound shall conform to the provisions of Subsection M .. and shall not be applied sooner than days after the concrete has been poured and finished .
The compound shall not be applied when the air temperature is below C unless otherwise directed the compound is not to be heated .
All of the surfaces that are to be treated shall be dry and cleaned of all dust dirt form oil and debris by sweeping sand blasting or air blasting .
All joints that are to be filled with a joint sealer are to be shielded from contact with the concrete penetrantsealer with tape or other suitable protective measures approved by the Engineer .
The compound is to be applied in accordance with the manufacturers specifications. . Delineators .
Delineators shall be installed in conformance with manufacturers recommendations at beginnings and ends of each continuous run of barrier with intermediate placement at meter intervals .
Two sided amber reflectors shall be mounted on top of double faced median barriers .
Single faced barriers shall have side mounted installation with amber color delineating left edge white color delineating right edge and red color backing on each .
Delineators shall be mounted at appropriate angles which provide maximum reflectorization .
COMPENSATION .
Method of Measurement .
Concrete Barrier Single Faced will be measured by the meter along the face of the barrier at the gutter line .
Concrete Median Barrier Double Faced will be measured by the meter along the center line of top of barrier .
Castinplace median barrier cap concrete will be measured by the cubic meter in place . .
Basis of Payment .
Concrete Barrier will be paid for at the contract unit price per meter which includes full compensation for all labor equipment and materials including concrete penetrantsealer delineators reinforcing steel premolded filler concrete leveling blocks and all incidental work necessary to complete the work as specified .
Castinplace Concrete Median Barrier Cap will be paid for at the contract unit bid price per cubic meter This unit price shall include full compensation for all labor tools equipment materials including concrete penetrantsealer reinforcing steel and premolded joint filler and all incidental work necessary to complete the work as specified .
Gravel borrow for the foundation of the barriers and between the sections will be paid for under Item Gravel Borrow. . Payment Items. . Precast Concrete Barrier Single Faced Meter .
Precast Concrete Median Barrier Double Faced Meter .
CastinPlace Concrete Barrier Single Faced Meter .
CastinPlace Concrete Median Barrier Double Faced Meter Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II. . CastinPlace Median Barrier Cap Cubic Meter .
Gravel Borrow Cubic Meter SECTION HIGHWAY GUARD REMOVED AND RESET AND REMOVED AND STACKED DESCRIPTION .
General .
This work consists of removing present highway guard including individual post resetting in accordance with these specifications and in close conformity with established lines and grades or stacking them as directed .
MATERIALS .
General .
The materials removed shall be utilized in the highway guard as reset except where necessary new posts shall be furnished by the Contractor .
Any posts removed and found unsuitable for use in resetting shall be replaced with new posts and paid for under the item of New Posts in Highway Guard Removed and Reset .
Any materials damaged or lost during or subsequent to removal shall be replaced by the Contractor without compensation .
All new materials required shall be equal in all respects to the materials in the present highway guard .
CONSTRUCTION METHODS .
Removal .
The present highway guard shall be carefully removed together with all fittings anchors and appurtenances and stacked and preserved safe from damage or loss .
Old post holes shall be backfilled with suitable material and satisfactorily compacted. . Erection .
Before resetting the portion of the posts below the ground surface shall be cleaned .
The highway guard shall be reset plumb on the new location lines and to the grades required .
Backfilling around the highway guard posts shall consist of suitable material satisfactorily compacted .
If the highway guard posts were originally set in concrete they shall be reset in their new locations in concrete. . Stacking .
The Contractor shall accept and hold the responsibility for the removal handling stacking at a location convenient for removal by owner and protection of all anchors posts cables fittings etc .
until final removal by others as designated and in accordance with the following Any anchors posts cables fittings etc .
lost or damaged through lack of protection or carelessness by the Contractor shall be replaced with satisfactory material in kind at hisher expense .
Materials stacked shall be stored in neat piles that will be convenient for removal by the owner .
The Engineer Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
will determine the size and location of the piles of stacked material .
The Contractors responsibility will cease upon final acceptance of the work or days from the time a certified notice with copy to Engineer is sent by Contractor to owner of material that all material is available for removal .
COMPENSATION .
Method of Measurement .
The measurement of Highway Guard Removed and Reset will be made in its final position from center to center of end post to which the guard is attached along the top edge of rail element .
Any remaining Highway Guard not required to be stacked shall become the property of the Contractor and shall be removed from the work without additional compensation .
Highway Guard Removed and Stacked will be measured in its original position and the quantity to be paid for will be the length actually removed and stacked .
Measurement will be from center to center of end posts to which guard is attached along the scale or the top edge of rail elements . .
Basis of Payment .
Removing and resetting highway guard will be paid for at the contract unit price per meter of Highway Guard Removed and Reset complete in its final position .
New posts will be paid for at the contract unit price each for New Posts in Highway Guard Removed and Reset in addition to the payment for Highway Guard Removed and Reset .
Removing and resetting individual posts will be paid for at the contract unit price each for Individual Posts Removed and Reset complete in place .
Removing and stacking of highway guard will be paid for at the contract unit price per meter of Highway Guard Removed and Stacked .
Removing and stacking of anchors will be paid for at the contract unit price each for Anchors Removed and Stacked .
Removing and stacking individual posts will be paid for at the contract unit price each for Individual Posts Removed and Stacked except when such posts are included in payment for Anchors Removed and Stacked .
Rock excavation if necessary will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic meter under the item for Class B Rock Excavation. . Payment Items. . Highway Guard Removed and Reset Meter .Individual Post Removed and Reset Each .New Post in Highway Guard Removed and Reset Each .Highway Guard Removed and Stacked Meter .Anchor Removed and Stacked Each .Individual Post Removed and Stacked Each .Class B Rock Excavation Cubic Meter Where more than one type of highway guard or post removed and reset is included in the Contract a number will be added to the right of the decimal to distinguish between the different types .
SECTION CHAIN LINK FENCE AND GATES DESCRIPTION Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II. . General .
This work shall consist of the construction of chain link fence and gates in accordance with these specifications and in close conformity with the lines and grades shown on the plan or established by the Engineer .
Chain link fence shall be either zinc coated steel aluminum coated steel or vinyl coated steel .
MATERIALS .
General .
Materials shall meet the requirements specified in the following Subsections of Division III Materials Chain Link Fences and Gates M .. Bonded Vinyl Coated Chain Link Fences Posts Rails Fabric Gates and Accessories M .. MPa mm kg Cement Concrete Bases M ..
Paint High Zinc Dust Content Galvanizing Repair M .. CONSTRUCTION METHODS .
General .
The posts shall be set true to the line and grade of the proposed fence .
End Corner and Intermediate Brace Posts shall be set in concrete bases as shown in the Construction Standards .
The posts in masonry walls shall be set in pipe sleeves or sockets .
All line posts except those which are unstable due to soil conditions as described hereinafter shall have drive anchor assemblies as shown in the Construction Standards .
Line Posts which in the opinion of the Engineer are unstable due to soil condition such as in swamps or seasonal wet areas shall be placed in a concrete base as shown in the Construction Standards .
Where solid rock is encountered without an overburden of soil line posts shall be set a minimum depth of millimeters and end corner gate and intermediate posts a minimum of millimeters in the solid rock .
The hole shall have a minimum width or diameter of millimeters greater than the largest dimension of the post section to be set .
The posts shall be cut before installation to lengths which will give the required length of post above ground or if the Contractor so elects heshe may use an even length of post above ground or if the Contractor so elects heshe may use an even length of post set at greater depth into the solid rock .
After the post is set and plumbed the hole shall be filled with grout consisting of one part Portland cement and one part clean well graded sand .
The grout shall be thoroughly worked into the hole so as to leave no voids .
Where posts are set in the above manner concrete footings will not be required .
Where solid rock is covered by an overburden of soil or loose rock the posts shall be set to the full depth shown on the standard drawing unless the penetration into solid rock reaches the minimum depths specified above in which case the depth of penetration may be terminated .
Concrete footings shall be constructed from the solid rock to the top of the ground as designated .
Grouting will be required on the portion of the posts in solid rock .
Intermediate Brace Posts as used in these specifications shall be spaced at meter maximum intervals .
Gate end corner and intermediate brace posts shall be braced as shown on the standard drawing .
Changes in line of degrees or more shall be considered as corners. . Foundation Bases .
Forms for placing concrete bases will not be required .
Chamfer or bevel edges will not be required .
Where chain link fences are used to enclose Engineers field office and material buildings the posts shall be set in ground without concrete bases to facilitate ease in removal later. . Top Rail .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
Top rail shall pass through the ornamental tops of line posts forming a continuous brace from end to end of each stretch of fence .
Lengths of top rail shall be jointed by sleeve type couplings .
Top rails shall be securely fastened to terminal posts by pressed steel fittings .
On curves with a radius of less than meters the top rail shall be bent true to the curve. . Top Tension Cable .
Top tension cable shall pass through the ornamental top of the line posts .
One continuous length of cable shall be used between pull posts .
The cable shall pass through the pull post top and down to the base of the next line post where it shall be attached to the base of the line post with a turnbuckle .
Sufficient tension shall be applied to the cable to allow a maximum sag of millimeters between posts after the chain link mesh has been attached to the cable .
The Contractor shall provide temporary bracing on intermediate brace posts when applying tension to one length of cable at a time to prevent undue stresses in the intermediate brace post .
After tension has been applied to the cables a wire rope clip shall be placed around both cables one on each side of the intermediate brace posts and the clips securely tightened .
Clips shall be placed as close to the posts as possible to minimize the deflection of the post if one of the cables should be parted .
The cable shall be fastened to the top of the end intermediate brace post with an eye bolt through the post and a turnbuckle connecting the eye bolt to the cable .
The end intermediate post shall be braced to the bottom of the end post with a short length of cable attached .
A length of cable shall connect the end intermediate brace post and the end post at the top .
Eye bolts shall have a shoulder on the eye end and shall be provided with a nut and lock washer .
Where the eye bolt is to be installed through a pipe section lead washers shall be placed against the shoulder of the eye and a lead washer backed and the nut tightened sufficiently to seal the hole in the pipe .
A galvanized iron strap millimeters in thickness by millimeters in width formed as shown on the standard drawing shall be provided for the attachment of eye bolts to the base of H column post in order to take the strain of the cable tension off the web of theH column .
All holes drilled in steel post sections shall be cleaned and painted before the eye bolts are installed with coats of paint High Zinc Dust Content Galvanizing Repair M The ends of all cables shall be seized with annealed iron wire passed around the end of cable and the line cable .
The seizing shall be at least millimeters in width. . Spring Tension Wire .
Spring tension wires shall be placed millimeters from the top and bottom of the line posts corner posts end posts and intermediate brace posts .
The spring tension wire shall be fastened to each line post with a No .
gauge steel clip .
The wires shall be fastened to end posts corner posts and intermediate brace posts with an end band and a minimum of five turns around the spring tension wire to end the installation .
One continuous length of spring tension wire shall be used between intermediate brace posts meters .
Sufficient tension shall be applied to create a tension in the spring tension wire so that no sag is visible .
On completion of the installation the spring tension wire shall be attached to the fence fabric with hog rings of No .
gauge placed every millimeters top and bottom . .
Fence Fabric .
Chain link fabric over .
meter fence shall be placed on the face of the post away from the highway and for fence .
meters or less erect fabric on the face of the posts designated by the Engineer except that on curves the fabric on all types of fence shall be placed on the face of the post which is on the outside of the curve .
The chain link fabric shall be placed approximately millimeters above the ground and on a straight grade between posts .
The fabric shall be stretched taut and securely fastened to the posts .
Stretching by motor vehicle will not be permitted .
Fastening to end gate corner and intermediate brace posts shall be with stretcher bars and fabric bands spaced Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
at millimeter intervals .
The fabric shall be cut and each span attached independently at all intermediate brace and corner posts .
Fastening to post top rail top tension cable or spring tension wire shall be with wire metal bands hog rings or by other approved method .
Rolls of wire fabric shall be joined by weaving a single strand into the ends of the rolls to form a continuous mesh. . Gates .
Chain link fabric shall be fastened to the end bars of the gate frame by stretcher bars and fabric bands and to the top and bottom bars of the gate frames by tie wires in the same manner as specified for the chain link fence fabric or by other standard methods if approved by the Engineer .
The height of the gate frame shall be approximately as follows Fence Height Gate Height meters meters . . . . . . . .
COMPENSATION .
Method of Measurement .
Chain link fence will be measured approximately parallel to the ground by the meter of completed fence exclusive of openings from outside of to outside of end posts .
Gates with gate posts will be measured between centers of the gate posts . .
Basis of Payment .
Chain Link Fence will be paid for at the contract unit price per meter complete in place except for rock excavation which shall include all drive anchors line posts fabric top rail cable or wire fasteners clips and all materials and equipment necessary to complete the work in a satisfactory manner .
Allowance for rock excavation will be as specified under Class B Rock Excavation .
Gates with Gate Posts will be paid for at the contract unit price per meter of the height specified and the respective widths shown on the plans complete in place .
Allowance for rock excavation will be made as specified under Class B Rock Excavation .
End post including brace will be paid for at the contract unit price each under item for Chain Link Fence End Post complete in place .
Corner and intermediate brace post will be paid for at the contract unit price each for Chain Link Fence Corner and Intermediate Brace Post complete in place .
The chain link fence fabric and posts shall be of the type used throughout the installation .
Concrete bases for line posts if required shall be paid for under Item .
MPa mm kg Cement Concrete Masonry for Post Foundation which shall include the excavation except rock excavation which shall be paid under Class B Rock Excavation. . Payment Items. . ___ meter Chain Link Fence Spring Tension Wire Fabric and Line Post Option Meter .
___ meter Chain Link Fence Spring Tension Wire Vinyl Coated Line Post Option Meter .
___ meter Chain Link Fence Pipe Top Rail Fabric and Line Post Option Meter Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II. . ___ meter Chain Link Fence Pipe Top Rail Vinyl Coated Line Post Option Meter .
___ meter Chain Link Fence Cable Top Fabric and Line Post Option Meter .
___ meter Chain Link Fence Cable Top Vinyl Coated Line Post Option Meter .
___ meter Chain Link Fence Pipe Top Rail With Barbed Wire Fabric and Line Post Option Meter .
___ meter Chain Link Fence Cable Top With Barbed Wire Fabric and Line Post Option Meter .
___ meter Chain Link Fence Spring Tension Wire With Barbed Wire Fabric and Line Post Option Meter .
___ meter Chain Link Gate With Gate Posts Meter .
___ meter Chain Link Gate With Gate Posts and Barbed Wire Meter .
___ meter Chain Link Fence End Post Each .
___ meter Chain Link Corner and Intermediate Brace Post Each .
___ meter Chain Link Fence Fabric Meter .
Class B Rock Excavation Cubic Meter .
MPa mm kg Cement Concrete Masonry for Post Foundation Cubic Meter Insert height of fence or gate at beginning of nomenclature .
When option is stipulated in above items the Contractor will be required to indicate hisher choice .
SECTION METAL PIPE RAIL DESCRIPTION .
General .
This work shall consist of the construction of metal pipe rail in accordance with these specifications and in close conformity with the lines and grades shown on the plan or established by the Engineer .
MATERIALS .
General .
Materials shall meet the requirements specified in the following Subsections of Division III Materials Rails and Posts M .. A Fittings M .. B Lead Wool M .. C Bitumen M .. D Paint Primer Coat Zinc DustZinc Oxide M ..
Paint Finish Coat Enamel M .. CONSTRUCTION METHODS .
Fabrication and Erection .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
All posts shall be set vertical .
In setting the posts precautions shall be taken to insure proper alignment and leveling to prevent springing or bending the railing in erecting .
All railings shall be straightened as required before setting up .
All horizontal pipes shall be provided with approved expansion couplings at intervals of not more than meters .
Welding shall conform to the requirements of Subsection .. After erection and welding all welds shall be cleaned and coated with a spot coat of M .. TTPG Type Primer Coating Zinc DustZinc Oxide .
The fabricator shall be on the Departments approved fabricators list. . Painting .
After erection and welding the completed rail shall be painted with one coat of M .. and a color coat of M .. Color No. . Painting shall conform to Subsection ..
COMPENSATION .
Method of Measurement .
The pipe rail will be measured in place and the quantity to be paid will be the length as constructed outside to outside of end posts or top rail whichever is the greater . .
Basis of Payment .
The pipe rail will be paid for at the contract unit price per meter under the item for Metal Pipe Rail complete in place. . Payment Items. . Metal Pipe Rail Meter SECTION FENCES AND GATES REMOVED AND RESET AND REMOVED AND STACKED DESCRIPTION .
General .
This work shall consist of removing present fences and gates and resetting or stacking them in accordance with these specifications and in close conformity with the lines and grades shown on the plan or established by the Engineer .
MATERIALS .
General .
The materials removed shall be utilized in the fence and gates for resetting except where necessary new posts and bases shall be furnished by the Contractor .
Any materials missing damaged or lost during or subsequent to removal shall be replaced by the Contractor without any additional compensation .
All new materials required shall be equal in quality and design to the materials in the present fence or gates .
CONSTRUCTION METHODS Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II . .
Removal .
The present fences and gates together will all appurtenances shall be carefully removed and satisfactorily stored and protected until required for resetting .
Old post holes shall be backfilled with suitable material properly compacted. . Erection .
Fences shall be reset plumb on the new line and grade as required and shall conform to the original fence or as the Engineer directs .
Backfilling around the posts shall consist of suitable material satisfactorily compacted .
If the fence posts were originally set in concrete bases they shall be reset in their new locations in concrete bases conforming to M .. for MPa mm kg Cement Concrete .
If repainting of fences which have been painted originally is required such work shall be done as directed .
Gates shall be reset where and as directed .
Painting if required shall be done as directed. . Stacking .
The fencing posts braces and gates shall be carefully removed from their present locations transported and stacked neatly on wooden planks at the locations directed on the project to be available and convenient for final removal from the project by the owner .
The Contractor will be held responsible for the fencing posts braces and gates and any damage to same prior to final removal from the project but the Contractors responsibility will cease upon final acceptance of the work or days from the time a certified notice with copy to the Engineer is sent by Contractor to owner of material that all material is available for removal .
COMPENSATION .
Method of Measurement .
The measurement of Fences Removed and Reset shall be made in the final position from outside to outside of end posts or top rail whichever is the greater .
Any remaining fence not required to be stacked shall become the property of the Contractor and shall be removed from the work without additional compensation .
Fences Removed and Stacked will be measured in its original position and the quantity to be paid for will be the length actually removed and stacked including wooden gates .
Gates with gate posts removed and reset complete in place will be considered as a unit .
Chain Link Gates with gate posts removed and stacked will be considered as a unit . .
Basis of Payment .
Removing and resetting fences will be paid for at the contract unit price per meter of Fence Removed and Reset complete in their final positions .
Removal and resetting of gates with gate posts will be paid for at the contract unit price each under the respective item .
Removing and stacking fencing will be paid for at the contract unit price per meter of Fence Removed and Stacked .
Removing and stacking of chain link gates with gate posts will be paid for under the item for Chain Link Fence Gate with Gate Posts Removed and Stacked .
Allowance for rock if not already paid for under previous rock excavation shall be made in accordance with the provisions as stipulated under Class B Rock Excavation. . Payment Items . .
Fence Removed and Reset Meter .
___ meter Chain Link Fence Removed and Reset Meter Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II. . ___ meter Chain Link Fence Gate with Gate Posts Removed and Reset Each .
Iron Fence Removed and Reset Meter .
Stock Fence Gate Removed and Reset Each .
Wood Gate Removed and Reset Each .
Fence Removed and Stacked Meter .
___ meter Chain Link Fence Removed and Stacked Meter .
___ meter Chain Link Fence Gate with Gate Posts Removed and Stacked Each .
Class B Rock Excavation Cubic Meter Height to be inserted .
SECTION FIELD STONE MASONRY DESCRIPTION .
General .
This work shall consist of the construction of field stone masonry consisting of angular blasted or field stones having straight edges but with faces not necessarily rectangular in shape laid either in cement mortar or dry in accordance with these specifications and in close conformity with the lines and grades shown on the plans or established by the Engineer .
MATERIALS .
General .
Materials shall meet the requirements specified in the following Subsections of Division III Materials Stone for Field Stone Masonry M .. Mortar M .. CONSTRUCTION METHODS .
Shaping Stones .
Selected stone roughly shaped to provide suitable exposed faces shall be used at all angles and ends of walls .
All shaping of stone shall be done before the stone is laid in the wall .
If a stone is loosened after the mortar has set it shall be removed the mortar cleaned off and the stone relaid in fresh mortar. . Headers .
Headers shall occupy at least the face area of the wall and shall be evenly distributed .
Headers in walls millimeters or less in thickness shall extend entirely through the wall . .
Laying Stone .
The masonry shall be laid and the face pattern shall be of uniform appearance throughout .
The stones shall Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
decrease in size from bottom to top of wall .
The stones shall be laid on horizontal beds parallel to the natural bed of the stone .
Vertical joints shall be broken by at least millimeters and no vertical joint shall be located directly above or below a header .
Each stone to be set in mortar shall be cleaned and thoroughly wetted before being set .
They shall be set on full beds of mortar and mortar joints shall be full and the stone settled in place before the mortar has set .
The wall shall be compactly laid having all interior joints completely filled with suitable stones or spalls thoroughly bedded in mortar. . Tree Wells .
Where directed dry field stone masonry walls shall be constructed around the trunks of trees in order to support the embankment in conformity with the standard design shown on the plans and as directed .
COMPENSATION .
Method of Measurement .
Field stone masonry will be measured by the cubic meter and the quantity shall be the number of cubic meters in the completed structure complete in place and accepted .
The limiting dimensions shall not exceed those shown on the plan or ordered by the Engineer . .
Basis of Payment .
Field stone masonry will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic meter under the item for Field Stone Masonry in Cement Mortar or Field Stone Masonry Dry .
Excavation will be paid for at the contract unit prices per cubic meter under the item for Class A Trench Excavation or Class B Rock Excavation. . Payment Items. . Field Stone Masonry in Cement Mortar Cubic Meter .
Field Stone Masonry Dry Cubic Meter .
Class A Trench Excavation Cubic Meter .
Class B Trench Excavation Cubic Meter SECTION WALLS REMOVED AND REBUILT DESCRIPTION .
General .
This work shall consist of the removing and rebuilding of present stone masonry and balance stone walls in accordance with these specifications and in close conformity with the lines and grades shown on the plan or established by the Engineer .
MATERIALS .
General .
The stone shall consist of those in the present wall and its foundation and such new stones as may be required .
Mortar shall meet the requirement of Subsection M .. of Division III Materials .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
CONSTRUCTION METHODS .
Stone Masonry Walls .
A .
Laying Stone in Mortar .
All the stones from the present walls to be rebuilt shall be removed and used to rebuild the new walls in addition to furnishing such new stones as may be necessary to provide rebuilt walls of uniform appearance and cross sectional dimensions throughout their length .
The stones shall be laid so as to break joints and in full mortar beds .
All vertical spaces shall be flushed with cement mortar and shall be packed full with spalls .
No spalls shall be allowed in the beds except if the bed requires more than millimeters of mortar .
At least of the stones in the face shall be headers evenly distributed throughout the walls .
Weep holes shall be constructed as directed .
B .
Laying Stone Dry .
The stone shall be laid so as to break joints and all vertical spaces shall be packed full with spalls .
No spalls shall be allowed in the beds and at least of the stones in the face shall be headers evenly distributed throughout the wall. . Balance Stone Walls .
A trench for rebuilding the balance stone walls shall be excavated to a minimum depth of millimeters as directed and to a width sufficient to place the largest bottom stones of the present wall .
All the stones from the present walls to be rebuilt shall be removed and used to rebuild the new wall in addition to furnishing such new stones as may be necessary to provide rebuilt walls of uniform appearances and cross sectional dimensions throughout their length .
The open spaces about the base of the wall shall be filled with the materials excavated from the trench and all surplus excavation shall be used as directed on the slopes of the new embankment .
COMPENSATION .
Method of Measurement .
Stone Masonry Walls Removed and Rebuilt as specified herein will be measured by the cubic meter and the pay quantity shall be only that quantity actually laid and approved .
Balance Stone Walls Removed and Rebuilt will be measured in place and shall be the length of balance stone walls rebuilt . .
Basis of Payment .
Stone Masonry Walls Removed and Rebuilt will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic meter for the kind of wall removed and rebuilt complete in place .
Balance Stone Walls Removed and Rebuilt will be paid for at the contract unit price per meter complete in place .
Excavation at the new location will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic meter under the item for Class A Trench Excavation or Class B Rock Excavation. . Payment Items. . Stone Masonry Wall Removed and Rebuilt in Cement Mortar Cubic Meter .
Stone Masonry Wall Removed and Rebuilt Dry Cubic Meter .
Balance Stone Wall Removed and Rebuilt Meter .
Class A Trench Excavation Cubic Meter .
Class B Rock Excavation Cubic Meter Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
SECTION INCIDENTAL WORK SECTION SIDEWALKS WHEELCHAIR RAMPS AND DRIVEWAYS DESCRIPTION .
General .
This work shall consist of the construction of bituminous concrete or cement concrete sidewalks wheelchair ramps and driveways in accordance with these specifications and in close conformity with the lines and grades shown on the plans or established by the Engineer .
MATERIALS .
General .
Materials shall meet the requirements specified in the following Subsections of Division III Materials Gravel Borrow M ..
Type b Cement Concrete AirEntrained MPa mm kg M .. Preformed Expansion Joint Filler M .. Class I Bituminous Concrete M .. CONSTRUCTION .
General .
A. Subgrade .
The subgrade for the sidewalks ramps and driveways shall be shaped parallel to the proposed surface of the walks ramps and driveways and thoroughly compacted .
All depressions occurring shall be filled with suitable material and again compacted until the surface is smooth and hard .
B .
Foundation .
After the subgrade has been prepared a foundation of gravel shall be placed upon it .
After being compacted thoroughly the foundation shall be at least millimeters in thickness and parallel to the proposed surface of the walk . .
Concrete Sidewalks and Wheelchair Ramps .
A .
Forms .
Side forms and transverse forms shall be smooth free from warp of sufficient strength to resist springing out of shape of a depth to conform to the thickness of the proposed walk or ramp and of a type satisfactory to the Engineer .
All mortar or dirt shall be completely removed from forms that have been previously used .
The forms shall be well staked and thoroughly graded and set to the established lines with their upper edge conforming to the grade of the finished walk or ramp which shall have sufficient pitch to the roadside edge to provide for surface drainage but not to exceed .
unless otherwise directed .
All forms shall be oiled before placing concrete .
B .
Placing and Finishing Concrete .
The concrete shall be placed in alternate slabs meters in length except as otherwise ordered .
The slabs shall be separated by transverse performed expansion joint filler millimeters in thickness .
Preformed expansion joint filler shall be placed adjacent to or around existing structures as directed .
On the foundation as specified above the concrete shall be placed in such quantity that after being thoroughly Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
consolidated in place it shall be millimeters in depth .
At driveways the sidewalks shall be millimeters in depth .
No finishing operation shall be performed while free water is present .
Finishing operations shall be delayed until all bled water and water sheen has left the surface and the concrete has started to stiffen .
After water sheen has disappeared edging operations where required shall be completed .
After edging and joining operations the surface shall be floated .
Immediately following floating the surface shall be steeltroweled .
If necessary tooled joints and edges shall be rerun before and after troweling to maintain uniformity .
After troweling the surface shall be brushed by drawing a softbristled pushbroom with a long handle over the surface of the concrete to produce a nonslip surface .
In conveying the concrete from the place of mixing to the place of deposit the operation shall be conducted in such a manner that no mortar will be lost and the concrete shall be so handled that the concrete will be of uniform composition throughout showing neither excess nor lack of mortar in any one place .
The surface of all concrete sidewalks shall be uniformly scored into block units of areas not more than .
square meters .
The depth of the scoring shall be at least one quarter of the thickness of the sidewalk .
The application of neat cement to surfaces in order to hasten hardening is prohibited .
The finishing of concrete surface shall be done by experienced and competent cement finishers approved by the Engineer .
When completed the walks shall be kept moist and protected from traffic and weather for at least days in accordance with the applicable provisions of Subsection .. . Bituminous Concrete Sidewalks and Wheelchair Ramps .
A .
Forms .
Where walls curbing or other suitable permanent supports are not present or where an approved mechanical spreader is not used satisfactory forms shall be installed to assist in securing proper alignment and adequate compaction of the base and surface courses .
B .
Placing Bituminous Concrete .
The bituminous concrete walk surface shall be laid in courses to a depth after rolling of millimeters .
The bottom course shall be millimeters in thickness and its surface after rolling shall be millimeters below and parallel to the proposed grade of the finished surfaces .
The top course shall be millimeters in thickness after rolling .
Unless otherwise directed the surface shall have sufficient pitch to the roadside edge to provide for surface drainage but not to exceed ..
The courses shall be constructed in accordance with the applicable requirements of Section and the following provisions .
Spreading Mixture The mixture shall be dumped as needed in wheelbarrows or on approved steel dump sheets outside the areas on which it is to be placed .
It shall then be immediately distributed into place by means of shovels and raked into a uniformly loose layer to the full width required and of such depth that when work is completed it shall conform to the grade and surface contour required .
An approved mechanical spreader may be used. . Rolling The surface shall be rolled with a selfpropelled tandem roller with a mass not less than .
metric tons and not more than .
metric tons .
In places inaccessible to a power roller compaction shall be obtained by means of mechanical rammers or by hand tampers with a mass not less than kilograms and having a tamping face not exceeding square millimeters . .
Testing Surface When tested with a meter straightedge placed parallel to the center line of the courses there shall be no deviation from a true surface in excess of millimeters. . Bituminous Concrete Driveways .
A .
No Forms will be required .
B .
Placing Bituminous Concrete .
The Bituminous Concrete driveway surface shall be laid in courses to a depth after rolling of millimeters unless otherwise designated on the plans .
The Bottom Course shall be millimeters in thickness and its surface after rolling shall be millimeters below and parallel to the proposed grade of the finished surface .
The top course shall be millimeters in thickness after rolling . .
Spreading Mixture The Mixture shall be spread with an approved spreader .
In areas not accessible to a spreader the mix shall be placed as specified for bituminous concrete sidewalks Section .
B. Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II. . Rolling The surface shall be rolled with a selfpropelled tandem roller with a mass not less than .
metric tons nor more than .
metric tons or an approved roller as designated by the Engineer . .
Testing Surface When tested with a meter straightedge placed parallel to the center line of the courses there shall be no deviation from a free surface in excess of millimeters .
COMPENSATION .
Method of Measurement .
Concrete walks and wheelchair ramps will be measured in square meters .
Bituminous concrete walks wheelchair ramps and driveways will be measured by the metric ton .
Gravel borrow will be measured by the cubic meter as specified in Subsection .. Fine Grading and Compacting in subgrade areas will be measured by the square meter . .
Basis of Payment .
Concrete Sidewalks Wheelchair Ramps and Sidewalks at Driveways will be paid for at the contract unit price per square meter .
Bituminous concrete for the walk surface and wheelchair ramps will be paid for at the contract unit price per metric ton .
Bituminous Concrete Driveways will be paid for at the contract unit price per metric ton under the item for Bituminous Concrete Driveways complete in place .
Gravel will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic meter under Item .
Gravel Borrow .
Fine Grading and Compacting will be paid for at the contract unit price per square meter under item .
Fine Grading and Compacting in subgrade areas .
Excavation will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic meter under Item .
Earth Excavation or Item .
Class A Rock Excavation. . Payment Items . .
Concrete Sidewalk Square Meter .
Concrete Sidewalk at Driveways Square Meter .
Concrete Wheelchair Ramp Square Meter .
Bituminous Concrete Walk Surface Metric Ton .
Bituminous Concrete Wheelchair Ramp Metric Ton .
Bituminous Concrete Driveway Metric Ton .
Earth Excavation Cubic Meter .
Class A Rock Excavation Cubic Meter .
Gravel Borrow Cubic Meter .
Fine Grading and Compacting in subgrade areas Square Meter SECTION BOUNDS DESCRIPTION .
General .
Bounds shall be of granite as directed and shall be set at points designated by the Engineer and in conformity with these specifications .
Drill Steel rods may be used if directed where the points fall on exposed rock .
Where and as directed the stone or concrete bounds now in the ground shall be removed and reset in conformity with these specifications .
In instances where these are not to be reset they shall be transported and stacked as directed .
Bounds LetteredGranite and Bounds Plain Granite Furnished and Set shall consist of furnishing and Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
installing highway property bounds as required and in accordance with the plans and the applicable provisions of this Section .
Lettering shall be in accordance with the Department Standards and face abutting properties .
MATERIALS .
General .
Material shall meet the requirements specified in the following Subsections of Division III Materials Granite Bounds M ..
Drill Steel Rods M .. CONSTRUCTION METHODS .
General .
The bounds shall be set at the depth and position as directed and they shall not project above the ground more than millimeters after final grading .
Bounds located in lawns shall be set with the top of the bound millimeters below the surface .
Bounds located in sidewalks or drives shall be set with the top of the bound flush with the surface .
Material for backfilling shall consist of suitable excavated material carefully placed about the bound and thoroughly tamped .
When the excavation is in earth not suitable for backfilling the Contractor shall furnish clean gravel or sand for backfill .
When the bound location falls on solid ledge and the use of a drill steel rod is directed by the Engineer a millimeter hole shall be drilled at a depth of millimeters and a drill steel rod as specified under Subsection .
shall be placed in the hole .
The rod shall be set so that the hole is on the bound point .
The drill steel rod shall project above the ledge from millimeters to millimeters and shall be grouted with a mortar mix .
The millimeter drill holes in the top of the bounds shall be filled to their full depth with lead rope securely compacted in place. . Bounds Removed and Reset .
Present bounds shall be excavated from the ground the holes properly backfilled with suitable excavated material or borrow and the bounds delivered to the new locations and reset as directed and suitably backfilled all in accordance with the requirements for setting bounds as stipulated hereinbefore .
When a bound to be reset does not have a drill hole in the top center of the bound a hole millimeters in depth and millimeters in diameter with the bottom somewhat flared shall be drilled and this hole filled with lead rope securely compacted in place .
The Contractor will be held responsible for all bounds removed and shall replace at hisher own expense all bounds as may have been broken by his employees or otherwise after such removal. . Bounds Removed and Stacked .
Present bounds shall be excavated from the ground the holes properly backfilled with suitable excavated material and the bounds carefully stacked as directed .
The Contractor shall accept and hold entire responsibility for the removal handling stacking at a location convenient for removal by owner and protection of all bounds until the final removal by others as designated and in accordance with the following Any bound damaged through lack of protection or carelessness by the Contractor shall be replaced with a satisfactory bound at hisher expense .
The Contractors responsibility will cease upon final acceptance of the work or days from the time a certified notice with copy to Engineer is sent by Contractor to owner of material that material is available for removal .
COMPENSATION .
Basis of Payment .
This work will be paid for at the contract unit price each under the item for Bounds Removed and Reset or Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
Bounds Removed and Stacked or Bounds LetteredGranite or Bounds PlainGranite or Drill Steel Rods Set in Solid Ledge complete in place and paid for as a bound of the type indicated .
Allowance for rock if not already paid for under previous rock excavation shall be based on an area .
square meters multiplied by the depth of the rock to the bottom of the bound plus millimeters and will be paid for under the item of Class B Rock Excavation .
There will be no rock allowance paid for drill steel rods .
Bounds which are designated to be Removed and Reset and are found to be unsuitable for reuse after excavation through no fault of the Contractor shall be paid for at one half the contract unit price .
Bounds which are designated to be Removed and Stacked and are found to be unsuitable for reuse through no fault of the Contractor will be paid for at the full contract unit price .
Borrow materials when directed to be used will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic meter for the particular type of Borrow. . Payment Items. . BoundLettered Granite Each .
BoundPlain Granite Each .
Bound Removed and Reset Each .
Bound Removed and Stacked Each .
Class B Rock Excavation Cubic Meter .
Gravel Borrow Cubic Meter .
Sand Borrow Cubic Meter SECTION RURAL MAIL BOXES REMOVED AND RESET DESCRIPTION .
General .
This work consists of removing and resetting present mail boxes in accordance with these specifications and in close conformity with the lines and grades established by the Engineer .
MATERIALS .
General .
Material shall meet the requirements specified on the plans .
CONSTRUCTION METHODS .
General .
The mail boxes indicated shall be removed together with the posts and the post holes filled with suitable material and properly tamped .
If necessary during the construction the mail boxes shall be set in temporary locations as directed so that they are easily accessible to the mail carrier .
In their final permanent location the present mail boxes shall be set on new wooden bases and iron pipe posts as shown on the Departments plan for Setting Rural Mail Boxes .
COMPENSATION .
Method of Measurement .
The number of units to be paid for will be determined by the number of sustaining posts installed and not by the Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
number of mail boxes removed and reset . .
Basis of Payment .
Payment for this work will be made at the contract unit price each under the item for Rural Mail Box Removed and Reset which price shall constitute full compensation for setting the boxes in temporary locations .
Rock excavation if necessary will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic meter under the item for Class B Rock Excavation. . Payment Items . .
Rural Mail Box Removed and Reset Each .
Class B Rock Excavation Cubic Meter SECTION METAL BINTYPE RETAINING WALL DESCRIPTION .
General .
This item consists of the furnishing and erection of metal retaining wall members consisting of stringer and spacer units columns column caps stiffeners and other accessories meeting the requirements of these specifications .
The details of the wall members and other arrangements in the finished wall shall be as shown on the plans. . Erected Wall .
When erected the walls shall consist of a number of columns in pairs one column of each pair being in the plane of the front of the wall and the other column being in the plane of the rear of the wall with the pairs of columns spaced longitudinally with overlapping Sshaped facing and rear members stringers and transversely with overlapping Ushaped tie members spacers .
The necessary bolts and appurtenances shall be furnished for complete assembly of the units into a continuous closed face wall of connected bins .
MATERIALS .
General .
Material shall meet the requirements specified in Subsection M .. of Division III Materials .
CONSTRUCTION METHODS .
Manufacturers Responsibility .
All units shall be so fabricated that units of the same nominal size shall be fully interchangeable .
No drilling punching or drifting to correct defects in manufacture shall be permitted .
Any units having holes improperly punched shall be promptly replaced at the expense of the Contractor .
Whenever possible in the manufacture of the units a minimum forming radius of millimeters shall be maintained .
All units that are formed with less than a millimeter radius shall be hotdipped galvanized after forming. . Excavation .
Rough excavation for the site of the wall shall be made to the lines and grades shown on the plans or as directed .
The bearing at the corners of the bin shall be firm and true to grade before any wall is erected .
No base plate shall be set on ledge or concrete and if encountered the ledge or concrete shall be removed and replaced with a gravel cushion having a minimum thickness of millimeters between the base plate and the ledge or concrete .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
Gravel shall conform to the requirements of Subsection M ..
Type c for Gravel Borrow. . Erection of Units .
Prior to erection the gauge of stringers spacers and columns shall be readily identifiable .
The units shall be erected as shown on the plans .
Members shall be handled carefully and any which are damaged as a result of handling storing or erecting shall be removed and new members substituted at the Contractors expense .
Any and all plain galvanized accessories excluding bolts shall be covered prior to erection with an approved paint supplied by the manufacturer .
The units in the wall shall conform to the dimensions and gauges specified on the plans and when assembled shall be in conformity with the lines grades and dimensions shown on the plans. . Construction of Wall on Curve .
In the construction of a wall on a curve the proper curvature for the face shall be obtained by the use of shorter stringers in the front or rear panels of retaining wall as designated on the plans or by the Engineer . .
Height of Wall .
The wall height may be varied but it shall not exceed the maximum height shown for the design selected .
Two or more designs of retaining walls may be incorporated in the same wall by the use of special split columns to make the connection on the stepback. . Backfill .
The filling of the interior of the wall and behind the wall may progress simultaneously with the erection of the units and shall consist of gravel conforming to the requirements of Subsection M ..
Type a .
The backfilling shall be made in layers not greater than millimeters in thickness and shall be thoroughly and satisfactorily compacted .
The puddling method of backfilling will not be permitted .
COMPENSATION .
Method of Measurement .
The quantity of metal bintype retaining wall to be paid for under this item shall be the number of square meters of area of the total of all front panels of metal retaining wall complete in place in the accepted work .
The area of each front panel shall be determined by multiplying the width of each front panel by its total height .
Excavation shall be measured as specified in Section for Earth Excavation or Class A Rock Excavation and as indicated on the plan .
Gravel borrow shall be measured as specified in Subsection .. .
Basis of Payment .
The above work will be paid for at the contract unit price per square meter of Metal BinType Retaining Walls complete in place .
Excavation will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic meter under the item of Earth Excavation or Class A Rock Excavation .
Gravel for filling in and around the metal bintype retaining wall will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic meter for Gravel Borrow. . Payment Items. . Metal BinType Retaining Wall Square Meter .
Earth Excavation Cubic Meter .
Class A Rock Excavation Cubic Meter .
Gravel Borrow Cubic Meter Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
SECTION ENGINEERS FIELD OFFICE AND MATERIALS LABORATORY EACH WITH PERTINENT EQUIPMENT DESCRIPTION .
General .
Satisfactory office space trailers materials laboratory or the utilization of a suitable existing building or buildings as directed shall be provided when required in an approved location on the project or in the immediate vicinity thereof for the exclusive use of the Engineer and Inspectors of the Department such facilities to be separate from any building or buildings used by the Contractor . .
Requirements .
The trailers or buildings shall be fully equipped and made ready for use prior to the beginning of other work on the project and may remain for a period of approximately days after all work on the project has been completed and accepted by the Department .
All offices and laboratories shall be maintained in good condition and appearance by the Contractor for the designated period after which all portable buildings or trailers fencing surfacing and utilities shall be removed from the location the areas cleaned loamed and seeded if required and left in a neat and acceptable condition .
If existing buildings are utilized the above mentioned requirements shall apply unless otherwise indicated in the Special Provisions. . Building Types and Construction .
Unless particularly specified the building or facilities may consist of any of the following subject to approval of the Engineer .
a .
Moved onto or constructed on the site .
b .
A trailer or trailers each type as stipulated in the Proposal .
c. An existing building owned or rented by the Contractor containing floor space equivalent to the type specified .
Buildings or trailers moved onto or constructed on the project shall conform with the following A .
General .
The work to be done under this section shall consist of furnishing all labor equipment and materials to construct furnish and maintain buildings or trailers for the Engineers use in accordance with the Department Standards and these Specifications .
The sanitary facilities are not for general use by the Contractors employees .
Sanitary provisions for these employees shall be provided otherwise by the Contractor in accordance with Subsection .F .
The work on buildings and trailers shall be completed before any other construction work is done at the site .
Maintenance shall continue until the work at the site under the Contract is completed and the buildings or trailers shall be kept clean orderly and in working condition at all times .
The Contractor shall protect the buildings or trailers against theft throughout the hours of the day and night and be responsible for any loss of property of the Department and the personal property of the employees of the Department housed therein due to either fire theft or other causes .
B .
Plumbing .
Each office shall be equipped with complete sanitary and washroom facilities .
All connections shall conform with state and local requirements for venting and other sanitary provisions .
A millimeter copper tubing Type L shall be installed for the water service .
The water closets shall be provided with sufficient pressure to completely expel the contents in one operation .
Insulation shall be provided on all services where necessary .
If directed the Contractor shall furnish and install an approved electric tape as directed together with necessary switches and thermostat for each water pipe to prevent Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
freezing .
If a sanitary sewer is not available a septic system adequate for the office meeting the requirements of the Department of Environmental Protection regulations set forth in The State Environmental Code Minimum Requirements for the Subsurface Disposal of Sanitary Sewage Title shall be installed .
The Department will not approve the location of a Field Office until the Contractor has obtained approval for hisher proposed method of sanitary sewage disposal from a The Department of Environmental Protection if the location is on state property or b The Department of Environmental Protection and the applicable local Board of Health if the location is on private or municipal property .
The Contractor will be required to furnish personnel equipment and materials for soil test pits and percolation tests and to furnish plans prepared by a Registered Professional Engineer skilled in the matter of subsurface sewage disposal signed and stamped with the Engineers stamp for any proposed subsurface sewage disposal system .
The plan or plans will meet the requirements of Title of the State Environmental Code or its successor or amendments thereto .
The Contractor will be required to determine through the appropriate regional office of the Department of Environmental Protection whether or not a proposed site is within a watershed area for public water supply .
Every effort will be made not to locate temporary Sanitary Facilities on any public water supply watershed .
Should there be no alternative the provisions of any regulations of D.E.P .
Division of Water Supply and the above shall apply .
In the event that it can be shown that there is no place reasonably proximate to the job with suitable soil and site conditions that will permit subsurface sewage disposal the Department of Environmental Protection will consider approval of a tight tank system .
The Contractor will have hisher engineer submit hisher tight tank proposal and plans to the appropriate Regional Environmental Engineer of the Department of Environmental Protection in compliance with their Sanitary Sewage Tight Tank Policy for approval .
C. Wiring and Lighting. . meter nonglare fluorescent luminaries shall be installed in each office so as to provide a minimum level of illumination at desk height of lux .
Two fixtures shall be placed over the drawing table as directed .
The master switch shall be near the door and control the desk light .
Separate pull chains shall be provided for the lights over the table .
Four double convenience outlets shall be installed where directed .
Electric wiring in each building or trailer shall be complete with meter connections fuse box and switch .
D. Heating and Air Conditioning .
All buildings or trailers shall be heated and air conditioned with equipment capable of maintaining a temperature of C the total cost to be borne by the Contractor .
E. Area Enclosures Surfacing and Maintenance .
The area occupied by the buildings or trailers shall be enclosed with .
meter chain link fence including a . meter clear opening doubleswing gate all with strands of barbed wire on extension arms and conforming to the relevant provisions of Section .
The area to be enclosed will depend on the manner in which the buildings are arranged and shall be satisfactory to the Engineer .
A portion of the area within the enclosure designated by the Engineer for use as walks and parking shall be graded and paved with millimeter Class I Bituminous Concrete Pavement Type I over a millimeter gravel foundation .
The Contractor shall maintain the enclosed area by cleaning as required including the removal of snow from the paved portions .
Toilet tissue paper towels and soap shall be furnished by the Contractor as required .
The office shall be cleaned and floors washed and waxed weekly .
The space between the ground and trailer floor shall be completely closed in and insulated .
All of this work shall be included for payment under the contract price for furnishing the specified number and types of buildings .
F. Insurance and Replacement .
At the time the buildings are made available to the Department the Contractor shall furnish evidence to the Engineer that Insurance in form coverage and substance satisfactory to the Department in the amount of non deductible has been obtained which will protect the Commonwealths property andor employees personal work related or professional equipment against loss of property in any of the buildings or trailers from fire theft storm or flood .
The insurance shall be kept in effect during the entire period of occupancy with evidence of all necessary renewals being promptly forwarded to the Engineer .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
In case of fire theft or breakdown all equipment involved shall be repaired or replaced by the Contractor within hours .
In the event buildings or trailers being used as field offices or materials laboratory are destroyed or rendered untenable for any reason they shall be replaced within two weeks or as directed .
Title to the buildings and equipment shall remain in the name of the Contractor .
MATERIALS EQUIPMENT .
General .
Buildings or trailers shall have equipment as hereinafter specified which shall be new or in a condition satisfactory to the Engineer .
The repair or replacement of faulty equipment shall be prompt and at the expense of the Contractor .
A suitable nonfreezing type fire extinguisher shall be furnished for each field office and materials laboratory . .
Engineers Field Office Type A .
In addition to the general requirements the Type A office shall provide a minimum of square meters of floor space with two outside doors six windows and be furnished as follows .
A slant top drafting table millimeters x . meters minimum size two plan racks and a closet equipped with a lock. . Two office type desks minimum top dimensions millimeters x . meters with two or more drawers on each side. . Four desk chairs on casters with adjustable height tilt seat. . Four stools Drafting table type. . One fire resistant drawertype safe legal size with combination lock .
Combination to be reset at the direction of the Engineer and revealed only to himher. . A utility table millimeters high minimum top size millimeters x . meters. . Two legal size fire resistant metal filing cabinets drawer with locks. . An electric sanitary hot and cold water cooler supplied with cups and drinking water. . An electric adding machine tape type with tape. . A fully automatic electric calculator with printout and sufficient supply of tapes. . Safety helmets and safety vests for all Department Construction personnel assigned to the project .
The safety equipment will not carry any marking such as the name of the Contractor and shall remain the property of the Contractor after completion of the project. . A trailerized office shall be provided with a one half bath that shall consist of all full size water closet and a porcelain steel lavatory recessed in a plastic top .
The drain and vent lines shall be A.B.S .
plastic and supply lines shall be Type L copper .
A liter minimum electric water heater shall be provided. . First Aid Kits shall be provided in the amount and with contents as specified in the current requirements of the Massachusetts Department of Labor and Industries regulations. . One new or like new Survey Transit complete with tripod and storage container for the exclusive use of the Resident Engineer for the duration of the contract .
The transit shall be suitable for Construction Surveys to establish line and grade equipped with horizontal circle directreading to one minute and vernier calibrations graduated to at least twenty seconds a vertical angle gradation with vernier to thirty seconds crosshairs for stadia measurements optical plumbing capability .
A compatible level rod with a minimum length of .
meters shall also be supplied for setting elevations for structures grades and stakes. . One meter minimum steel tape one meter minimum cloth tape and one plumb bob. . One electrostatic or plain paper copier capable of producing millimeter x millimeter or millimeters x millimeter copies .
Included shall be the cost of paper and chemicals .
The total cost for the paper and chemicals shall not exceed for the life of the project .
Only one copier will be required if there is more than one Field Office in the Contract . .
The Contractor shall assume the cost of all telephone installations maintenance and removal including the cost of the telephones .
The Contractor shall assume the cost of all telephones and the answering machine including installations maintenance and removal .
Two telephones and one telephone answering machine shall be provided at the Resident Engineers office .
If there are additional Field Offices andor a Materials Laboratory Building an additional telephone shall be intercommed to each .
The Contractor will pay all monthly telephone charges and be reimbursed by the Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
Department for monthly use charges only .
Payment under this item shall be full compensation for telephone installation instruments maintenance and removal .
The Contractor will pay all monthly telephone charges and be reimbursed by the Department for monthly use charges only . .
The following materials testing and sampling equipment shall be supplied if the Contract specifies cubic meters of cement concrete or more and does not require a Materials Laboratory .
a One Air Meter .
cubic meter PressUrMeter Type Ref .
AASHTO T and ASTM C . b Two Concrete Curing Boxes meeting the requirements of AASHTO T Section Curamold or equal .
c A Quick Check Air Indicator Kit meeting the requirements of AASHTO T . d Concrete Cylinder Molds with Plastic Covers millimeters in diameter by millimeters high single use mold meeting the requirements of AASHTO M shall be supplied cylinders per cubic meters or fraction thereof .
The cylinders shall be approved for use by the Research and Materials Section .
e One complete Slump Test Outfit Ref .
AASHTO T and T as follows A slump cone of seamless spun metal with handles and foot clamps .
A tamping rod millimeters long millimeters in diameter with hemispherical end .
A sturdy pan made of .
millimeter thick metal with reinforced rims millimeters x millimeters x millimeters .
A brasswire briquette brush .
A wooden handled steel trowel millimeters x millimeters .
f One wheelbarrow minimum .
cubic meter volume .
g One longhandled shovel .
h If cubic meters of lightweight concrete are specified in the Contract the following shall be supplied Roller Meter type air meter Ref .
AASHTO T . Unit weight bucket Ref .
AASHTO T . One platform beam scale capacity kilograms sensitivity grams with two beams at front of platform reading to kilograms by single kilogram and to grams by grams with additional hanger weights to fulfill capacity of kilograms all parts to be of steel with enclosed weighing mechanism platform to be millimeters by millimeters .
A digital platform scale with a minimum capacity of kilograms with similar sensitivity can be substituted .
Scale must be calibrated immediately prior to start of Contract .
i Plastic lined sampling bags capable of holding kilograms of soil or aggregates .
Sample bags are to be approved by the Research and Materials Section . .
The following shall be supplied if the Contract specifies painting of bridges a Cans and jars for sampling paint .
Cans shall be liter metal friction top paint sample cans with covers .
Jars shall be liter plastic or glass designed to hold acid with acid resistant covers .
b Each Wet Film Thickness gauges . . millimeter range .
c One Dry Film Thickness Gauge Tooke Mark III or equal equipped with spare set of cutting tips .
d One Dry Film Thickness Gauge Nordsen or Inspector Model III range .
millimeter .
e One Sling Psychrometer. . A computer system meeting the requirements set forth by Data Processing and including installation maintenance removal shall be provided at the Resident Engineers Office . .
Engineers Field Office Type B .
Engineers Field Office Type B shall be equipped as described in Subsection .
except that the minimum floor space shall be square meters . .
Engineers Field Office Type C. Engineers Field Office Type C shall have a minimum floor space of square meters and be equipped as described in Subsection .
except that only one plan rack two desk chairs no paper copier and no computer are required .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II . .
Engineers Field Office Type D. Engineers Field Office Type D shall have a minimum floor space of square meters and be equipped as described in Subsection .
except that only one door four windows one plan rack no closet one telephone one desk chair two stools no utility table no paper copier and no computer are required. . Materials Laboratory Building .
In addition to the general requirements Materials Laboratory Building shall provide a minimum of square meters of floor space and be equipped as follows .
An officetype desk minimum top dimensions of millimeters x . meters with two or more drawers on each side. . One desk chair on casters with adjustable height tilt seats. . One metal filing cabinet legal size four drawer with locks. . A stainless steel sink at least millimeters x millimeters outside dimensions and millimeters deep installed in a suitable counter top and supplied with hot and cold running water .
Waste shall be disposed through a Zurn trap millimeters x millimeters high or equal to a septic tank or sewer. . One .
meters square galvanized metal plate .
millimeters thick. . One cylindrical compaction mold .
cubic meter .
millimeters x . millimeters high complete with .
millimeter collar extension and base plate all parts to be plated for corrosion resistance .
Reference AASHTO T ASTM D . . One cylindrical compaction mold .
cubic meter .
millimeters x . millimeters high complete with .
millimeter collar extension and base plate all parts to be plated for corrosion resistance .
Reference AASHTO T ASTM D . . One .
kilogram rammer .
millimeter diameter with circular face and guide sleeve for millimeter drop .
Reference AASHTO T ASTM D . . One .
kilogram rammer .
millimeter diameter with circular face and guide sleeve for millimeter drop .
Reference AASHTO T ASTM D . . Two hardened steel straightedges millimeters x millimeters x millimeters . .
The Contractor shall provide and maintain for the exclusive use of the Department a Nuclear Density Meter conforming to the following specifications Shall meet the requirements of ASTM D D D . Shall have test range of Density kilogramscubic meter to kilogramscubic meter Moisture to The meter shall have the capability of both direct transmission andor back scatter capable of measuring the density of soil to a minimum depth of millimeters .
When the Contractor delivers to the job site the Nuclear Density Meter as specified heshe shall notify immediately in writing the Research and Materials Engineer Massachusetts Highway Department D Street South Boston Massachusetts so that this gauge can be programmed for periodic wipe tests .
Such notification shall include Model Number Serial Number and Date of Manufacture .
Payment for furnishing and maintaining the nuclear density meter and for the stipulated training and licensing of Department Personnel furnishing the monthly film badge detection service and all costs related thereto will be included in the unit price bid . .
Plastic lined sampling bags capable of holding kilograms of soil or aggregates .
Sample bags are to be approved by the Research and Materials Section. . One sand cone apparatus including three .
liter clear plastic jugs with screw caps and millimeter x millimeter base plate with hole opening millimeters in diameter .
Ref .
AASHTO T . . One galvanized trash can with cover .
millimeter thick metal millimeter diameter millimeters high for storage of calibrated sand filled with ten .
kilogram bags Ottawa Standard sand. . Four sampling spoons of heavy gauge plated steel approximately millimeters long. . Four .
liter moisture cans lacquered inside with friction type lid and bail. . Twelve .
cubic meter aluminum moisture cans millimeters in diameter millimeters high with covers. . One solution balance kilogram capacity to weigh directly to gram with two weighing beams and taring Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
beam tare capacity to be kilogram weighing beams to read grams by gram divisions and grams by gram divisions additional matching weights one kilogram two kilogram one kilogram and one kilogram to be provided to fulfill capacity of kilogram platform to be millimeters in diameter .
An electronic direct reading top loading kilogram minimum capacity balance with a precision of .
gram may be substituted for the solution balance .
All scales must be calibrated immediately prior to start of Contract. . One singlespan triplebeam scale minimum capacity grams weighing directly to .
gram weighing beams to read grams by grams grams by grams and grams by .
gram pan to be millimeters in diameter together with a scoop hanging tare counter weight and plastic balance cover .
An electronic top loading balance with a capacity of grams minimum and reading to .
gram .
All scales must be calibrated immediately prior to start of Contract. . One platform beam scale capacity kilograms sensitivity grams with two beams at front of platform reading to kilograms by single kilograms and to kilograms by kilograms with additional hanger weights to fulfill capacity of kilograms all parts to be of steel with enclosed weighing mechanism platform to be millimeters x millimeters .
A digital platform scale with a minimum capacity of kilograms with similar sensitivity can be substituted .
All scales must be calibrated immediately prior to start of Contract. . Two burner commercial or laboratory grade electric hot plates with enclosed elements one burner single heat watt one burner threeheat watts at least millimeters x millimeters high for use on volts UL approved or two burner gas hot plates of equal or greater heat capacity. . One gravity convection thermostatically controlled drying oven of rugged construction with millimeter thick Transite or equal walls minimum inside dimensions to be millimeters wide millimeters deep and millimeters high equipped with two expanded metal shelves automatic thermostat and other standard controls capable of maintaining temperatures of C a glass thermometer reading from C divisions maximum watts connected for use on V hertz current unless the Contractor elects to provide volt service. . One Gilson Screen shaker set including standard Gilson shaker plus a set of screens millimeters x millimeters x millimeters as follows millimeters millimeters .
millimeters millimeters millimeters .
millimeters .
millimeters and .
millimeters and shall include a dust pan .
All sieves shall meet AASHTO M . . One motordriven portable sieve shaker for operation on volt hertz single phase current complete with belt driven mechanism to produce combination rocking and tapping action capacity for six full height sieves plus pan and cover all parts mounted on a sturdy base. . A set of brass frame United States Standard testing sieves all to be full height millimeters in diameter and matched for nesting one each of the following millimeters millimeters .
millimeters .
millimeters .
millimeters .
millimeters .
millimeters .
millimeters micrometers micrometers micrometers micrometers micrometers and micrometers two micrometer mesh two pans and one cover .
The sieves shall meet AASHTO M . . Three fine millimeter sieve or sash brushes. . Two woodenhandled knives millimeters overall in length with millimeter thin steel blades. . A set of sturdy pans for drying soils as follows Two millimeters x millimeters x millimeters minimum size of .
millimeter thick metal with reinforced rims .
Eight for use in oven approximately millimeters x millimeters x millimeters of .
millimeter thick metal. . Two air meters .
cubic foot PressUrMeter type Reference AASHTO T and ASTM C . . Two complete slump test outfits Reference AASHTO T and T each as follows A slump cone of seamless spun metal with handles and foot clamps .
A tamping rod millimeters long millimeters in diameter with hemispherical end .
A sturdy pan .
millimeters thick metal with reinforced rims millimeters x millimeters x millimeters .
A brasswire briquette brush .
A wooden handled steel trowel millimeters x millimeters . .
If the job has more than .
cubic meters of lightweight concrete a RollerMeter type air meter meeting AASHTO T and a unit weight bucket meeting AASHTO T shall be furnished .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II. . An electric sanitary water cooler supplied with cups and drinking water. . concrete curing boxes meeting the requirements of AASHTO T Section shall be Curamold or equal. . heavy duty .
liter plastic pails. . quickcheck air indicator kit meeting the requirements of AASHTO T . .
Concrete cylinder molds with plastic covers millimeters in diameter by millimeters high single use meeting the requirements of AASHTO M shall be supplied cylinders per cubic meters or fraction thereof .
Cylinders shall be approved for use by the Research and Materials Section .
Three molds shall be submitted for approval prior to start of the project. . One copy of the Standard Specifications for Transportation Materials and Methods of Sampling and Testing Part I and Part II Methods of Sampling and Testing latest edition and one copy of the latest interim AASHTO Specifications .
Both are published by the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials North Capital Street N.W .
Suite Washington D.C. . . One shovel and one .
cubic meter wheelbarrow for transporting samples .
Catalogs for the above equipment may be seen at the Departments Research and Materials Laboratory in South Boston .
COMPENSATION .
Basis of Payment .
Payment for work under these items will be at the respective contract unit bid price for Engineers Field Office and Equipment Type A Engineers Field Office and Equipment Type B Engineers Field Office and Equipment Type C and Engineers Field Office and Equipment Type D and Materials Laboratory Building and Equipment .
Payment as described above shall be compensation for all services heat gas light water sanitary etc .
except monthly telephone charges for all labor material fencing surfacing equipment service including general inside cleaning at least once each week and incidentals necessary to provide equip maintain insure remove and dispose of the buildings and clean the site as specified and directed .
The contract unit bid price will prevail for buildings built or furnished as described for equivalent trailer space or office space rented in existing buildings when such substitution has been approved. . Payment Items . .
Engineers Field Office and Equipment Type A Month .
Engineers Field Office and Equipment Type B Month .
Engineers Field Office and Equipment Type C Month .
Engineers Field Office and Equipment Type D Month .
Materials Laboratory and Equipment Month .
Telephone Charges Dollars SECTION TRANSPORTATION VEHICLE DESCRIPTION .
General .
This item consists of furnishing and maintaining current model vehicles equipped with strobe lights for the use of Department personnel assigned to the project .
MATERIALS .
General .
The vehicle may be any medium size air conditioned six cylinder four door sedan van or other type vehicle capable of transporting four persons in comfort and protected against the elements .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
The vehicle will be registered in Massachusetts and it shall be the Contractors responsibility to pay all fees insurance charges fuel lubricants and maintenance costs necessary to provide a legally operable vehicle acceptable to the Engineer .
The vehicle will be made available from days after receipt of the executed contract to days after completion of the project unless released earlier by the Engineer. . Office Van .
The van shall have a minimum wheel base of .
meters and be modeled as follows .
A millimeter plywood overflooring to which the furniture is securely bolted. . A . meter sliding door with window on the side as well as rear doors with windows . .
Secure locking on all doors. . An independent switch for an overhead dome light . .
The van shall be furnished with a knee hole desk and a two drawer file cabinet which are fastened down a millimeter plywood table with formica top and a swivel chair without casters that is movable. . Safety equipment shall be furnished with the Van and shall remain the property of the Contractor after completion of the project safety helmets and safety vests for all Department Construction personnel assigned to the project .
The safety equipment will not carry any marking such as the name of the Contractor .
CONSTRUCTION METHODS .
General .
The vehicle will be for the exclusive use of the Resident Engineer and hisher assistants to accommodate their official transportation requirements on and off the project site including portal to portal travel between the project site and the assigned personnels residence .
The vehicle shall not be utilized for nonofficial or personal use by an individual while it is assigned to this project .
The vehicle shall be used for the transportation of materials andor samples for testing and also for transportation to properly supervise the coordination of Traffic Police and Safety Functions .
The vehicle shall be maintained in a good state of repair at all times and serviced at the regular intervals recommended by the vehicle manufacturer .
Work schedules of the Engineer andor hisher assistants will be arranged so that the vehicle will be available for regular maintenance at the scheduled times .
Public Liability and Property Damage Liability Insurance shall be provided throughout the term of this project to the minimum limits established below .
Type Minimum Maximum Public Liability person accident Property Damage Liability accident accident Said insurance shall be maintained in full force and effect during the life of the contract and shall protect the Resident Engineer hisher assistants or any other authorized State Driver for personal injury and wrongful death and for damages to property arising in any manner from their negligence or wrongful acts or failures to act .
Such insurance against legal liability shall indemnify and save harmless the Commonwealth and any or all of the officers agents and employees thereof resulting out of or in consequence of the acts or failures to act on the part of the Commonwealth .
COMPENSATION .
Method of Measurement .
Transportation shall be measured by the month per vehicle and shall be the actual number of months each vehicle is required and available to the Resident Engineer andor hisher assistants or representatives . .
Basis of Payment .
Transportation Vehicles will be paid for at the contract unit price bid per month for each vehicle which price and Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
payment shall be full compensation for the vehicle including all fees insurance costs maintenance costs fuel and lubrication costs repair costs and all other incidental expenses necessary to provide a legally operable vehicle to the satisfaction of the Engineer. . Payment Items. . Transportation Vehicle No .
___ Month .
Transportation Office Van Month Item number will differentiate to indicate number of transportation vehicle .
SECTION MOBILIZATION DESCRIPTION .
General .
This item shall consist of preparatory work and operations including but not limited to those necessary for the movement of personnel equipment supplies and incidentals to the project site for the establishment of all contractors field offices buildings and other facilities necessary for work on the project and all other work and operations which must be performed or for costs which must be incurred prior to beginning work .
CONSTRUCTION METHODS .
General .
The work required to provide the above facilities and services for mobilization shall be done in a safe and workmanlike manner and shall conform with any pertinent local or state law regulation or code .
Good housekeeping consistent with safety shall be maintained .
COMPENSATION .
Method of Measurement .
Payment for mobilization will be made on a lump sum basis . .
Basis of Payment . .
The first payment of one third of the lump sum price for Mobilization or percent of the total bid price whichever is less will be made on the first estimate . .
The second payment of one third of the lump sum price for Mobilization or percent of the total bid price whichever is less will be made following the completion of percent of the total Contract price . .
The third payment of one third of the lump sum price for Mobilization or percent of the total bid price whichever is less will be made following the completion of percent of the total Contract price . .
Upon completion of all the work on the project payment of any amount bid for Mobilization in excess of the total amount previously paid will be paid by the Department. . Payment Items. . Mobilization Lump Sum Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
SECTION LOAM BORROW PLANTABLE SOIL BORROW PROCESSED PLANTING MATERIAL OR TOPSOIL REHANDLED AND SPREAD DESCRIPTION .
General .
This work shall consist of furnishing and placing loam borrow processed planting material or topsoil rehandled and spread on an approved area in accordance with these specifications and in close conformity with the lines and grades shown on the plans or established by the Engineer .
MATERIALS .
General .
Material shall meet the requirements specified in the following Subsections of Division III Materials Loam Borrow M .. Topsoil and Plantable Soil Borrow M ..
Processed Planting Material M .. CONSTRUCTION METHODS .
Preparation of Areas on Which Loam Plantable Soil Borrow Topsoil or Processed Planting Material Are to be Placed .
The area upon which the above materials are to be placed shall be raked harrowed or dragged to form a reasonably smooth surface .
All stones larger than millimeters undesirable growth over millimeters and debris shall be removed from the area and disposed of by the Contractor outside the location .
When directed by the Engineer additional suitable material available from excavation or furnished under Item Ordinary Borrow shall be spread as required to repair gullies or depressions .
The labor equipment and materials necessary to place compact and grade the additional material shall be paid for under the respective item from which the material is obtained . .
Placing Loam Topsoil or Processed Planting Material .
The loam processed planting materials or the topsoil obtained from stacked piles shall be hauled deposited and spread to the directed depths on the areas shown on the plans or designated by the Engineer once these areas have been properly prepared .
All grass and weed growth on the areas designated to be loamed shall be cut to a maximum height of millimeters raked harrowed or dragged before the loam is placed thereon .
After the loam topsoil or processed planting material has been spread it shall be carefully prepared by spading or harrowing and raking with iron rakes .
All large stiff clods lumps stones over millimeters brush roots stumps litter and other foreign material shall be removed from the loam topsoil or processed planting materials area and disposed satisfactorily .
The compaction shall be equivalent to that produced by a hand roller weighing from to kilograms per meter of width .
The compaction may be obtained by rolling dragging or any method that produces satisfactory results .
All depressions caused by settlement or rolling shall be filled with additional materials and the surfaces shall be regraded and rolled until it presents a reasonably smooth and even finish and is up to the required grade .
During hauling operations the roadway surfaces shall be kept clean and any loam or other dirt which may be brought upon the surface shall be removed promptly and thoroughly before it becomes compacted by traffic .
If necessary the wheels of all vehicles used for hauling shall be cleaned frequently and kept clean to avoid bringing any dirt upon the surface .
The Contractor shall take all reasonable precautions to avoid injury to existing or planted growth .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II. . Topsoil Rehandled and Spread .
Topsoil which is obtained on the site from piles of topsoil previously excavated and stacked in accordance with the relevant provisions of Section and designated as topsoil to be rehandled and spread shall be used as required and as directed by the Engineer on areas to be seeded or planted .
The topsoil must be approved before it is spread and the Contractor will be required without additional compensation to take corrective action as directed in order to make the topsoil suitable for its intended use .
The Contractor is required under the item of seeding to adjust the acidity by the addition of limestone as determined by testing as required under Subsection .
and to apply the fertilizer as required under Subsection .. . Plantable Soil Borrow .
Plantable soil borrow shall be used as specified in Subsection .
except that it may be obtained outside the project limits .
COMPENSATION .
Method of Measurement .
The quantity of Loam Borrow Plantable Soil Borrow Processed Planting Material or Topsoil Rehandled and Spread shall be determined by measurement in place after compaction to the depth specified on the plans or as directed and to the volume so ascertained there shall be added to compensate for such loss as may be due to settlement shrinkage and penetration into the underlying material .
The volume of Topsoil Rehandled and Spread including added percentage for settlement shall not exceed the total volume of Item Topsoil Excavated and Stacked less any waste . .
Basis of Payment .
Loam Borrow Processed Planting Material and Topsoil Rehandled and Spread will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic meter complete in place which prices shall also include the grading of areas where stockpiles of topsoil are removed. . Payment Items. . Loam Borrow Cubic Meter .
Plantable Soil Borrow Cubic Meter .
Topsoil Rehandled and Spread Cubic Meter .
Processed Planting Material Cubic Meter SECTION IMPERVIOUS SOIL BORROW DESCRIPTION .
General .
This work shall consist of furnishing and placing impervious soil borrow in accordance with these specifications and in close conformity with the lines and grades shown on the plans or established by the Engineer .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
MATERIALS .
General .
Impervious soil borrow shall meet the requirements specified in Subsection M .. of Division III Materials .
CONSTRUCTION METHODS .
General .
Impervious soil borrow shall be placed and compacted as specified in Subsection ..
COMPENSATION .
Method of Measurement .
Impervious soil borrow shall be measured as specified in Subsection .. .
Basis of Payment .
Impervious soil borrow shall be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic meter under the item for Impervious Soil Borrow complete in place even if the impervious soil borrow is obtained from Muck Excavation. . Payment Items. . Impervious Soil Borrow Cubic Meter SECTION SEEDING DESCRIPTION .
General .
This work shall consist of seeding certain areas at the locations indicated on the plans or designated by the Engineer in accordance with these specifications .
MATERIALS .
General .
Materials shall meet the requirements specified in the following Subsections of Division III Materials Limestone M ..
Fertilizer M .. Grass Seed M .. CONSTRUCTION METHODS .
General .
The Contractor shall not proceed with the work of seeding until permission of the Engineer has been obtained .
Before the application of limestone fertilizer and seed the Contractor shall harrow or rototill to a depth of Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
millimeters when directed all areas where loam or topsoil has been placed under a previous contract when such areas are to be prepared for seeding under this contract .
When loam borrow is placed or topsoil is rehandled and spread and they are paid for under the respective items of a contract they will not require harrowing or rototilling .
The Contractor shall remove all debris and stones having any dimensions greater than millimeters before the application of limestone fertilizer and seed . .
Application of Limestone .
Limestone may be applied in dry form or hydraulically as provided in Subsection .. Limestone where necessary shall be spread and thoroughly incorporated in the layer of loam or topsoil to adjust the acidity of the loam or topsoil .
The rate of application of the limestone will vary up to a maximum of .
kilogram per square meter depending on the results of laboratory tests conducted by the Department .
The limestone shall be thoroughly incorporated into the layer of loam or topsoil and the upper millimeters of the underlying subsoil by harrowing or other methods satisfactory to the Engineer so as to provide a layer of thoroughly mixed material for the seed bed . .
Application of Fertilizer for Grass .
Fertilizer may be applied in dry form or hydraulically as provided in Subsection .. After the application of limestone if found necessary on the seed bed fertilizer shall be spread on the top layer of loam or topsoil at the rate of .
kilograms per square meters and worked into the seed bed .
The full depth of loam or topsoil shall then be spaded or harrowed and graded to the required cross section. . Seeding Grass .
After the loamed or topsoil areas have been prepared and treated as hereinbefore described grass seed conforming to the respective formulas hereinbefore specified shall be carefully sown thereon at the rate of approximately .
kilograms per square meters .
Seeding shall be done in two directions at right angles to each other .
Seeding on level areas and on slopes up to and including vertical to horizontal slopes shall be done by means of an approved seeder that will seed and roll in one operation .
On shoulders and other narrow areas the seeding may be done longitudinally in one application. . Seeding Grass by Spray Machine .
A hydraulic spray machine approved by the Engineer and designed specifically for seed dissemination may be utilized .
The application of limestone as necessary fertilizer and grass seed may be accomplished in one operation by the use of an approved spraying machine .
The materials shall be mixed with water in the machine and kept in an agitated state in order that the materials may be uniformly suspended in the water .
The spraying equipment shall be so designed that when the solution is sprayed over an area the resulting deposits of limestone fertilizer and grass seed shall be equal in quantity to those quantities specified above in Subsections . . and .. A certified statement shall be furnished prior to start of work to the Engineer by the Contractor as to the number of kilograms of limestone fertilizer and grass seed per liters of water .
This statement should also specify the number of square meters of seeding that can be covered with the solution specified above .
If the results of the spray operation are unsatisfactory the Contractor will be required to abandon this method and to apply the limestone fertilizer and seed in accordance with the requirements of Subsections . . and .. . Care During Construction .
The Contractor shall be responsible for the watering of all seeded and grassed areas which shall be kept moist .
The Engineers decision will prevail in the event a dispute develops with the Contractor as to whether or not the seeded and grassed areas are moist .
Seeded areas on which growth has started shall be watered to a minimum depth of millimeters to assure continuing growth .
Watering shall be done in a manner which will provide uniform coverage prevent erosion due to application of excessive quantities over small areas and prevent damage to the finished surface by the watering equipment .
The Contractor shall furnish sufficient watering equipment to apply one complete coverage to the seeded areas in an hour period .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
If necessary suitable signs and barricades of brush or other materials shall be placed to protect the seeded areas .
After the grass has appeared all areas and parts of areas which fail to show a uniform stand of grass for any reason whatsoever shall be reseeded and such areas and parts of areas shall be seeded repeatedly until all areas are covered with a satisfactory growth of grass .
The Contractor shall care for all of the seeded areas until the work has been physically accepted without compensation in addition to the amount regularly to be paid under this item as hereinafter provided .
Care shall include all regrading refertilizing reseeding and mowing which may be necessary .
Prior to the acceptance of the project the Contractor will be responsible for mowing the grass when necessary on all flat or rolling slopes from level to and including vertical to horizontal slopes to a height of millimeters when the grass has attained a height of millimeters .
The grass on all slopes steeper than vertical to horizontal shall be cut when necessary to a height of millimeters at such a time as a stable turf has been established in the Engineers judgment . .
Liability .
A satisfactory stand of grass as determined by the Engineer shall be required .
To be acceptable a stand of grass shall consist of a uniform stand of at least percent established permanent grass species with a uniform count of at least plants per .
square meter .
When all items of the contract including the work specified under this item have been acceptably completed except that a satisfactory stand of grass has not been produced the contract may be accepted .
COMPENSATION .
Method of Measurement .
The quantity of seeding shall be the number of square meters based on actual measurements made over the general contour of the areas seeded complete in place and accepted . .
Basis of Payment .
This work including all mowing will be paid for at the contract unit price per square meter under the item for Seeding complete in place .
When a satisfactory stand of grass has not been established at the time of acceptance no payment for seeding shall be allowed at the time of acceptance .
At the time the final estimate is ready to be forwarded to the Contractor the seeded areas will again be inspected by the Engineer and if a satisfactory stand of grass has been established the seeded areas with a satisfactory stand of grass will be included for payment. . Payment Items. . Seeding Square Meter SECTION REFERTILIZATION DESCRIPTION .
General .
This work shall consist of an application of fertilizer to seeded areas as indicated on the plans or as designated by the Engineer and in accordance with these specifications .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
MATERIALS .
General .
Materials shall meet the requirements specified in the following Subsections of Division III Materials .
Fertilizer M ..
Seed M .. CONSTRUCTION METHODS .
General .
Work under this item shall be done in April May August or September .
No permission will be granted to refertilize in months other than herein prescribed .
Areas recently seeded shall be refertilized only after one season of growth of two months duration . .
Application of Fertilizer .
The fertilizer shall have a composition of and be applied at a rate of .
kilograms per square meters .
In addition organic fertilizer derived from any commercial source shall be applied at the rate of .
kilograms of Nitrogen per square meters . .
Seed .
Seed shall be included with the fertilizer at a rate of .
kilograms per square meter .
COMPENSATION .
Method of Measurement .
The quantity of refertilization shall be the number of square meters based on actual measurements made over the general contour of the seeded areas complete in place . .
Basis of Payment .
The work under this item will be paid for at the contract unit price per square meter complete in place which price shall include all labor materials and equipment necessary to do the required work. . Payment Items. . Refertilization Square Meter SECTION MULCHING SEED FOR EROSION CONTROL DESCRIPTION .
General .
This work shall consist of furnishing and placing hay straw wood chip wood fibre or aged pine bark mulch as particularly specified in the required amounts on the areas indicated on the plans or as directed .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
MATERIALS .
General .
Materials shall meet the requirements specified in the following Subsections of Division III Materials .
Hay Mulch M ..
Straw Mulch M .. Wood Chip Mulch M .. Wood Fibre Mulch M ..
Aged Pine Bark Mulch M ..
Seed for Erosion Control M .. Bales of Hay for Erosion Control shall be fastened with wire and have a minimum size of millimeters x millimeters x millimeters .
CONSTRUCTION METHODS .
Preparation for Mulching .
The areas upon which mulch is to be spread shall be prepared by raking harrowing or dragging to form a reasonably smooth surface .
All stones larger than millimeters undesirable growth over millimeters in height and all debris shall be removed from the area and disposed of by the Contractor in a satisfactory manner .
The disposal area shall be outside the location limits of the project when required by the Engineer and shall be the responsibility of the Contractor without additional compensation .
When required by the Engineer the Contractor shall spread compact and grade additional acceptable material to repair gullies or depressions .
Such additional material shall be obtained from suitable excavation or furnished by the Contractor under Item Ordinary Borrow .
The labor and equipment required to furnish and place the additional material shall be paid for under the respective item from which the material is obtained without additional compensation .
Grading preparatory to mulching will be included for payment under respective items of mulching . .
Placing Mulch .
Hay or Straw Mulch shall be loosely spread to a uniform depth over all areas designated on the plans at the rate of kilograms per square meters except over certain seeded areas where kilograms of hay per square meters shall be used or as otherwise directed .
Hay or Straw Mulch may be applied by mechanical apparatus if in the judgment of the Engineer the apparatus spreads the mulch uniformly and forms a suitable mat to control slope erosion .
The apparatus shall be capable of spreading at least of the hay or straw in lengths of millimeters or more otherwise it shall be spread by hand without additional compensation .
Wood Chip Mulch and Aged Pine Bark Mulch shall be loosely spread to a uniform depth over all areas designated on the plans at the rate of .
cubic meters per square meters approximately millimeters in depth or as otherwise directed .
Wood Chip Mulch and Aged Pine Bark Mulch may be applied by mechanical means except that if the equipment breaks the mulch into small pieces or changes its desired texture as determined by the Engineer it shall be spread by hand without additional compensation .
Wood Fibre Mulch shall be uniformly spread over certain seeded areas at the minimum rate of kilograms per square meters unless otherwise directed .
It shall be placed by spraying from an approved spraying machine having pressure sufficient to cover the slopes from bottom to top in one operation .
Immediately before spraying the mulching material shall be mixed with water in the sprayer and kept uniformly suspended in the water by agitation during the spraying operation. . Hay Mulch with Seed for Erosion Control .
The intent of these items is the prevention of slope erosion .
If the sequence of operations is such that only Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
portions of slopes have been completed such portions shall be preserved by seeding and mulching when directed prior to completion of the remaining portions of the slope .
The work to be done under the above items consist of applying seed and hay mulch onto slopes that have been graded and completed to the required line and grade at locations designated on the plans and as directed by the Engineer .
The operations shall be separate with the seed applied first .
This work may be applied by hand or by mechanical apparatus if in the Engineers judgment the apparatus spreads the materials uniformly and does not break the hay mulch into fine or small particles or otherwise change the desired texture of the hay mulch .
The seed shall be uniformly applied at the rate of .
kilograms per square meters. . Bales of Hay for Erosion Control .
Bales of hay shall be supplied and placed along the bottom of slopes ditches and where directed .
The bales shall be securely fastened in place by staking or pinning as shown on the plans or in a manner approved by the Engineer .
During the course of construction it may be necessary to remove and relocate or replace bales of hay as directed .
The removal of collected sedimentation and debris from behind these bales and disposal of same is included in this item .
The bales shall remain in place until the removal is directed by the Engineer .
The bales shall then become the Contractors property and shall be disposed of off the site .
COMPENSATION .
Method of Measurement .
Hay Mulch and Straw Mulch applied as required will be measured by the metric ton delivered on the project as determined from certified weight slips .
Wood Chip Mulch and Aged Pine Bark Mulch will be measured by the cubic meter based on either truckload measurement as delivered on the project or in place measurement the method of measurement to be determined by the Engineer .
If truckload measurement is used wood chip mulch taken from this measured volume for mulching trees and shrubs other than placed in mass planting areas will be deducted on the basis of the volume of chips placed over the rated size of each planting pit at a depth of millimeters .
No deduction shall be made in mass planting areas for wood chip mulch ordinarily included in the unit price of the trees or shrubs planted therein .
Wood Fibre Mulch will be measured by the metric ton delivered on the project as determined from the net weight certified by the manufacturer on the containers or as determined from weight slips accompanying delivery .
Bales of Hay for Erosion Control will be measured by the unit in place each .
Ordinary Borrow will be measured as specified in Subsection .
or by truck load measurement as directed by the Engineer .
Seed for Erosion Control will be measured by the kilogram . .
Basis of Payment .
Hay Mulch Straw Mulch and Wood Fibre Mulch will be paid for complete in place at the contract unit price per metric ton under the item for the particular type of mulch .
Wood Chip Mulch will be paid for complete in the place at the contract unit price per cubic meter .
Aged Pine Bark Mulch will be paid for complete in place at the contract unit price per cubic meter .
Bales of Hay for Erosion Control will be paid for each which shall include all labor material and equipment necessary to place the bales relocate as directed and finally remove and dispose of the bales including the removal of sedimentation from behind the bales of hay .
Replacement of Bales of Hay when directed will be paid for each .
Ordinary Borrow will be paid for complete in place at the contract unit price per cubic meter .
Seed for Erosion Control will be paid for at the contract unit price per kilogram .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II. . Payment Item. . Hay Mulch Metric Ton .
Straw Mulch Metric Ton .
Wood Chip Mulch Cubic Meter .
Wood Fibre Mulch Metric Ton .
Aged Pine Bark Mulch Cubic Meter .
Bales of Hay for Erosion Control Each .
Seed for Erosion Control Kilogram .
Ordinary Borrow Cubic Meter SECTION PAVEMENT MILLING MULCH UNDER GUARD RAIL DESCRIPTION .
General .
This work shall consist of placing a geotextile fabric under guard rail and placing millimeters of pavement millings on top of the fabric .
MATERIALS .
General .
Pavement millings are to consist of recently milled asphalt concrete pavement .
The milled material shall meet the following gradation requirements Square Opening Sieve Percent Passing by Weight .
mm .
mm .
mm .
mm The geotextile fabric shall conform to Department Material Specification M ..
Type IV Fabric .
CONSTRUCTION .
General .
The mulched area will generally be meter wide and start at the back of the berm sloped edging curb or edge of roadway pavement .
In end treatment areas where the guard rail is set back from the edge of roadway the mulch will extend from the edge of roadway to millimeters behind the back of the guard rail posts. . New Guard Rail .
Where the milling mulch is being placed at locations of new guard rail installation the fabric and millings shall be placed prior to placing the guard rail .
When posts are to be driven the millings shall be moved aside in the vicinity of the post the fabric cut and then the posts shall be driven .
After the posts are driven the millings shall be raked closely around the posts .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II . .
Existing Guard Rail .
Where the milling mulch is to be placed in locations of existing guard rail the fabric shall be placed on both sides of the post and shall be cut at the posts to allow the fabric to lay flat between the posts and to overlap a minimum of millimeters .
The millings will then be placed and raked closely around the posts .
COMPENSATION .
Method of Measurement .
The quantity of pavement milling mulch shall be the number of meters based on actual measurements made along the guard rail . .
Basis of Payment .
The work under this item shall be paid for at the contract unit price per meter complete in place which price includes the geotextile fabric pavement millings and all related excavation borrow and grading. . Payment Items. . Pavement Milling Mulch under Guard Rail Meter SECTION SODDING DESCRIPTION .
General .
This work shall consist of the construction of lawn field or collected natural growth sod as required on the areas indicated on the plans or as designated by the Engineer and in accordance with these specifications .
MATERIALS .
General .
Materials shall meet the requirements specified in the following Subsections of Division III Materials Loam Borrow M .. Topsoil and Plantable Soil Borrow M .. Sod M ..
Seed M .. CONSTRUCTION METHODS .
Laying Sod .
A foundation for the lawn and field sod shall be constructed and it shall consist of loam borrow plantable soil borrow or topsoil rehandled and spread in quantities sufficient to produce after natural settlement has taken place and after tamping a depth of at least millimeters .
Fresh sods shall then be placed in final position on the areas designated for sodding .
Sods shall be placed in a solid strip or spot pattern as designated on the plans or as directed .
When the solid pattern is used the sods shall be laid edge to edge with staggered joints .
All sods shall be very carefully handled to prevent loosening and separation of the loam from the roots .
The combined thickness of the sod and loam shall be at least Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
millimeters .
The sod shall be settled by watering it and by tamping on a board laid over it .
When the sods are to be placed in temporary storage piles and they are in the form of separate flat slabs instead of folds or rolls they shall be placed in layers so that the grassy side of the first or bottom layer shall be uppermost whereas in the next succeeding layer the roots shall be uppermost and so on in such a manner as to place the grass or roots of each succeeding layer in immediate contact with the corresponding surface of the preceding layer in order to avoid rapid growth of the grass while in storage .
The piles shall be sprinkled with water and covered with burlap straw or other acceptable material which shall be kept moist when required and as directed .
As a rule temporary storage will not be permitted for a period longer than days .
The sod shall not be stored in such a manner to compress the thickness of sod below the minimum required .
Collected natural growth sod as specified in Subsection M .. shall be placed in an excavation in the existing ground to the depth of the sod and shall be placed in either a staggered pattern or in strips as directed .
If the staggered pattern is used sods shall be placed not over meter apart .
If strips are used they shall run approximately parallel with the roadway and not over meters apart .
Loam shall not be used in laying natural growth sod .
Mulch shall be carefully replaced around sods placed in premulched areas .
Care shall be taken that the collected sods shall be firmly embedded in the natural soil .
A hole shall be excavated in the slope beneath the mulch to the depth and width of the sod and the sod placed therein .
Soil and mulch shall then be placed and compacted around the sod .
In all cases the mulch must be parted at each planting location prior to planting and then satisfactorily replaced immediately following the planting .
Collected natural growth sod shall be placed within one day after arrival on the project .
Sods which have been stored beyond this time limit and sods which have become dried out or broken prior to placement in final position on the designated areas shall be rejected by the Engineer. . Fastening Sod to Slopes .
On slopes steeper than vertical to horizontal lawn and field sod shall be held securely in place by fastening alternate lines of sod with wooden pegs .
The pegs shall be not less than millimeters in length and they shall be spaced meter apart and driven flush with the surface of the sod .
Other approved methods of fastening sod to slopes may be used where pegging is not practicable . .
Surface Dressing of Lawn and Field Sodding .
When the sod has been set in final position loam shall be used to fill the joints and as a surface dressing to cover the sodded areas to a depth of about millimeters .
A grass seed mixture conforming to the specifications stated in Subsection M .. for Slopes and Shoulders shall be mixed with clean dry sand or dry sandy loam and sown upon the loam surface dressing at the rate of .
kilograms per square meters .
The sodded areas shall then be compacted and the compaction shall be equivalent to that produced by hand roller with a mass of between and kilograms per meter of width and to produce a smooth uniform surface .
Natural growth sod should be pruned after planting .
All woody plants such as sweet fern sheep laurel and blueberry shall be pruned of their top growth . .
Maintenance and Care .
The Contractor shall be responsible for any necessary watering of sodded areas .
If necessary suitable signs and barricades of brush or other material shall be placed to protect the sodded areas .
Before acceptance of the work a satisfactory uniform stand of grass will be required .
See Subsection ..
The Contractor shall maintain all of the sodded areas until the work has been officially accepted without compensation in addition to the amount regularly to be paid under this item as hereinafter provided .
Maintenance shall include all reseeding or resodding which may be necessary as determined by the Engineer .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
COMPENSATION .
Method of Measurement .
The quantity of lawn and field sodding shall be the number of square meters based on actual measurements made over the general contour of the areas sodded complete in place and accepted .
The quantity of collected natural growth sods each conforming to M .. in a healthy condition shall be the actual number of such sods at the time of acceptance of the project . .
Basis of Payment .
The work involved in lawn or field sodding will be paid for at the contract unit prices per square meter complete in place under the respective items for Lawn Sodding or for Field Sodding which prices shall include loam for filler and top dressing and seed except loam used for foundation of sod which will be paid for as Loam Borrow Plantable Soil Borrow or Topsoil Rehandled and Spread .
Collected natural growth sods will be paid for at the contract unit price each complete in place under the item for Collected Natural Growth Sod. . Payment Items . .
Lawn Sodding Square Meter .
Field Sodding Square Meter .
Natural Growth Sod Lowbush Blueberry Each .
Natural Growth Sod Bearberry Each .
Natural Growth Sod Mountain Laurel Each .
Natural Growth Sod Sweet Fern Each .
Loam Borrow Cubic Meter .
Plantable Soil Borrow Cubic Meter .
Topsoil Rehandled and Spread Cubic Meter SECTION PLANTING TREES SHRUBS AND GROUNDCOVER DESCRIPTION .
General .
This work shall consist of furnishing transplanting planting andor transplanting trees shrubs vines ground cover and seedlings of varieties and sizes specified in locations as shown on the plans andor as directed by the Engineer .
The work shall include excavation of pits placing of backfill mixture mulching watering staking or guying wrapping liming fertilizing seeding care of the plants and replacement of unsatisfactory plants and materials during the life of the contract .
MATERIALS .
General .
Materials shall meet the requirements specified in the following Subsections of Division III Materials with the amendments and supplements contained herein Loam Borrow M .. Peat Borrow M .. Topsoil and Plantable Soil Borrow M .. Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
Lime Stone M ..
Fertilizer M ..
Bone Meal M .. Woodchip Mulch M .. General Planting M .. Nursery Stock M .. Tree Paint M .. Materials for Guying Staking M .. Wrapping Material M .. Water for Irrigation M ..
The Contractor shall furnish written certificates of compliance in triplicate for each load of plant material showing where the plants were grown and listing all transplantings age or size as specified grade and quantity .
All plants shall be tagged so that proper identification can be made .
All trees and shrubs shall be balled and burlapped unless otherwise provided by the plans and specifications .
The caliper height age and other dimensions as specified for all planting material shall apply at the time planting is done and the plants will be inspected by the Engineer at this time as to these requirements as well as the quality or grade and varieties required .
All plants not approved by the Engineer shall be removed from the project by the Contractor .
The trees shrubs vines and evergreen seedlings shall be Northern Grown Nursery Stock .
Botanical and common names shall conform with the current edition of Hortus Third compiled by the staff of L. H. Bailey Hortorium Cornell University .
The current edition of U.S.A. Standard for Nursery Stock sponsored by the American Association of Nurserymen Inc. shall be the Departments standard for plants and for balling and burlapping sizes and requirements .
The term plant shall refer to any tree shrub seedling vine or groundcover. . Storing of Materials .
Materials may be temporarily stored within the highway layout as directed by the Engineer .
When materials are stored within the layout the site shall be abandoned immediately upon completion of the project and the storage area returned to its original natural condition at the sole expense of the Contractor . .
Delivery and Protection .
Arrangements shall be so made so far as practicable to have plants delivered as the pits or beds are ready for them .
Whenever plants can not be planted on the day of arrival all those with bare roots shall be heeledin in moist soil in a satisfactory manner .
All heeledin plants shall be properly maintained by the Contractor until they are planted .
In the event that heeledin plant material must be held over until the next planting season such material shall be lifted and replanted in a satisfactory manner in nursery rows as directed by the Engineer .
The ball of roots of balled and burlapped plants if not planted immediately after delivery and inspection shall be adequately protected by the loam covering until removed for planting and in a satisfactory manner appropriate to the condition .
Throughout the work care shall be exercised to keep the roots of all plants from drying out to preserve the solidity of the balls of balled and burlapped plants and to prevent plants from being broken scarred or damaged in any way .
All emergency storage of materials shall be at the entire risk of the Contractor. . Backfill Mixture for BareRooted and Balled and Burlapped Plants .
A. Evergreen Trees and Evergreen Shrubs part peat borrow parts loam borrow B. Deciduous Trees and Deciduous Shrubs part peat borrow parts loam borrow kilograms bone meal per cubic meter of mixture Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
C. Roses Vines and Ground Cover part peat borrow parts loam borrow kilograms bone meal per cubic meter of mixture The Contractor shall notify the Engineer in writing at least days in advance when heshe intends to use the backfill mixture the source and amount of material available and reserved for backfilling .
Samples for testing will be taken in the field at the source .
The Contractor shall furnish facilities and assistance to the Engineer for collecting and forwarding these samples. . Container Grown Plants .
All container grown plants shall be healthy vigorous wellrooted and established in the container in which they are sold .
They shall have tops which are of good quality and are in healthy growing condition .
An established container grown plant shall have roots penetrating the plantable container or on removal of the container shall reveal roots that thoroughly penetrate the soil mass to the extent that the soil mass does not crumble apart on handlings .
The container shall be sufficiently rigid to protect the root mass during shipment .
The container sizes shall be provided in accordance with the U.S.A. Standard for Nursery Stock specifications by the American Association of Nurserymen Inc .
The potting mixture in containers shall be part peat part loam and part coarse sand .
If necessary ground limestone shall be added to raise the pH value to .. Superphosphate shall be added at the rate of .
kilograms per cubic meter .
The potting mixture for sweet fern shall be equal parts of peat and sand with no additives required .
Plants of Liner size and Sweet Fern root cuttings shall have been grown in the container for a minimum of twelve weeks .
The certificate of compliance for container grown plants shall contain in addition to the requirements listed in Subsection .
the guaranteed composition of the potting mixture and the date of planting in the container .
A random sample may be required from each delivery for soil and root inspection upon request of the Engineer .
CONSTRUCTION METHODS .
General .
Balled and burlapped plants may be planted in the spring until June and in the fall from August to November .
Container grown plants may be planted at any time the ground is not frozen provided specified minimum time of growth and root development have been met .
Bare rooted plants shall be planted only from the time ground thaws in spring until May . .
Turf Removal .
In areas of mass shrub planting where there is an established turf the Contractor will be required to excavate the sod as indicated on the plans or as directed by the Engineer to a depth sufficient to remove the root system approximately millimeters .
The shape and dimensions of the areas to be so treated shall be determined in the field by the Engineer .
It shall be the Contractors responsibility to dispose of all material removed in a manner satisfactory to the Engineer. . Excavation of Planting Pits .
The dimensions of the planting pits for bare rooted or balled and burlapped plants shall be as follows A .
Trees more than .
meters high Diameter at least millimeters larger than the diameter of the ball or root spread depth at least millimeters greater than the depth of the ball or root system .
B .
Trees .
meters high or less Least dimension millimeters .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
C. Shrubs Least dimension millimeters .
D. Roses Vines and Ground Cover Least dimension millimeters .
The shape of the pits may vary from square to round with the approval of the Engineer .
In all cases the least dimension of the pit shall be sufficient to easily accommodate the root system without crowding .
The excavated material shall be disposed of as directed . .
Planting Bare Rooted Plants Except Seedlings .
The backfill mixture of soil placed beneath the plant shall be firmed prior to setting the plant .
The plant shall be set in the planting pit at a depth within millimeters below the depth at which it was previously growing .
The root system shall be carefully spread and the pit partially backfilled making sure that the soil filters in among the roots .
The backfill shall be formed with care taken not to injure or bruise the roots .
When the pit is between and full it shall be puddled to eliminate air pockets and settle the soil .
After the water has percolated into the soil the rest of the pit shall be filled in .
A mound shall be formed around the edge of the pit to form a shallow saucer to aid watering .
The pit area shall then be puddled again and any depressions occurring as a result filled in with the backfill mixture .
The plant shall be woodchip mulched after watering to a depth of millimeters as provided in Subsection .. .
Planting Balled and Burlapped Plants .
The plant shall be set in the planting pit at a depth within millimeters below the depth at which it was previously growing .
The burlap shall then be untied loosened and spread away from the ball .
Any excess burlap shall be cut away and disposed of as directed .
Roots that have been wrapped around the ball shall be made to lay in as natural a manner as possible .
Backfill shall then be placed around the ball and firmed .
The planting procedure shall also include that as specified in the first and third paragraphs of Subsection .
entitled Planting Bare Rooted Plants except Seedlings . .
Planting Container Grown Plants .
The plant shall be placed in a hole that is millimeters larger than the diameter of the container and the surface of the soil of the container shall be level with the surrounding ground .
Any part of a plantable container projecting above the level of the soil shall be removed .
All metal plastic or other non rootthru type container shall be completely removed during the process of planting .
The part of the hole outside the container shall be backfilled with the excavated soil and thoroughly firmed and puddled with water to eliminate air pockets .
A mound of soil shall be formed on the ground around the container to form a shallow saucer to aid watering .
On steep slopes the mound around the saucer may be omitted on the uphill side .
The plant shall be woodchip mulched after watering to a depth of millimeters as provided in Subsection .. .
Planting Bare Root Seedlings .
Bare root seedlings of the variety indicated on the plan shall be planted by opening a wedgeshaped hole in the slope of a sufficient size to take the seedlings roots that are to be directed downward and without kinks .
The seedling shall be placed at a depth in the hole approximately millimeters below its previously planted depth .
The planting hole shall be closed by making a second wedgeshaped hole about millimeters from the first in order to force the first closed which then shall be closed and compressed with the heel .
Bare root seedlings shall be given a liquid mud bath prior to planting .
For seedlings to be planted on grass covered slopes it will require removal of the sod on a millimeter square area for a maximum depth of millimeters at each seedling location prior to planting .
Seedlings must be delivered to the project in a dormant condition .
If there is any evidence that growth has started the entire load or lot will be rejected .
Evergreens will be rejected if the fine roots were lost in digging .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II. . Staking and Guying .
Type Ia Evergreen trees .
meters to .
meters Deciduous trees .
meters to .
meters These trees shall be supported by one stake driven firmly millimeters to meter into the ground .
The stake shall be located far enough from the tree to avoid damaging the roots and so that the top of the stake shall be about the height of the tree .
The point of attachment to the stake shall not be more than millimeters from the trunk .
If the stake must angle toward the tree it shall be driven at such an angle to cross the trunk and shall extend about millimeters past the trunk .
Secure the tree to the stake with .
millimeters in diameter hosecovered wire twisted to provide tension .
The length of the hose shall be millimeters .
Type Ib Trees higher than type a and less than millimeters caliper These trees shall be supported with two stakes on opposite sides and driven into the ground at least millimeters .
The stakes shall be cut off at a height in aesthetic proportion to the height of the tree .
The stake shall not be higher than three fourths the height of the tree .
Secure the tree to stakes with .
millimeters in diameter wire with hose and twist the wire to provide tension .
The length of the hose shall be millimeters .
Type II Trees millimeters to millimeters caliper These trees shall be securely guyed by wire protective material and anchors .
Three guys shall be equally spaced around the tree .
Each guy shall be fastened around the tree trunk immediately above a substantial limb located to of the tree height above the ground and anchored at a distance from the trunk equal to of the height of attachment to the tree .
The anchor shall be a hardwood stake .
The anchor stake shall be firmly driven at an angle and to a depth of at least millimeters and the excess length of stake shall be cut off millimeters above the ground .
The guy wire with protective hose shall be placed around the tree trunk secured at the hose by a single twist extended with both wires to the anchor stake and securely fastened with enough slack in the guy to permit ten to twenty twists for tensioning .
After installation of all guys the wires shall be twisted by a lever in the same direction as previous twists to provide tension as directed by the Engineer. . Wrapping .
Only deciduous trees will require wrapping .
Trunks of trees millimeters caliper and over shall be completely wrapped with burlap or other approved material beginning at the base of the tree and extending to the first branch .
Wrapping shall be tied at the top and bottom and at millimeter intervals .
Wrapping of tree trunks shall not be completed until after inspection and approval by the Engineer .
Wrapping of tree trunks shall be completed within five calendar days after planting . .
Protective Screen .
All Euonymous Flowering Cherries and Flowering Crabs shall be protected to a height of millimeters to millimeters above the ground from animals and rodents by a protective cage .
The cage shall be of wire or plastic mesh or other approved material and shall not make any direct contact with the tree .
Standard practice shall apply. . Mulching .
No mulch shall be applied prior to the first watering of the plant .
Trees and shrubs shall be mulched not later than one week after planting .
Mulch material shall be furnished and placed over all pit or saucer areas of individual trees and shrubs and over the entire area of shrub beds to the depth indicated on the plans .
In areas to be planted with roses vines or ground cover the entire area shall be mulched before planting .
The mulch shall be parted at the location of each hole and carefully replaced around the plant immediately after planting .
Preparation for mulch areas of mass planting shall conform to the provisions of Subsection .. Mulch material may be wood chips aged pine bark or other material as indicated on the plans or approved by the Engineer .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II. . Pruning .
Pruning of all plants shall be done only by persons skilled in this work as follows Initially all broken or dead or injured branches shall be cut flush with the trunk or limb and broken roots shall be pruned on the plant side of the break .
Additional pruning shall be done in accordance with accepted nursery practice for the variety of plant involved .
The foregoing shall be done at the time of planting .
Dieback shall be pruned before final acceptance .
Pruning shall not deform or otherwise destroy the typical shape or symmetry of the tree and shall not reduce the height by more than .
The leader of the tree shall not be cut back unless otherwise directed .
Cuts larger than millimeters in diameter shall be painted with approved tree paint. . Care and Maintenance .
The Contractor will be held responsible for all planted material until the project is completed and accepted at which time all plants shall be in a healthy growing condition and free from weeds or other obnoxious materials or conditions .
All plants shall be cared for during the course of the project by weeding cultivating pruning trimming tightening of guys resetting or replacement of plants where necessary and by performing other operations to keep the plants healthy and growing. . Weeding .
The Contractor will be responsible for weeding around planted materials mulched with wood chips .
All weeding shall be completed before the acceptance of the project .
At no time shall weeds attain the height of millimeters during the period of contract prior to acceptance. . Watering .
All plants shall be watered during planting and all plants except seedlings shall be watered at least twice each week for a minimum of twelve waterings .
At each watering the soil around each tree or shrub shall be thoroughly saturated .
If sufficient moisture is retained in the soil as determined by the Engineer the required watering may be reduced .
Trees will require a minimum of liters of water each and shrubs a minimum of liters each .
Trees or shrubs planted after October shall be thoroughly watered at the time of planting after which subsequent watering will not be required. . Period of Establishment .
The Contractor shall employ all possible means to preserve the plants in a healthy growing condition .
The plant establishment period shall be for at least one year following the satisfactory completion of all planting on the contract or for the duration of contract whichever is later .
Care during the establishment period includes watering cultivating pruning repair and adjustment of guys and stakes and such other work as specified or ordered by the Engineer . .
Replacement of Defective Plant Material .
The Contractor shall replace all plant material that has not shown satisfactory evidence of growth .
A semifinal inspection by the Engineer and the Contractor will be made to determine the acceptability of the plant material at a date no later than September prior to a November project completion date .
Each tree shall show at least healthy growth and any other plants except seedlings shall show at least healthy growth .
All dead and unsatisfactory plants shall be replaced in kind and size with plants as originally specified or on approval by the Engineer in writing by alternate or substitute varieties of plant material of equal value .
Replacement plantings of evergreens shall be in place by October and of deciduous by November .
Replacement plantings shall conform to the provisions of this section except the requirements for establishment .
Seedlings shall be allowed a tolerance of for dead or defective plants provided there are no prominent bare spots .
If the number of seedlings in any planting area are less than the allowable tolerance sufficient replacement Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
plantings shall be made to eliminate the bare spots and also meet the specified tolerance .
All dead and unsatisfactory plants except seedlings shall be promptly removed from the project .
A final inspection of all plant material for acceptance will be held after the replacement planting has been completed .
COMPENSATION .
Method of Measurement .
The quantity of plants to be paid for will be the number of living trees shrubs vines and ground cover plants of specified kinds and sizes furnished planted and accepted in accordance with these specifications .
The quantity of seedlings to be paid for will be the number of seedlings originally planted provided the establishment rate of the replacement plantings are acceptable in accordance with the specifications .
Turf removal will be measured in its original position on the designated surface area and by a depth of millimeters .
Woodchip mulch used on areas other than over tree or shrub planting pits will be measured by truckload volume on delivery at the project .
The mulch taken from this measured volume and used for mulching trees and shrubs will be deducted on the basis of the volume of chips placed over the rated size of each planting pit at a depth of millimeters . .
Basis of Payment .
The quantity of trees shrubs vines seedlings and ground cover plants measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit prices each for planting of the types species and sizes called for in the bid schedule .
The unit price per planting item shall include furnishing and delivering all plants furnishing and delivering prepared backfill soil mulch fertilizer digging plant pits planting pruning guying and staking wrapping mulching weeding watering cleanup plant establishment work and care including replacements and for all labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work prescribed in this section except that mulch for vines and ground cover plants will be paid for under the contract unit price for the mulch specified .
Turf removal will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic meter under the item for Earth Excavation .
Wood chips for mulching areas other than specified for trees and shrubs will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic meter in place under the item for Wood Chip Mulch .
No payment will be made for mulching specified as required and included in payment for other contract items. . Payment Items General Categories. . to .
Evergreen Trees Balled and Burlapped Each .
to .
Deciduous Trees Balled and Burlapped Each .
to .
Evergreen Shrubs Balled and Burlapped Each .
to .
Deciduous Shrubs Balled and Burlapped Each .
Vines and Groundcover PotGrown Each .
Seedlings Each .
Earth Excavation Cubic Meter .
Wood Chip Mulch Cubic Meter Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
SECTION TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES SECTION CONDUIT MANHOLES HANDHOLES PULL BOXES AND FOUNDATIONS DESCRIPTION .
General .
The work under this section shall consist of furnishing and installing andor constructing the following in accordance with the requirements of the specifications as directed on the plans and as directed by the Engineer .
A .
Unless otherwise specified or indicated on the plans conduits or ducts intended for use as raceways for the installation of wires and cables shall be millimeters nominal size . .
Type NM Rigid NonMetallic Plastic shall be used for all underground runs unless otherwise specified . .
Type RM Rigid Metallic Steel Steel Plastic Coated Special Alloys or Aluminum shall be used for all above ground runs unless otherwise specified and where augured or jacked conduit is required .
When specified for underground use or to be encased in concrete conduit shall be plastic coated or manufactured from metal inherently resistant to corrosion . .
Type FM Flexible Metallic Steel or Steel Plastic Coated shall be used where flexibility and special applications are required .
B. Junction Boxes or Pull Boxes shall be of such dimension as shown on the Standard Drawings .
Unless otherwise specified other designs shall not be used .
Pull Boxes shall be installed in all conduit or duct runs over meters in length where there is an abrupt change in direction grade or elevation to provide a direct one conduit entrance for wire and cable into signal mast arm or strain pole foundation and as directed by the Engineer .
C. Electric Manholes as shown on the Standard Drawings plans andor as directed by the Engineer .
D. Foundations for light standards lighting load centers standard signal posts pedestal signal posts mast arms strain poles and control cabinets .
MATERIALS .
General .
Materials shall meet the requirements specified in the following Subsections of Division III Materials Cement and Cement Concrete Materials M Pipe Culvert Sections Conduit and Fittings Pull and Junction Boxes M Paint and Protective Coatings M Metal Related Materials Cast Iron Frames and Covers M Gravel M ..
Type c Metallic pull and junction boxes may be cast iron welded sheet steel or cast aluminum with gasketed covers securely fastened with monel or stainless steel screws that will with cover in place be watertight .
Cast iron or sheet steel boxes shall be hot dipped galvanized conforming to the applicable portions of ASTM A . Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
CONSTRUCTION METHODS .
Conduit .
A. Excavating Trench .
The conduit shall not be placed until after the gravel subbase for the roadway has been constructed and the rolling thereof has been completed .
The trench for a single conduit line shall be excavated to a width of millimeters to a depth not less than meter below the proposed grade of the finished pavement as shown on the plans .
Whenever or more conduit lines are to be laid in the same trench the trench shall be excavated to the width shown on the plans or as specified in the Special Provisions .
If the condition of the bottom of the excavated trench is wet clayey or spongy or otherwise unsatisfactory the Engineer may require that the bottom of the trench be excavated deeper and the space filled with clean gravel to form a firm bearing for the conduit .
The gravel shall be firmly compacted in layers not over millimeters in depth .
The grade of the finished trench shall be parallel to the proposed pitch of the traffic conduit or duct .
B .
Preparation of Bed .
After the trench has been excavated to the proper width and depth as specified above a gravel foundation millimeters in depth shall be constructed on the bottom of the trench to provide a proper cushion for the conduit .
This cushion of gravel shall be thoroughly tamped .
C. Laying Conduits .
Unless otherwise directed all conduit lines shall be direct from one end to the other no bends being allowed except when entering a pull box or signal base .
Whenever or more conduit lines are to be laid in the same trench the conduits shall be separated from each other by a minimum distance of millimeters .
D. Joints .
All joints shall be made in accordance with conduit or duct manufacturers recommendations NEMA UL and the Massachusetts Electrical Code MEC .
E. End Markers .
Dead ends of conduit lines shall be plugged with wooden plastic or fibre stoppers .
To mark the ends sections of millimeter by millimeter studs long enough so as to project above the surface of the ground after the trench has been backfilled shall be set vertically before the backfill is placed .
For single conduit lines the stud shall be butted directly against the stopper in the end of the conduit .
Where or more conduit lines converge to a common point each line shall be ended millimeters from the common point of intersection and a stud set up at this point .
Backfill shall not be placed until the Engineer has established the necessary ties to the studs .
F. Concrete Envelope .
All Type NM Conduits or ducts marked X on the plans shall be encased in a concrete envelope as shown on the Standard Drawings .
G. Filling Trench .
Gravel fill shall be made around the sides of the conduit and over it for a depth of millimeters and thoroughly tamped .
A plank of spruce fir hemlock or other satisfactory wood about millimeters wide and millimeters thick nominal dimensions shall be placed over this gravel and the filling of the trench with suitable materials in layers of not over millimeters compacted thoroughly shall be completed .
If Extra Heavy Wall Schedule Conduit is selected as an option for Rigid NonMetallic Conduit an approved underground warning tape may be substituted for the millimeter by millimeter plank .
H. Testing Installation .
After the trench is backfilled the Contractor shall in the presence of the Engineer test the installation by pushing or pulling through the entire length of the conduit line a rod rope or fish tape on the end of which is attached a brush and ball with a diameter not smaller than millimeters less than the inside diameter of the conduit .
All obstructions including stones dirt concrete etc .
shall be removed and damaged conduits shall be replaced at the expense of the Contractor .
I. Conduit and Duct Crossing Paved Roadways .
Unless otherwise specified when a trench has been cut across a paved surface the trench shall be bridged with a millimeter concrete slab as shown on the Standard Drawings .
When jacking or drilling methods are specified for placing conduits under existing pavements pavement shall not be disturbed without the approval of the Engineer .
In the event obstructions are encountered upon approval of the Engineer small test holes may be cut in the pavement to locate the obstructions .
Jacking or drilling pits shall be kept meter clear of the edge of any type pavement wherever possible .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
J. Conduit on Structures .
Conduit system on structures shall consist of furnishing and installing all material and equipment and performing all work necessary for a complete conduit system .
The type of conduit shall be as designated on the plans conforming to the requirements of Subsection M All conduit bends shall be made in a neat and workmanlike manner crushed or deformed conduit shall not be used .
Conduit ends shall be reamed to remove all burrs and all chips resulting from reaming removed from the conduit before installation .
The ends of all conduit runs shall be protected by grounding bushings and be capped if wire and cable is not to be installed immediately .
Conduit shall be held rigidly in place to prevent misalignment during placing of concrete .
Reinforcing bars shall not be cut bent displaced or otherwise altered from that shown on the design plans unless directed otherwise by the Engineer .
One manufactured expansion fitting made of material compatible with the conduit shall be used for each conduit run on structures at every expansion joint of the structure unless flexible metallic conduit loops or bends are stipulated .
Clamps or hangers shall be provided at intervals not exceeding .
meters .
Conduit runs shall be made with the minimum practicable number of bends .
The total of the angles of bends between junction or pull boxes shall not exceed .
So far as practicable all bends shall be formed by the use of factory standard radius elbows .
For metal conduit where special angles of bends or offset bends are required they may be formed to a radius of not less than times the nominal inside diameter provided the bend is made on a pipe bending machine .
Field bends may be made by the use of a conduit bender forming curves the minimum radius of any portion of which shall not be less than times the nominal inside diameter .
Short radius bends shall be accomplished by the use of junction boxes or special condulets .
Hot bends or other methods of bending which will destroy the protective coating on the metal conduit will not be permitted .
Conduit in which the cross sectional area has been reduced or which contains sharp kinks will be rejected .
Unless the plans indicate otherwise conduit shall be continuous from outlet to outlet however the runs may be interrupted by condulets placed for the purpose of pulling conductors or making short radius bends .
All metal conduit shall be cut square the ends internally reamed and threaded the proper length and assembled at all fittings in proper manner so that all joints will be mechanically secure water tight and provide electrical continuity .
All threaded connections shall be given a coat of pipe joint compound before fitting up .
The ends of field cut joints on nonmetallic conduit except plastic shall be tapered to conform to factory ends .
The sections shall be joined at couplings and fittings by tapping the ends of sections sufficiently to provide water tight joints without over stressing or cracking the fittings .
Where nonmetallic conduit is joined to metallic conduit special tapered and threaded nonmetallic adapters shall be used .
When fittingup compound is specified for nonmetallic conduit the compound shall be of a type which will remain plastic during assembly and set within a reasonable period thereafter .
The compound shall be carefully painted on joints so that excess compound will not intrude on the inner surface of the conduit after assembly .
All junction boxes shall be of sufficient size to provide for proper splicing and packing of all conductors plus additional space for a future increase of in the number of conductors or conductor size .
All unused openings in boxes and fitting shall be closed by tight metal plates or plugs and all dead ends of conduit except where provided for drainage shall be fitted with pipe caps .
All terminal ends of conduit not ending in boxes or condulets shall be fitted with rubber bused caps containing the required number and size of holes to tightly fit the conductors running through or fitted with standard water tight terminal fittings or potheads .
Where an obstruction may have developed in any conduit run it shall be removed if practicable .
If the obstruction is not removed the affected portion of the conduit system shall be removed and replaced with new clean conduit or if this can not be accomplished an entire new conduit shall be placed around the affected section at a location selected by the Engineer .
All conduit encased in concrete shall be rigidly held in proper position during concrete placement .
Nonmetallic conduit shall be secured against separation at the joints during concrete placement by being tied to a separate steel rod at least millimeters in diameter running the full length of the conduit .
Such rod and ties shall be considered as parts of the electrical installation .
Provisions for adequate drainage shall be made in all conduit systems .
Horizontal runs shall be slightly pitched and unless completely sealed against moisture all low points shall be drained .
Conduit shall be adequately supported by sleeves fixed boxes hangers clamps or anchorages placed at intervals not exceeding .
meters .
Anchor bolts which are indicated on the plans as set in concrete shall be placed in the proper location before placing concrete .
Condulets pull boxes junction boxes and caps shall be of galvanized cast or malleable iron of the threaded connection type with cast waterproof covers fitted with moisture proof gaskets .
The covers of junction boxes which house Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
transformers or cutouts shall be attached to the box by hinges or chains .
Conduit or raceway sleeves shall be placed during construction of the portions of the structures in which they are located .
They shall be maintained in a clean condition and protected from damage or obstruction by placing removable plugs or caps until ready for use .
In general exposed conduit shall not be placed until all adjacent construction work has been completed .
Portions of conduit to be encased in masonry or boxed in between structural members shall be placed in advance of placing concrete or during assembly of structural members and protected from damage and plugging by use of covers or tight fitting metal caps. . Electric Manholes Handholes Pull Boxes and Junction Boxes .
A .
General .
Electric manholes handholes pull and junction boxes shall be built to the lines grades dimensions and designs shown on the plans or Standard Drawings with the necessary frames covers etc .
in accordance with the applicable provisions of Section Basins Manholes and Inlets .
B .
Cast in Place Concrete Units .
After excavation all loose material shall be removed before the forms are installed .
All conduits ground rods pulling irons and reinforcing steel shall be installed rigidly in place before the concrete is placed .
After the concrete for the manhole handhole or pull box is placed and forms removed all exposed portions of the concrete shall be neatly finished .
Frame castings shall be set according to the requirements of Subsection .
Placing Castings .
C. PreCast Concrete Units .
The construction methods for precast concrete units shall conform to the relevant provisions of Section Subsection M .. and the above Subsection .B .
D. Metallic Units .
Metallic pull and junction boxes shall be installed at the approximate locations shown on the plans or in long conduit runs they shall not be spaced over meters from each other .
It shall be the option of the Contractor at hisher expense to install additional pull or junction boxes that heshe may desire to facilitate hisher work .
Pull or junction boxes installed shall not be of dissimilar metal to the metal conduit used in any one electrical system . .
Foundations .
Light standard lighting load center signal post strain pole signal mast arm and signal control cabinet foundations shall be constructed with the necessary anchor bolts supplied under the items listed in Section Traffic Control Signals Section Highway Lighting and Section Flashing Beacons Illuminated Warning Signs and Lighted Barrier Arrows reinforcing rods conduit elbows or sweeps etc .
as shown on the Standard Drawings and in accordance with the applicable requirements of Section Cement Concrete Masonry .
For core type foundation estimating and bidding purposes in the absence of boring samples or the actual determination of the soil properties at the proposed footing location the Department will accept an assumed soil bearing pressure of kiloPascals for the design of the footing using the Span Wire Assembly Design Chart III of the Departments Standard Drawings .
The moments shall be calculated from the data obtained from the relevant traffic control signal plan .
However the augered foundations shall not be constructed prior to soil classification of the subsurface soil by a qualified firm or person to perform the soil classification analysis and footing design .
The actual existing soil conditions shall be determined from boring samples see Section .
If the results of the auger boring show that the soil classification requires the use of a Foundation Design Chart that requires a greater depth the foundation shall be constructed according to the requirements of the appropriate chart and payment will be made for the difference in depth under Item .. Inversely if it is determined the soil classification permits the use of a Foundation Design Chart that requires a lesser depth the Department shall be credited for the difference in depth under Item .. All unsuitable material within the limits of the footing must be removed at the direction of the Engineer Peat organic material material that has been dumped etc ..
The concrete for the footing shall be placed immediately after excavation to prevent water from collecting in the excavated area .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
COMPENSATION .
Method of Measurement .
When separate items are listed in the Proposal for various types of Electrical Conduits each type will be measured according to the following Electrical Conduits of each kind and diameter will be measured by the meter between end terminals along the center line of the conduit as actually installed complete in place and accepted .
When conduit ends terminate in pull or junction boxes measurement shall be to the center line of such pull or junction boxes .
Electric manholes handholes pull and junction boxes and signal and lighting foundations shall be measured for payment as a unit .
Allowance for rock if not already paid for under previous rock excavation shall be based on the width of rock encountered in the trench but not to exceed the width specified in Subsection ..
Structure excavation shall be measured in accordance with Section .
The measured quantity including a millimeter depth allowance will be paid for under the item for Class B Rock Excavation .
Gravel will be measured by the cubic meter as specified in Subsection .. Cement Concrete Masonry will be measured by the cubic meter as specified in Subsection .. .
Basis of Payment .
The unit contract price per meter shall be full compensation for furnishing all conduits condulets couplings expansion fittings elbows bends caps sleeves clamps hangers reducers tees jointing compound sealing compound cement concrete required in Subsection .F and .I planking required in Subsection .G and gravel required in Subsection .B for placing the electrical conduit in accordance with these specifications including all excavation except Class B Rock Excavation or jacking required backfilling of the trenches chipping or sawing of pavement bedding or hanging of conduit and all other work incidental to the construction of the conduit system except that when electrical conduit is included on any project as an integral part of a traffic control signal or Highway Lighting System and the conduit is not shown as a pay item it shall be considered as incidental to the construction and be included in the lump sum price for such systems .
The accepted quantities of signal and lighting foundations including anchor bolts will be paid for at the contract unit price each .
Anchor bolts will be paid for under the items listed in Sections .
and ..
The accepted quantities including cost of castings of electric manholes handholes and pull and junction boxes will be paid for at the contract unit price each complete in place .
Any incidental work or materials for which no basis of payment is provided will be considered as completely covered by the unit price bid .
Class B Rock Excavation will be paid for under Item .
The contract unit price shall be considered full compensation for the satisfactory disposal of the Class B Rock excavated material .
Borings will be paid for in accordance with Section .. . Payment Items. . to .
___ millimeter Electrical Conduit Type NM Meter mm to mm diameter single double bank or bank .
to .
___ millimeter Electrical Conduit Type NM Plastic UL Meter mm to mm diameter .
to .
___ millimeter Electrical Conduit Type NM Plastic NEMA Meter mm to mm diameter .
to .
___ millimeter Electrical Conduit Type RM Steel Galvanized Meter .
to .
___ millimeter Electrical Conduit Type RM Aluminum Meter mm to mm diameter .
to .
___ millimeter Electrical Conduit Type RM Steel Plastic Coated Meter Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
mm to mm diameter .
to .
___ millimeter Electrical Conduit Flexible Metallic Meter mm to mm diameter .
Conduit Encased in Concrete SD .
Meter .
to .
Electric Manhole SD .
SD .
to SD .
Each .
to .
Electric Handhole SD .
SD .
to SD .
Each .
Pull Box millimeters by millimeters SD .
Each .
Pull Box millimeters by millimeters SD .
Each .
Pull Box Adjusted Each .
Electric Manhole Adjusted Each .
Electric Handhole Adjusted Each .
to .
Junction Box ___ x ___ x ___ millimeters Each .
to .
Light Standard Foundation SD .
SD .
to SD .
Each .
Lighting Load Center Foundation Each .
Standard Signal Post Foundation Each .
Pedestal Signal Post Foundation SD .
Each .
Signal Mast Arm Foundation Each .
Signal Control Cabinet Foundation Each .
Footing Cost Adjustment Meter .
Class B Rock Excavation Cubic Meter .
Drive Sample Boring Meter .
Core Boring Meter .
Mobilization and Dismantling of Boring Equipment Lump Sum SECTION WIRING GROUNDING AND SERVICE CONNECTIONS DESCRIPTION .
General .
This work shall consist of furnishing and installing wire and cable of the type and size indicated for traffic signals highway lighting and related electrical systems equipment grounding systems new ground electrodes or connections to existing ground electrodes and all materials and equipment necessary to deliver power to traffic signal highway lighting and related electrical systems .
Service points shown on the plans are approximate only .
The Contractor shall determine exact locations and riser elevations from the serving utility arrange to complete the service connections and be responsible for all charges incidental thereto .
All electrical connections splicing grounding resistance tests service connections and circuit identification shall be done by a licensed electrician holding Certificate B issued by the State Board of Examiners of Electricians. . Cable Types and Uses .
A .
General .
The types of wire and cable shall be used in the following manner Type All traffic control signal circuits above ground supported by a messenger wire in duct or other electrical wire and cable raceway and shall be installed only when the air temperature is above C. Type Same as Type except may be installed at any air temperature above C. Type All traffic control circuits installed above ground supported by integral messenger .
Type Same as Type and when an electrical continuous metallic shield is required .
Type All traffic signal circuits for direct earth burial or severe service conditions .
Type Traffic control signal heads .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
Type All power and lighting distribution systems in duct or other electrical wire and cable raceways .
Type Same as Type and includes direct earth burial services and roadway wire loops USE XLP only .
Type Special purpose when specified .
Type Grounding and bonding traffic control and highway lighting systems .
Type Shielded detector leadin cable for wire loop detectors .
Type Multiconductor heavy duty portable power cord for traffic control signal mast arm and high mast tower lighting .
Type Loop detector wire with tube .
MATERIALS .
General .
A .
Wire and Cable .
Unless otherwise specified all traffic signal cable connectors shall be not less than AWG solid or stranded and all conductors for mast arm andor span wire shall not be less than AWG stranded .
Materials shall meet the requirements specified in Section M. B .
Equipment Grounding .
Unless otherwise specified equipment grounding conductors shall be not less than AWG insulated or bare solid or stranded copper wire meeting the requirements specified in Section M C. Ground Electrodes .
Ground electrodes shall consist of a water pipe driven rods or other devices approved for the purpose .
Water pipes and driven rods used as grounding electrodes shall conform to the following requirements .
A metallic underground water piping system shall be used as grounding electrodes where such a system is available. . Where a water system is not available the grounding connection shall be made to an electrode meeting the requirements specified in Section M. D. Service Connections .
All equipment furnished shall be new unless specifically mentioned otherwise and shall meet the current requirements of NEMA UL and the code wherever such standards apply .
CONSTRUCTION METHODS .
Wire and Cable .
A .
Steel Messenger Cable Fittings .
Messenger cable integral with Types Traffic Signal Cable shall be secured to strain poles by means of pole bands .
Pole bands shall be installed as detailed on the Standard Drawings .
Strain insulators shall be installed as shown on the plans .
Attachments to utility owned poles shall be according to the local utility company requirements and under the supervision of the local utility company Engineer .
The Contractor shall furnish and install back guys head guys anchors etc .
that may be requested by the local utility Engineer where guys are necessary due to the placement of traffic signal equipment on utility poles .
Traffic signal cable shall be attached to messenger cables by spinning the cable to the messenger with an approved lashing material stainless steel or KevlarAramid fiber core with nylon jacket or when approved in writing steel cable rings approved for the purpose may be used .
B .
Installation of Copper Wire and Cable .
Installation of wire and cable shall not begin until the conduit system has been tested in accordance with the requirements of Section .
Conduit Paragraph H Testing Installations .
All conductors and grounding wire shall be drawn by hand into ducts or conduits without damage to covering sheath insulation or wires .
This wiring shall not be done until all work which may damage the wires has been completed .
In pulling all wires shall be drawn freely into conduits without kinks or bends twisting or lapping .
In general all conductors in each conduit run shall be pulled at the same time fed from free running reels .
Powdered soapstone talcum or other approved lubricant may be used to assist in placing wire and cable in conduits .
A sufficient length of slack shall be allowed for each cable in all manholes handholes pull and junction boxes and Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
equipment enclosures to provide for neat racking and movement due to thermal expansion and contraction .
C. Splicing .
Splices shall be made in accordance with the Electrical Code by Journeymen Electricians holding Certificate B issued by the Board of State Examiners of Electricians .
Splices shall be made only in manholes handholes control cabinets junction boxes or signal and lighting bases .
Pull boxes shall not be used for splicing except in pull boxes where vehicle detectors are used soldered splices will be permitted in the pull box nearest the detector see Subsection .
B .
Detector leads shall not run in the same cable sheath or jacket in cable carrying signal currents .
The conductors shall be joined by the use of connectors and terminal lugs listed by Underwriters Laboratory and meet all requirements of the Massachusetts Electrical Code .
Splices shall be insulated .
Unless otherwise specified the Contractor may use any of the following .
A filler compound or moistureresistant selffusing tape applied to a thickness equal to and well lapped over the original conductor insulation followed by two layers of electrical insulating tape .
The dielectric strength of splices shall be at least equal to that of the cable insulation. . An UL approved electrical spring connector wirenut with an approved sealing compound for protection from dampness and water. . An approved reenterable rigid body splice kit with a nonhardening sealing compound compatible with the wire insulation. . An approved heatshrinking cable sleeve or tape designed to provide electrical insulation and protect overhead and underground splices from moisture penetration corrosion and electrical breakdown .
After wiring and splicing is completed all conduit runs shall be plugged at all manholes handholes pull boxes junction boxes cabinets and foundations to form a complete closed conduit or duct system to prevent air circulation .
Approved sealing compound including foam shall be used in liberal amounts carefully forced into the ends of the conduits and tightly packed around all wire and cables completely sealing the opening .
D. Highway Lighting Circuit Identification .
The Contractor shall furnish and install colored tapes and identification tags on all lighting conductors at the points where they connect to equipment and on cables in all pull and junction boxes and pole shafts .
The colored tapes shall cover millimeter portion of the conductor at these points line black neutral white line red line blue .
In pole shafts line black neutral white photocell bypass red .
The tags shall be nylon or other suitable nonmetallic material not less than millimeters in diameter and not less than millimeter thick .
Identification markings shall be stamped on the tags by means of small tool dies .
Each tag shall be securely tied to the proper conductor by nylon or other suitable nonmetallic cord plastic or nylon .
E. Traffic Control Signal Circuit Identification .
The Contractor shall wire and splice traffic control signal circuits to conform to the following color identification code C Cable Vehicle Phases Overlaps Pedestrian Phases .
Black Spare Spare Push Button Switch .
White Phase through C Overlap C WalkDont Walk C . Red Phase through R Overlap R Dont Walk R . Green Phase through G Overlap G Walk G . Orange Phase through Y Overlap Y Push Button Switch .
Blue Spare .
WhiteBlack Phase C . RedBlack Phase R . GreenBlack Phase G . OrangeBlack Phase Y . BlueBlack Spare .
BlackWhite Phase C . RedWhite Phase R . GreenWhite Phase G . BlueWhite Phase Y . BlackRed Phase R Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II. . WhiteRed Phase C . OrangeRed Phase Y . BlueRed Phase G . RedGreen Spare The number of conductors required for each traffic control signal system shall be as follows All systems shall have a minimum of one five conductor cable for each of the following controller outputs to field wiring required by the timing and sequence plan for the system Vehicle Phases Overlap Phases Pedestrian Phases Approval may be given when requested in writing for alternate use of one C cable in lieu of four of the above C cable .
The Contractor shall furnish and install colored tapes and identification tags on all cables at the points they connect to equipment in all signal bases in all pole shafts and in all pull and junction boxes .
The tapes shall cover a millimeter portion of the cables at the above locations with the following colors Black for Ring Red for Ring Brown for Detectors Orange for Overlaps Yellow for Pedestrian Phases The tags shall be nylon or other suitable nonmetallic material not less than millimeters in diameter and not less than millimeter thick .
Identification markings shall be as follows Vehicle Phase Numbers Ring Vehicle Phase Numbers Ring Detector Phase Numbers Overlap Phase Numbers and Letters Pedestrian Phase Numbers The identification markings shall be stamped on the tags by means of small tool dies .
Each tag shall be securely tied to the proper cable by nylon or other suitable nonmetallic ties. . Equipment Grounding .
With each cable run an equipment grounding conductor shall be installed to which all equipment shall be bonded in accordance with standard practice and the Code .
Metallic cable sheaths metal conduit nonmetallic conduit grounding conductors ballast and transformer cases metal poles and pedestals metal junction and pull boxes and metal cabinets shall be made mechanically and electrically secure to form a continuous system and shall be effectively grounded to the ground electrode installed at the service point .
Bonding of traffic signal standards pedestals strain poles and mast arms shall be accomplished by installing a millimeter or larger brass bolt in the lower portion of the shaft .
For bonding purposes in all nonmetallic type conduit the grounding conductor shall be run continuously .
Where nonmetallic conduit is to be installed for future use the above mentioned conductor may be omitted .
In lieu of the continuous equipment grounding conductor when approved by the Engineer a ground electrode may be installed at each pole or standard .
Bonding of metallic conduit systems in concrete foundations and pull boxes shall be by means of approved grounding bushings compatible with the conduit and bonding jumpers .
All expansion sleeves in metallic conduit runs shall be provided with a bonding jumper as specified . .
Ground Electrodes .
A .
General .
When an underground water system is used as the grounding electrode the grounding conductor shall be securely attached to the piping system by welding or brazing or other approved means .
If a waterpiping system is not available a driven rod as specified in Subsection .C shall be used as the Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
grounding electrode .
Driven rods should as far as practical be embedded below permanent moisture level .
Except where rock is encountered rods shall be driven to a depth of at least .
meters .
Where rock is encountered other devices approved for the purpose shall be used see Article Grounding MEC .
B .
Resistance Tests .
Grounding electrodes shall where practicable have a resistance to ground not to exceed ohms .
Where the resistance is not as low as ohms additional rods shall be driven placed at least .
meters apart and connected in parallel with a AWG bare copper solid or stranded conductor as directed by the Engineer .
The measurement shall be made with either a Ground Ohmer or Megger Ground Tester with all wire disconnected except parallel connections and test wires from the rod and in the presence of the Engineer .
The Contractor shall furnish the Engineer with a report of all resistivity tests indicating the values obtained for each and combinations parallel connected of rods tested .
This report shall become a part of the as built records. . Service Connections .
Each service shall include a meter socket a three wire single phase or four wire three phase solid neutral disconnect of size noted the necessary conduit conduit risers cable and ground assembly all installed in accordance with the Code serving utility and Department requirements .
Service equipment shall include all equipment from the distribution lines of the serving utility to and including the metering equipment .
Meter will be furnished and installed by serving utility .
Service disconnect unless otherwise specified shall be a standard type circuit breaker encased in a NEMA Type R raintight enclosure that can be padlocked .
In general all traffic signal services will be volts or volts single phase hertz alternating current and all highway lighting will be volts volts single phase or volts three phase hertz alternating current .
Conduit for services shall not be less than millimeters and be rigid metal above ground securely fastened every meter .
All wire and cable shall conform to Subsection M Type .
The wires between the serving utility distribution lines and service disconnect shall not be smaller than AWG .
The ground electrode shall conform to the requirements of Subsection ..
Ground clamps shall be approved by UL and acceptable to the local power company .
In the case of underground services the Contractor shall furnish and install all equipment as required by the serving utility .
The Contractor shall make adjustments in the installation to comply with the varied requirements of the Code and serving utility and perform all work to the satisfaction of the Code serving utility and the Department .
COMPENSATION .
Method of Measurement .
A .
Wire and Cable .
All cable will be measured by the meter the measurement being made along the center line of the conduit in which the conductor is placed .
No allowance will be made for the necessary lengths of slacked cable laid around the sides of manholes handholes junction boxes pull boxes or extending from foundations for making splices taps in cable and connecting the internal components of control cabinets .
B .
Equipment Grounding .
Equipment grounding will be measured as a unit including all nuts bolts washers including lockwashers connectors clamps and incidental materials to form a continuous system .
Equipment grounding conductor will be measured by the meter conforming to Subsection .
A. C. Ground Electrodes .
When a metallic underground water system is used as the grounding electrode measurement will be made on the basis of the grounding conductor installed and connected to the metallic waterpipe system .
Measurement for ground rods will be based on units .
meters .
meters or longer as specified .
If in the driving of standard units obstructions are encountered measurement will be made for the actual length driven .
The ground rod shall then be withdrawn and redriven at a new location to meet requirements specified above .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
D. Service Connections .
Service Connections of each type will be measured on the basis of the number of services installed and connected to the serving utility distribution lines with all appurtenances in acceptable operating condition . .
Basis of Payment .
A .
Wire and Cable .
All cable will be paid for at the respective contract unit price per meter for the type and size specified which price shall include installation and connection of wire and cable and all splices and circuit identification .
All additional materials required to complete the installation shall be considered as incidental thereto and included in the contract price for wire and cable and no additional compensation will be allowed .
B .
Equipment Grounding .
The lump sum price for Equipment Grounding shall be full compensation for work necessary or incidental to the installation of the equipment ground modifying existing grounds or both as shown on the plans .
All additional materials and labor not shown on the plans or standard drawings called for herein and which are required to complete the installation shall be considered as incidental thereto and be included in the contract price for equipment grounding .
Equipment grounding conductor will be paid for at the contract unit price per meter as specified in Subsection .
A. C. Ground Electrodes .
This work will be paid for at the relevant unit price which price shall include all ground clamps AWG copper conductors excavation backfilling compaction welding or brazing all tests reports and work incidental thereto .
Allowance will be made for ground rods not driven to minimum depths because of obstructions and will be paid for at the contract unit price per meter for ground rod .
D. Service Connections .
Service connections will be paid for at the contract unit price for each service connection complete in place .
All additional work called for herein which is required to complete the service connection shall be considered as incidental to the construction. . Payment Items. . Traffic Signal Steel Messenger Cable Type Meter .
to .
Traffic Signal Cable Type to Meter .
Traffic Signal Head Wire Type Meter .
to .
Wire Type No .
General Purpose to Meter .
to .
Wire Type No .
Direct Burial to Meter .
Wire Type Special Purpose TWTHW Meter .
Wire Type Special Purpose UF Meter .
Wire Type Grounding and Bonding Meter .
Wire Type Loop Detector Leadin Meter .
Wire Type Heavy Duty Portable Cord Meter .
Wire Type Loop Detector Wire and Tube Meter .
Equipment Grounding Lump Sum .
Ground Rod Meter .
Ground Rod .
meters Long Each .
Ground Rod .
meters Long Each .
Service Connection Overhead Lump Sum .
Service Connection Underground Lump Sum Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
SECTION TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNALS DESCRIPTION .
General .
This work shall consist of furnishing and installing or modifying at each location traffic control signals ready for operation .
Included in the work is the furnishing and installing or modifying existing traffic signal control equipment signal heads electric lamps pedestrian push buttons control equipment vehicle detectors posts and bases poles pedestals mast arms strain pole and span wire assemblies and all incidental materials included in Section and necessary for operating the traffic control signals .
This work shall also include furnishing and erecting any pertinent signs and all painting required to complete the installation .
The removal salvage stockpiling reinstallation or transporting of existing traffic installations will be covered under this section and appropriate pay items where applicable .
The locations of signal heads controllers standards and appurtenances shown on the plans are approximate and exact locations will be established by the Engineer in the field .
The responsibility for the exact and satisfactory installation of traffic signals shall rest with the Contractor and work performed if not acceptable to the Engineer shall be executed to the satisfaction of the Engineer by the Contractor at the Contractors expense .
All electrical equipment shall be designed manufactured and tested in accordance with the applicable standards of the ANSI EIA FSS IMSA ITE NEMA UL and these Specifications .
Unless otherwise designated on the plans on the Standard Drawings for Traffic Signals as set forth in the Special Provisions and as specified herein all work and materials shall conform to the requirements of the Massachusetts Electrical Code herein referred to as the electrical code .
Wherever reference is made to codes or standards mentioned above the reference shall be construed to mean the code or standard that is in effect on the date of advertising of the project .
All electrical connections splicing grounding resistance tests service connections and circuit identification shall be done by a licensed electrician holding Certificate B issued by the State Examiners of Electricians .
Standard symbols and construction details for traffic signal installations are shown on the current Traffic Signal and Highway Lighting Standard Drawings .
Within days following execution of the Contract the Contractor shall submit to the Engineer for approval a list of equipment heshe proposes to install .
The submission shall include all equipment identified on the plans or in the specifications by the name of the manufacturer model or identifying number of each item .
The list shall be supplemented by catalog cuts and such other data as may be required including wiring diagrams of any special equipment and any proposed minor deviation from the plans .
All the above data shall be submitted in triplicate for checking .
Following checking correction and review not less than five complete approved sets shall be resubmitted to the Engineer for distribution .
The Department shall not be liable for any material purchased labor performed or delay to the work prior to such review and approval .
The Contractor shall provide the Department within days of receipt of approval written proof that heshe has ordered the Traffic Control Signal Devices required by this Section .
Shop drawings are required for all structural support materials and fabricated items that are not specifically detailed on the plans .
Shop Drawings are not required for items that are on the Departments Approved Equipment List .
The warranties that the Contractor receives from each manufacturer of equipment and materials pertinent to the complete and satisfactory operation of traffic signal installation shall be turned over to the Department at the time of acceptance of the project at no cost to the Department .
Each warranty so furnished shall indicate its expiration date and be in effect for a minimum period of one year from the date traffic signals were placed in continuous operation .
If within one year from the date the traffic signal system is placed in continuous operation the equipment and materials do not meet the warrants specified above and the Engineer notifies the manufacturer or hisher authorized representative promptly the manufacturer or hisher authorized representative thereupon shall correct any defect either by repairing or replacing any defective part or parts at no cost to the Department .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
The Contractor shall at hisher own expense replace any part of the traffic signal control equipment found to be defective in workmanship material or manner of functioning within six months from the date of final acceptance of all the installations .
It is the intent of the Plans Specifications and Special Provisions to provide a complete traffic control signal system throughout the project .
It is not intended that every fitting minor detail or feature be shown and described as the assumption is made that either the Contractor or hisher Subcontractor is an expert in the particular area of responsibility and is capable of interpreting the plans specifications and special provisions so that the bid shall include all items required and that they shall be provided and installed in a neat and workmanlike manner .
Any installation of wiring by the Contractor will be performed by licensed electricians. . Equipment .
All new equipment including controllers with cabinets vehicle detectors and detector amplifiers shall be furnished except as noted and installed by the Contractor .
When equipment and materials are to be furnished the Contractor by the Department the equipment and materials will be made available to himher at the project site .
No equipment or accessories specified in Section will be accepted unless type tested and approved by the Department prior to the date of the proposal .
The Department will list annually all equipment and accessories that have been type tested approved andor approval withdrawn .
Such approval by the Department of equipment or accessories however shall not relieve the Contractor of any responsibility required under Section .. All approvals will be conditional and the Department reserves the right to withdraw its approval of equipment or accessories at any time for any of the following reasons a .
Delivery of equipment or accessories which do not meet requirements of Section .
b .
Equipment or accessories with abnormal maintenance and performance records .
MATERIALS .
General .
The materials required are those specifically covered in the plans and in accordance with Division III of the Standard Specifications .
Any and all signs required shall conform to Section of the Standard Specifications and the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices .
Unless otherwise indicated on the plans or specified in the Special Provisions all materials shall be new and of the latest design .
Any equipment that has been type tested and approved by the Department Subsection .
will be considered as meeting these specifications .
Where existing systems are to be modified the existing equipment and material shall be incorporated in the revised system salvaged or abandoned as directed by the Engineer in writing . .
Controllers .
A .
General . .
Operate on a power input of volts single phase hertz alternating current . .
Capable of operating in a coordinated system with preemption equipment supervised in a master system without major internal wiring modifications. . Be housed in a weatherproof cabinet of adequate size as specified hereinafter .
The cabinet shall be furnished as a housing for the controller auxiliary equipment and terminal facilities and conform to the following electrical and mechanical requirements .
a .
Doors The cabinet shall have a main door equipped with a keyed tumbler lock of the type in current use by the Department and an auxiliary door equipped with a conventional police lock and key .
Two keys shall be furnished with each lock .
Door hinge pins shall be made from stainless steel .
b. Switches Panel behind the auxiliary door shall be provided with the following switches .
Main power switch .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II. . A switch to change from automatic to flashing operation or vice versa with the controller power off in flashing operation. . A switch to energize the controller while the signal lights are off or on flashing operation accessible only when main door is open .
This switch shall be interlocked with the above switch so that the controller must go through the startup sequence when going from flashing operation to automatic operation unless prohibited by the conflict monitor .
All switches shall be labeled as to function .
c. Vents Cabinets shall be equipped with screened raintight T vents millimeters or larger for pre timed controllers .
Cabinets containing vehicle actuated controllers shall be equipped with a thermostatically controlled fan and filtered vents .
d. Shelves Cabinets shall be fitted with two substantial shelves or brackets to support the controller and auxiliary equipment .
e. Radio Interference Controllers flashers or current interrupting devices shall be equipped with suitable radio interference suppressors .
The Contractor shall if notified by the Department of such interference provide and install the additional equipment necessary to eliminate the interference .
f. Flasher Each cabinet shall be provided with a solid state electronic device capable of providing flashing operations at the rate of flashes per minute .
Flasher device shall be furnished mounted on a pluginbase with plugin mounting .
The device shall be capable of normally producing flashing yellow indications for all signals facing the main street and flashing red indications for signals facing the cross streets or in a combination specified .
The output load rating with incandescent lamp load shall not be less than amperes .
The automatic to flash switch specified in b above shall be wired in such a manner that no pedestrian indications will show during flashing operation .
g. Circuit Breaker A twopole solid neutral circuit breaker panel for power service shall be mounted in the cabinet .
h. Wiring All cabinet wiring shall be neat and firm and the following installed in the cabinet .
Unfused terminals for neutral side of power supply. . Terminals for signal light cables one for each signal circuit and one for more terminals for the common conductor. . Terminals for detectors pedestrian pushbuttons controllers auxiliary equipment field conductors overlap outputs plus an additional ten terminals for spares. . Terminals for interconnecting cables when required. . All terminals shall be suitably identified. . A flexible cable shall be furnished for connecting the controller to the cabinet terminals. . Signal light load switches number as required by type of controller . .
Convenience outlet Standard wire grounding duplex receptacle amperes capacity with integral ground fault interrupter . .
Overload protection for all wiring and auxiliary equipment. . Surge protector for protecting equipment against overvoltage transients caused by manmade or natural sources. . Three power service unfused terminal connections AC AC and ground having the ability to connect No .
AWG conductor .
i .
Meter Socket Each cabinet shall be provided with a standard residential meter socket with no knockout on top .
The rating shall be Amps Amps continuous VAC CUAL rated .
The meter socket shall be attached and electrically grounded to the cabinet .
B. Actuated Controllers .
Traffic actuated controllers shall consist of a complete assembly of the following elements .
Controller Unit Dispatcher or Timer .
Interface Requirements .
Terminals and Facilities .
SolidState Load Switches .
SolidState Flashers .
VoltageConflict Monitors .
Auxiliary Equipment .
Cabinets .
Cabinet Foundations andor Anchor Bolts Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II. . Technical Manuals and Box Prints The first eight elements of the controller assembly shall be wired to perform all the controller signal operations for the specific type of controller specified . .
Controller Unit Dispatcher or Timer .
a .
The controller unit shall meet all applicable requirements of the National Electrical Manufacturers Association NEMA Standards contained in NEMA Publication No .
TS current edition and the following b .
Be in compliance with Section .
Equipment .
c. All controllers units shall provide solidstate timing circuits utilizing power line frequency as a base .
d. All timing and control parameters except time clock operation shall be retained in memory when power is off batterybackup to retain memory will not be accepted .
e. The controller units shall be modular or integral keyboard entry type .
f. Modular Controller Units Operator programmable data entry adjustments for the modular units shall be accomplished through thumbwheel pin or keyboard devices located on the front panel of the unit .
All plugin modules of like function shall be interchangeable between to phase frames and to phase frames .
All modules of unlike function shall be keyed and electrically interlocked to prevent insertion or operation in a slot not designed for its use and to prevent malfunctions .
g. Integral Keyboard Entry Controller Units Operator programmable data entry adjustments for integral keyboard entry units shall be accomplished through a front panel keyboard and a liquid crystal display .
The unit shall utilize a menu driven format which shall list in English the major categories of programming data .
Once the user selects the appropriate category the program shall provide prompting for additional keystrokes until full programming is accomplished .
The integral keyboard entry unit shall have the capacity of operating in either a single ring or dual ring mode with two through eight phase control .
The unit shall be capable of either sequential or concurrent phase control .
Overlap phases shall be programmable through the keyboard .
The unit shall be capable of operating as a volume density controller and shall also have internal time base coordination TBC .
The coordination control shall conform to Subsection .. F ..
The keyboard entry controller unit shall have a security code function and internal preemption control capabilities .
The phase or phases selected for call to nonactuated CNA modes shall be determined as needed by keyboard entries .
The keyboard entry controller unit shall have a standard RS serial port for data transfer to another controller or printer .
A data transferprinter cable shall be included with the controller. . Interface Requirements .
a .
The controller frame types listed in Table shall meet all the applicable interface requirements of NEMA Standard TS Section . . Terminals and Facilities .
a .
Each electrical terminal within the facility shall be identified with nomenclature that corresponds to the nomenclature on the controller assembly wiring diagram .
Terminal nomenclature shall be adjacent to terminals .
All load switches relays flashers circuit breakers fuses and switches within the facilities shall be identified with nomenclature on the controller assembly wiring diagram .
b .
All functional points on the connectors of the controller units shall be terminated in the facilities .
c. All conflict monitor input channel leads that can be used to monitor the maximum number of signals available in a given configuration shall be terminated on terminal strips in the cabinet .
d. The facilities shall be so wired that the intersection will revert to flashing operation if the conflict monitor is disconnected .
e. Unless otherwise specified loop detector leads and harnesses will be required and shall be terminated harnesses for tophase frames and harnesses for tophase frames .
f. Fullyprogrammable wired load switch sockets with load switches flash transfer relay sockets with relays and dual circuit flasher socket with flasher shall be provided in quantities shown in Table .
g. When specified programming automatic transfer from normal operation to flashing operation Uniform Code Flash shall comply with the requirements of the MUTCD Section B Flashing Operation of Traffic Control Signals .
h. It shall be possible to easily change the flash indications Flashing Yellow to Flashing Red or viceversa and load switch positions Overlap to Pedestrian or viceversa from the front side of the terminal facilities using only simple tools without the need to unsolder or resolder connections .
i .
A support shall be provided so that as a minimum it is supporting the flasher and load switches at some Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
point between millimeters and millimeters from the panel surface .
At least of the area beneath the load switch and flasher shall be open to allow for the free flow of air across the load switches and flasher see NEMA TS Section for other requirements. . SolidState Load Switches .
a .
The solidstate load switches shall be a modular assembly containing three solidstate switch packs .
b .
The front panel shall be provided with three indicators to indicate the state of the input circuit of the load switch .
c. Each switch pack shall be readily serviceable by the use of a screwdriver or small hand tools without soldering or unsoldering connections .
d. Load switches shall meet requirements of NEMA Standard TS Section . . SolidState Flasher .
a. Solidstate flashers shall meet the requirements of NEMA Standard TS Section for Type ampere dualcircuit .
Load switch packs shall be serviceable as in .
above. . VoltageConflict Monitors .
a. VoltageConflict monitors shall meet the requirements of NEMA Standard TS Section as follows .
Type for to phase frames . .
Type for tophase frames. . Auxiliary Equipment .
a .
Space shall be provided for all shelf mounted auxiliary equipment including harnesses cables and space for equipment with maximum dimensions of millimeters high by millimeters deep by millimeters wide . .
Cabinet Aluminum .
a. Cabinets shall be fabricated from H sheet aluminum alloy at least millimeters thick and adequately reinforced .
It shall be of allweather construction .
b .
Meet the applicable requirements listed under A .
General .
c. The convenience outlet required by this section shall have integral ground fault interrupter .
d. An incandescent light with switch shall be installed in the cabinet switch to be installed next to test switch .
e. Detector test switches shall be provided on the back of the door inside the cabinet millimeter Type CB cabinets and millimeter Type CC and CD cabinets .
f. The cabinet shall be equipped with a door stop assembly to hold the door open at approximately degrees and degrees .
g. The cabinet shall be equipped with a thermostatically controlled fan assembly adjustable between C and C with a minimum capacity of .
cubic meters per minute .
The fan shall be mounted in the top of the cabinet in a manner to prevent rain snow or insects from entering the cabinet .
h. Each cabinet shall be provided with a filtered louver vent in the front door .
A UL listed vent filter shall be supplied which is odorless and fireproof .
The filter shall contain a metal grill for protection .
Filter resistance shall be rated at meters per minute of air at .
millimeters water column .
i .
All surfaces of the cabinet and doors shall be painted a minimum of two coats of aluminum paint excluding primer as follows .
Cabinets that come from the manufacturer with one or more coats of paint excluding primer will be accepted if there are no scars and abraded areas . .
If cabinets show any scars or abraded areas the Contractor shall repair these areas and apply one coat of aluminum paint. . Cement Concrete Cabinet Foundations andor Anchor Bolts .
a .
All cabinets shall be complete with millimeter x millimeter anchor bolts for Type CA or CB cabinets and for Type CC or CD cabinets .
b .
When new cement concrete foundations are required they shall be constructed in accordance with section . . Technical Manuals and Box Prints .
The following documentation shall be provided prior to final acceptance as furnished by the manufacturer .
a .
Controller Unit Flasher Load Switches Conflict Monitor and all external logic units. . Electronic schematic of circuit boards. . Pictorial layout of components on circuit boards .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II. . Service manual for troubleshooting. . Manual describing the theory of operations. . Parts list showing manufacturers part number and location .
b .
Controller cabinet . .
Cabinet wiring diagram. . Field wiring diagram .
The following types of controllers shall be furnished as specified Type DW to DW A to phase fullvehicularactuated or semivehicularactuated control device that in response to vehicular actuation from all streets transfers the rightofway from one phase to another as the movement of traffic on all streets demands and with a separately adjustable timing for the pedestrian portion of combined pedestrian vehicular phase for all phases and with the addition of adjustable timing capable of increasing and decreasing the various time intervals due to variation in volume of moving and waiting traffic Use Type DW Controller .
The minimum timing requirements for adjusting of time intervals are shown in Table .
Type DW to DW A to phase control device as specified for Type DW to DW with four additional phases added Use Type DW Controller .
The minimum timing requirements for adjusting of time intervals are shown in Table .
All vehicular actuated controllers shall be installed in a weatherproof outdoor cabinet of adequate size to house the controller load switching assemblies and any other auxiliary equipment required by the plans and specifications .
The nominal minimum size cabinets for controllers shall be as follows Type CA Cast Alum .
Base Mounted millimeters x millimeters x millimeters Approx .
Type CB Sheet Alum .
Based Mounted millimeters x millimeters x millimeters Approx .
Type CC Sheet Alum .
Base Mounted millimeters x millimeters x millimeters Approx .
Type CD Sheet Alum .
Base Mounted millimeters x millimeters x millimeters Approx .
TABLE NOMINAL MINIMUM TIMING REQUIREMENTS FOR CONTROLLERS The following functionswith the associated minimum timing ranges and maximum increments shall be provided as a minimum when required by the application listed under Controller Type number in Table .
Function Range seconds Increment seconds Minimum Green Initial Passage Time Vehicle .
Maximum Maximum Yellow Clearance .
Red Clearance .
Walk W Ped .
Clearance FDW Added Initial per act. . Time to Reduce Time Before Reduction Minimum Gap . .
Note Zero shall be satisfied by any time between zero and milliseconds .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
TABLE Controller Type DW DW Frame Type Conflict Monitor Type Vehicle Load Switches Ped .
Load Switches Overlap Load Switches Flash Transfer Relays Cir .
Flasher A Power Cir .
Breaker A A Cabinet MHD Type CB CC Note Type DW to DW Controllers may require external logic to produce an exclusive pedestrian phase .
Note CB cabinets are to be wired for phase frames .
CC cabinets are to be wired for phase frames .
C. PreTimed Controllers. . A pretimed electromechanical controller assembly shall consist of a controller flasher and other equipment as specified in contract documents that are wired in a controller cabinet to make a complete and operational traffic controller assembly. . A pretimed solidstate controller assembly shall consist of a controller load switches a flasher a conflictvoltage monitor and other equipment as specified in contract documents that are wired into a controller cabinet to make a complete and operational traffic controller assembly .
Pretimed solidstate controller assemblies shall meet all applicable requirements of the elements listed under B. Actuated Controllers .
The following types of controllers shall be furnished as specified Type A or B a multidial device which shall be of the type capable of being operated as an isolated unit as a unit in a nonprogressive system or when specified a unit in an interconnected progressive system equipped to provide an omittable pushbutton actuated exclusive pedestrian phase without any physical changes to the controller required .
Unless otherwise specified each controller shall be furnished with dial units with offsets per dial for Type A and equipped with master supervisory contacts to provide supervision for an interconnected system for Type B .
Type A B or C Multicycle length multicycle split and multicycle offset control device arranged to operate with a master controller and capable of operating in any split cycle and offset selected from a central source or at the controller itself for Type A equipped with master supervisory contacts capable of operating as a masterlocal for Type B and equipped with master supervisory contacts capable of operating as a master only for Type C. Type A single dial control device which shall be of the type capable of being used as an isolated unit when specified or as a unit in an interconnected progressive system where exclusive pedestrian control is required .
This controller shall be of the alternate sequence type providing for a constant total cycle length .
Time required for the exclusive pushbutton actuated pedestrian phase shall be deducted from the latter part of the main street green interval .
Type A single dial control device which shall be of the type capable of being used as an isolated unit where exclusive pedestrian control is required .
This controller shall be of the alternate sequence type with the time required for exclusive pushbutton actuated pedestrian phase added to the total time cycle .
This controller shall not be used in an interconnected system .
Type A or B A single dial control device which shall be of the type capable of being used as an isolated unit or when specified as a unit in an interconnected progressive system at midblock locations for Type A or at an intersection for Type B where exclusive pedestrian control is required .
Type A master controller supervising a series of controllers of various types into a traffic adjusted interconnected coordinated system .
When this type of controller is required special provisions will be prepared for the particular project .
Unless otherwise specified all the above controller types shall be installed in weatherproof metal cabinets of Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
the type regularly supplied by the manufacturer pretimed electromechanical controllers shall be supplied with a complete set of timing gears seconds for all timing dials contained therein .
Cabinets shall be fitted with the necessary adapters to permit post top mounting on a standard signal post or in a ground mounted cabinet .
D. Railroad Preemptors .
In response to remote instructions the preemptor shall stop controller timing and start preemption timing the preemptor shall simultaneously select and time the proper signal indications for the protection interval as shown on the plans .
Preemption equipment may be housed in a separate cabinet .
E. Time Switch Type TS .
A Type TS time switch is a four circuit solidstate device that controls multiple daily operations on a weekly schedule and may be instructed to suspend operations when programmed .
The elements of the Type Time Switch are as follows .
Precision Time Reference .
The time reference shall be accomplished by digital methods using Hertz power line frequency as a time base when power is present and a crystal controlled oscillator backup source when power has failed or the time reference may be the digital encoded time signal that is broadcast by the National Bureau of Standards .
In the event of power failure all programs and relationships shall be held in memory without modification or the use of batteries for at least fortyeight hours .
The backup source shall have an accuracy of .
or greater. . Time Clock .
The time clock shall be provided with four independent circuits which are controlled by preprogrammed time of day events .
The time of day shall be accurately set to the nearest second .
Time of day day of week date year and the operation of the four relay outputs shall be easily set from the integral keyboard .
All data required to properly set and program the clock and review the stored program shall be clearly displayed .
The time clock shall be capable of remembering a minimum of twenty program steps .
A program step is defined as the time of day and the day or days of the week for which the relay outputs shall be turned on or off .
The time clock shall be capable of initiating a minimum of ten basic program plans .
The time clock shall automatically compensate for daylight saving time DST and eastern standard time EST changes. . Outputs .
The time switch shall have four single pole double throw relay outputs with a contact rating of at least A at VAC resistive load .
Skip plan relay control shall be limited to one output relay .
Interface to the power line and the controlled device shall be by suitable connectors and cabled wire harness at least .
meters long .
Each conductor shall be a minimum of AWG with volt insulation suitable for at least C. .
Physical .
The time switch shall be provided with a case .
The case shall be provided to protect the circuits from dust and shall be fastened securely to the unit and be easily removable for servicing .
At least two mounting holes shall be provided for mounting to a suitable backplate .
Holes shall provide clearance for at least a No .
screw .
In addition to the above mounting required a mounting adaptor plate shall be provided to simplify mounting in crowded cabinets. . Power Requirements .
The time switch shall perform under the following conditions a. Voltage to VAC nominal voltage VAC .
b .
Frequency Range Hertz plus or minus .
Hertz . .
Documentation .
A complete set of operating and maintenance instructions shall be provided with each unit .
F. Special Function Units. . Master Control Units .
These units solidstate or electromechanical shall be designed to perform such functions as coordination detector switching preemptor double clearance timing and other functions as may be required by complex traffic control signal systems .
When these types of units are required plans and special provisions will be prepared for the particular projects. . Time Base Coordination Units TBCU .
The TBCU shall coordinate control equipment to achieve the coordinated operation of an intersection with other intersections without the use of wire or cable between intersections .
The elements of the TBCU are as follows a .
Precision Time Reference .
The time reference shall be accomplished by digital methods using Hertz power line frequency as a Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
timebase when power is present and a crystal controlled oscillator backup source when power has failed or the digital encoded time signal that is broadcast by the National Bureau of Standards .
In the event of power failure time of year all programs and synchronization relationships shall be held in memory without modification for at least hours .
The backup source shall have an accuracy of .
or greater .
b .
Time Clock .
The time clock shall operate on a fiftytwo week cycle that is easily programmed to the nearest second of the week day hour and minute of the year .
The fiftytwo week cycle shall begin with week zero and return to week zero after week fiftyone .
Days of the week shall cycle Sunday day zero through Saturday day six .
Hours of the day shall be on a twentyfour hour basis with double zero being midnight .
The clock shall make automatic correction for Daylight Savings Time and return to Standard Time at user programmed times programmed at the start of week zero of the one year cycle .
c. Programmable Microprocessor .
The TBCU shall provide for programming of all timing and operation parameters as follows Cycle and Offset .
The TBCU shall be capable of providing four cycle lengths adjustable from to seconds in one second increments .
At least three smoothing routines shall be provided and be user programmable to smooth coordination plan cycle and offset change .
FreeFlash .
Time selection of the free function shall cause the intersection controller to operate in the free mode .
Time selection of flash function shall cause the intersection controller to operate in the flash mode subject to the requirements of Section B of MUTCD . .
Coordination Control .
The TBCU shall be capable of providing coordination control methods of cycle select offset select yieldhold with forceoff phase omit phase skip permissive period and similar control functions . .
Program .
At least eight programmable outputs shall be provided capable of being programmed to change its state on or off at any second of the year in one second increments or change its state on or off on a per cycle basis with the TBCU capable of setting the duration of the cycle and the starting and ending times of the outputs .
In addition two of the eight outputs shall be capable of being programmed for up to eight starting and ending times on a per cycle basis for NEMA Forceoff Ring Phases and Forceoff Ring Phases andor Phase Omits .
Sufficient user programmable memory shall be provided to allow implementation of the following program structure a. event times a listing of times at which controlled events start or stop during a hour period .
b. day programs a listing of which outputs switch at which event time during a hour period .
c. day program events a listing of coordinating plan conditions or the time switching of an output .
d. week programs a week program specifies which day program shall be used on each day of the week .
e. year program specifies which week program shall be used on each week of the year .
f. exception days an exception day causes a day program different from that in the year program to be used on a specific day .
g. cycle lengths cycle lengths are the times in seconds of the coordinated background cycles .
h. offset values a system reference for the start of an individual intersections coordinated phase green .
i. smoothing methods select interrupter short way or maximum dwell smoothing of offset and cycle changes .
j. FreeFlash the controller may be timeswitched to free of coordination control or to flash mode by timeswitching .
k. Daylight SavingsStandard Time changes a change ahead hour and a change back hour that can be programmed .
l. synchronization reference times per cycle to start time of an external timing reference pulse .
m. programmable entries to define on and off times in percent of each cycle for outputs that Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
pulse or more times each cycle . .
Programming Methods .
To prevent accidental unauthorized changing of stored coordination plans it shall be required to enter a predetermined number code before memory can be entered erased or altered .
However it shall be possible to read all data stored in memory without entering the memory number access code .
This memory shall be easily programmed by using any of the following methods a .
Keyboard Entry The keyboard entry shall give positive feedback to the programmer that a key was pressed and recognized .
b .
Program Transfer Any TBCU shall be capable of programming any other unit of the same make and model by plugging a simple transfer cable between the programmed unit and the unit to be programmed .
If an error occurs during program transfer this error shall be indicated and the unit shall erase itself . .
Display .
The TBCU shall be capable of displaying any of its stored information operation status battery fail and power onoff. . InputsOutputs .
Eight NEMA PhaseOn signal information shall be input to the TBCU to be used as enables for the two eight pulsescycle outputs to control forceoff andor phase omit outputs .
The TBCU shall operate with any type of traffic signal controller using NEMA TS compatible input and output levels and conventions .
Each output shall be totally isolated from each other and from the internal logic circuitry .
The TBCU shall contain monitoring circuitry to turn all output off whenever failures such as a processor malfunction power supply out of regulation invalid data in user memory battery overly discharged and program conflicts have occurred .
Electrical connections to and from the TBCU shall be made by inserting a keyed mating connector .
The TBCU shall be completely replaceable in the controller cabinet without the use of tools or the necessity of disconnecting and reconnecting individual wires leading therefrom. . Operating Standards .
The TBCU shall perform under the following conditions a. Voltage to Volts AC .
The nominal voltage shall be Volts AC .
b .
Frequency Range Hertz plus or minus .
Hertz .
c. Power Interruptions See NEMA TS d. Temperature and Humidity See NEMA TS e. Power Service Transients See NEMA TS .. and f. Vibration See NEMA TS g. Shock See NEMA TS .
Housing .
Housing and hardware shall be manufactured from corrosion resistant materials .
Circuit boards and assemblies shall be readily accessible for servicing and materials shall conform to the requirements of NEMA TS All controls shall be on the front panel and including a fuse for line voltage input power replaceable without disassembling the TBCU. . Harness .
All connections to external points shall be made through front panel connections and each TBCU shall have included a harness with mating connectors at least meters in length . .
Detectors .
A .
Magnetic Detector Amplifiers and Sensors .
Magnetic detector amplifiers shall be entirely solidstate with the exception of the output relay designed to operate in extremes of temperature and humidity .
Front panel adjustments shall be provided to control sensitivity .
The amplifier in combination with the sensors listed shall be capable of providing the following Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II. . Multilane Sensor .
Nondirectional noncompensated with a zone of influence .
meters each side of sensor. . SingleLane Sensor .
Nondirectional noncompensated with a zone of influence millimeters each side of sensor .
The magnetic detector amplifier and sensors shall conform to all applicable requirements of Section III of A Standard for Vehicle Detectors a revised standard of The Institute of Transportation Engineers .
B. Magnetometer Detector Amplifier and Sensors .
Magnetometer detector amplifiers shall be entirely solidstate with the exception of the output relay designed to operate in extremes of temperature and humidity .
Front panel adjustments shall be provided to control select mode of operation calibrating the units and adjustment for hold time .
The amplifier in combination with the sensors listed shall be capable of operating satisfactorily with the following sensors. . One to six sensors cylindrical in shape no larger than millimeters in diameter and millimeters in length .
The magnetometer detector amplifier and sensors shall conform to all applicable requirements of Section IV of A Standard for Vehicle Detectors a revised standard of The Institute of Transportation Engineers .
C. Inductive Loop Detector Amplifier and Sensors .
Inductive loop detector amplifiers shall be entirely solidstate with the exception of the output relay designed to operate satisfactorily with sensors embedded in a roadway .
Inductive loop amplifiers shall conform to all applicable requirements of the National Electrical Manufacturers Association NEMA Standards Publication TS latest revision for the following types .
Type Shelfmounted channel detector unit as specified with delay and extension timing relay output and powered from a volt AC source .
Units shall conform with the applicable requirements of NEMA TS Sections and . .
Type Shelfmounted channel detector unit as specified with delay and extension timing relay output and powered from a volt AC source .
Units shall conform with the applicable requirements of NEMA TS Sections and and the following Inductance Range Any configuration of wireloop sensors and shielded leadin including seriesparallel combinations having a total inductance up to microhenries with a maximum shielded leadin length of meters .
Tuning Adjustments No tuning adjustments units shall automatically selftune within ten seconds upon the application of power or following power interruption .
Sensitivity Each channel of the unit shall be capable of detecting any valid vehicle over any test loop configuration described in NEMA TS Sections and .
A minimum of eight sensitivity adjustments shall be provided for each channel .
Each channel MS connector output of the Type and Type detector units shall mate with cable connector MS AS to be supplied with each unit cable for channel units cables for channel units .
Each connector cable supplied for each channel of each unit shall be ten wire color coded and labeled A through J pin terminations as follows A. AC Common F. Output N.O .
B. Relay Common G. Output N.C. C. AC Line H. Chassis Ground D. Loop Input I. DelayExtension Logic Ground E. Loop Input J. DelayExtension Logic Input Each cable shall be a minimum of .
meters in length .
D. UltraSonic Vehicle Detectors .
Ultrasonic transceivers shall be entirely solidstate with the exception of the output relay designed to operate in extremes of temperature and humidity .
Front panel adjustments shall be provided to control range and gain .
The transceiver in combination with a transducer shall be capable of providing the following .
MultiLane detection Overhead mount .
SingleLane detection Overhead mount .
MultiLane detection Sidefire mount .
SingleLane detection Sidefire mount UltraSonic vehicle detectors shall conform to all applicable requirements of Section VI of A Standard for Vehicle Detectors a revised standard of The Institute of Transportation Engineers .
E. Pedestrian Push Buttons .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
Pedestrian push buttons shall be of the tamperproof type .
They shall consist of direct push type buttons and momentary contact switch in a cast metal housing .
The assembly shall be waterproof and so constructed that it will be impossible to receive any electrical shock under any condition .
The housing shall be shaped to fit the curvature of the pole to which it is attached to provide a rigid installation .
Saddles shall be provided to make a neat fit when required .
Immediately above each pedestrian push button a millimeter x millimeter nominal metal sign shall be installed on the crosswalk side of the post or pole. . Mast Arms Strain Poles and Span Wire Assemblies .
A .
General. . Mast Arms shall consist of a shaft complete with bracket arm shaft cap cable support J hook with or without transformer base as specified signal head hanging device and safety chain anchor lug .
Unless otherwise specified mast arms shall be made of aluminum or steel .
The design includes two types of mast arms Type I Arms with one signal at the end .
Type II Arms with signals mounted at intermediate points and at the end .
The arms shall upsweep in design without tierods or overbracing .
Arms shall be selfsupporting single member arm or supported by an underbrace truss .
Arm upsweeps shall be limited to between and meters of rise from the lowest point of attachment to the pole to the tangent terminal point of attachment of the signal head hanging device .
Unless otherwise specified single member arms shall not be made of aluminum .
All mast arms shall provide for wiring entrances directly into the pole of shaft from inside the mast arm there shall be no exposed wiring .
Nominal wall thickness of aluminum structural members shall be not less than millimeters and for aluminum structural pole or shaft members not less than .
millimeters .
Steel structural members shall not be less than millimeters .
All arms shall be provided with a lug for anchoring signal head safety chain. . Strain Pole and Span Wire Assemblies shall consist of galvanized steel strain poles span wires compression fittings tether wires when specified clamps pole caps wire entrances disconnect hangers signal head hanging devices signal cable hanging devices sign hanging devices when specified and all necessary miscellaneous materials to form a complete span wire assembly .
The design includes two types of span wire assemblies .
Type I Span Wire Assembly with free swinging signals .
Type II Span Wire Assemblies with Tether Wire .
Span Wire Assemblies shall conform to the requirements as shown on the Standard Drawings .
B .
Support for Mast Arm Mounted and Span Wire Mounted Signal Heads .
Mast Arm Type I The structure shall be designed to support freeswinging signal heads of .
square meters projected area having a mass of kilograms at the extreme end of the . . . . or meter arms as shown on the plans .
For signal heads over .
square meters projected area see Type II below .
Mast Arm Type II When freeswinging signal heads over .
square meter projected area or fixed signal heads at the extreme end of the arm or at intermediate points on the arm are specified requirements will be as shown on the plans andor Special Provisions .
Acceptance of the Type II Mast Arm will be contingent upon the review and approval of shop drawings submitted by the Contractor .
Span Wire Assemblies Type I and Type II Requirements will be shown on the plan andor Special Provisions .
Acceptance of Type I or Type II Span Wire Assemblies will be contingent upon the review and approval of shop drawings submitted by the Contractor .
All structures shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO Standard Specifications for Structural Supports for Highway Signs Luminaries and Traffic Signals Current Edition for a wind speed of kilometers per hour .
All structures shall be constructed in accordance with the applicable requirements of the Departments Standard Drawings .
C. Anchor Bolts .
Anchorage shall consist of four or more high strength steel bolts positioned and designed to withstand the forces corresponding to the moment which will cause failure to the shaft .
Bolts shall be of the proper size length and design to develop proper bond in transferring loads to the cement Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
concrete foundation .
Anchor bolts shall be furnished with a template .
Each anchor bolt shall have two hex nuts two flat washers and one lockwasher to facilitate leveling of the shaft .
Anchor bolts shall be galvanized .
D. Finish .
The bracket arms shall be furnished with a finish compatible to that of the shaft to insure uniformity of appearance .
The exterior of the shaft and bracket arm shall be free of protuberances dents cracks discoloration and other imperfections marring their appearance .
For shipping purposes the shaft and bracket arm shall be protected to preserve the finish. . Post and Bases .
Standard Signal Post shall consist of a millimeter shaft complete with an octagonal base .
meters or .
meters long including base .
Pedestal Signal Post shall consist of a millimeter shaft complete with a pedestal base .
meters or .
meters long including base .
All posts and their bases shall be of the same material either steel or aluminum .
Aluminum sign posts shall utilize a tapered shaft . .
Vehicle Signal Heads .
Signal heads shall be weathertight assemblies conforming to the requirements of Adjustable Face Vehicle Traffic Control Signal Head Standard ITE Technical Report ANSI D .. Optically Programmed Adjustable Face Traffic Control Signal Heads that have been type tested and approved by the Department Subsection .
will be considered as meeting the requirements of this specification. . Pedestrian Signal Heads .
Pedestrian signal heads shall be of the incandescent type or the fiberoptic type .
A. Incandescent Type .
The incandescent pedestrian signal heads shall be of the two section type conforming to the ITE Standard for Adjustable Face Pedestrian Signal Heads ITE Technical Report Number .
All new pedestrian signal indications shall be rectangular in shape and shall consist of symbolized messages .
These symbolized messages consist of a walking person illuminated in Lunar White to symbolize WALK and an upraised hand illuminated in Portland Orange to symbolize DONT WALK .
The symbols are the international symbols as set forth in the Standard Highway Signs booklet published by the United States Department of Transportation latest edition .
Each indication shall be independently illuminated and emit a single color .
The DONT WALK signal section shall be mounted directly above the WALK signal section .
The Minimum height of each symbol shall be millimeters .
When not illuminated the WALK and DONT WALK symbols shall not be readily visible by pedestrians at the far end of the crosswalk they control .
B. Fiberoptic Type. . General .
The unit shall consist of a matrix of fiberoptic bundles forming two displayed messages within a single section on a rectangular background facing the same direction .
A single section head displaying two messages via international symbols HandPerson Walking in Portland Orange and Lunar White respectively shall be used .
The symbol size shall be millimeters wide x millimeters high .
The messages shall be clearly legible and shall attract the attention of pedestrians under all ambient lighting conditions varying from total darkness to bright sunlight at all distances from meters to the width of the area to be crossed .
A visor or hood shall not be required for legibility .
The message shall be visible at full intensity anywhere within a cone centered about the optical axis and perpendicular to the surface of the matrix display .
When not energized the signal shall be blanked out unreadable with no phantom image regardless of solar intensity or direction .
The messages shall be bright in color against a flat black background .
The displays shall be made from a single row of fiberoptic bundles with a nominal millimeter spacing between centers .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
The light source shall be designed and constructed so that in case of an electrical or mechanical failure the WALK symbol and the DONT WALK symbol will remain dark .
Each message shall be displayed separately and never concurrently. . Materials .
One watt .
volt Type ENL lamp with a rated life expectancy of hours shall be used as the light source for each display .
The lamp shall be a multi mirror reflector quartz halogen bulb operating at an approximate color temperature of K. . Optical System .
The signal shall consist of a. Weatherproof housing door gasket and visor b. Fiberoptic module within individual output bundles c. Color filters for desired message colors d. Light sources e. Transformers f. Protective back cover for the module g. Electrical system including wiring .
Optical Requirements .
The optics shall be glassonglass fiber with an core to cladding ratio .
It shall have an average numerical aperture of .
with a maximum transmission attenuation of DB per kilometer .
Each fiber shall have a . . millimeter diameter with an included acceptance angle of degrees .
Output bundles located at the face of the sign shall have a minimum diameter of .
millimeters for the international symbols .
The input fiber bundle located at each light source shall have a maximum diameter of millimeters .
The output bundles shall be protected by a vandal resistant UV stable prismatic polycarbonate lens .
millimeters thick .
Individual fiberoptic bundles shall not be jacketed or encased .
Color filters shall be optical quality glass .
The filters shall be color fast and in accordance with the I.T.E .
Signal Color Specification for Chromaticity .
The prismatic polycarbonate lens shall be gasketed and mounted at a prefocused distance in the door away from the fiberoptic panel .
All optical fiber utilized in the production of the fiberoptic unit shall be tested for a .
Core to clad fusion b .
Size c. Roundness of fiber d. Optical transmission e. Brittleness Results of these tests shall be available upon request. . Construction .
The front panel shall be flat black aluminum alloy minimum millimeters thick and shall have a maintenance free black anodized acid test finish .
All fiberoptics transformer and lamps shall be mounted on the door of the unit .
All screws washers nuts and bolts shall be stainless steel .
All components shall be readily accessible when the door is opened .
The only tool required for maintenance or replacement of components shall be a standard screwdriver .
No moving parts are permitted in the optical system. . Electrical .
Electrical connection shall be provided by a barrier type terminal strip for connecting field wires .
Transformers shall be used to reduce the incoming volts AC to .
volts AC .
Transformers shall have Class A insulation impregnated with a double coating of epoxy resin so as to preclude intrusion of moisture and shall be rated at .
voltamps .
A separate transformer and bulb shall be used for each color to allow connection with existing controller wiring and conflict monitors. . Louvered Hood and Optically Programmed Adapters. . Where specified louvered hoods shall be either of the following stipulated types Type A millimeters or millimeters vane with degree cutoff .
Type B millimeters or millimeters vane with degree cutoff .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
Type C millimeters or millimeters Multivane with adjustable to degree cutoff. . Optically programmed signal adapters shall be comprised of an optical extension adaptable to standard millimeter signal sections for controlling the visibility of the indication .
The projected indication may be selectively visible or veiled anywhere within degrees of the optical axis. . Traffic Signal Lamps .
Lamps shall be of the type designed to withstand excessive vibration and intended for use in traffic signal heads .
All traffic signal lamps for use in millimeter signal heads shall have a light center length of .
millimeters .
All traffic signal lamps for millimeter signal heads shall have a light center length of .
millimeters .
All lamps shall have a voltage rating of volts and a rated life of hours minimum .
Other requirements shall be as follows .
For Millimeter Signal Heads a. watt series Approximate Initial Lumens. . For Millimeter Signal Heads a. watt series Approximate Initial Lumens. . Optically Programmed Heads a. watt PAR for pedestrian heads b. watt PAR for signal heads .
Flashing Warning Beacons a. watt series millimeter heads b. watt series millimeter heads CONSTRUCTION METHODS .
General .
Details of construction shall conform to all applicable requirements of the Standard Specifications and drawings plans details Special Provisions manufacturers instructions and directions of the Engineer. . Painting .
All painting required shall be done in conformance with applicable portions of Subsection .. Aluminum posts pedestals poles standards or mast arms shall not be painted .
All galvanized surfaces shall not be painted unless abraded or damaged at any time after the applications of the zinc coating .
The surfaces shall then be repaired by thoroughly wire brushing the damaged areas and removing all loose and cracked coatings after which the cleaned areas shall be painted with two coats of paint conforming to the requirements of Subsection M All traffic signal highway lighting and related electrical equipment except new traffic signal controller cabinets that comes from the manufacturer with one or more coats of paint excluding primer will be accepted as one coat if scars or abraded places are properly cleaned and spot coated .
Two additional coats of paint shall then be applied .
If such equipment is painted at the factory with just a primer coat the Contractor shall apply three coats of paint .
Paint shall be applied to all interior surfaces before equipment and appurtenances are installed and to all exposed parts of the equipment and appurtenances after they have been completely installed using the following colors Controller Cabinets ExteriorAluminum Controller Cabinets InteriorAluminum or White Signal Posts Exterior SteelYellow Signal Posts Interior SteelAluminum or Yellow Mast Arm and Mast Arm Pole ExteriorAluminum Mast Arm and Mast Arm Pole InteriorAluminum Housings Back Yellow Housings FrontBlack Visors OutsideYellow or Black Visors Inside Dull Black Backboards Dull Black Louvers Dull Black Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
Meter Sockets Aluminum Painting may be omitted if equipment and materials are received from the manufacturer with equivalent paint specified above .
All scars and abrasions shall be spot coated with two coats of the specified paint .
Steel poles inner and outer surfaces shall be painted in accordance with the applicable provisions of the Specifications .
All surfaces of aluminum bases in contact with concrete shall be coated in the field with a protective coating recommended by the manufacturer of the base . .
Signals .
A .
General .
Signal posts bases mast arms mast arm shafts and strain poles shall be handled in loading unloading and erecting in such a manner that they will not be damaged .
Any parts that are damaged due to the Contractors operations shall be repaired or replaced at the Contractors expense .
Unless otherwise directed by the Engineer posts bases mast arms and strain poles shall not be erected on concrete foundations until the concrete has set for at least three days .
Mast arms and strain poles shall be raked sufficiently to be plumb after all loads have been place poles shall be raked by adjusting double nuts .
Shims or similar devices for plumbing or raking will not be permitted .
The bottom of the housing assembly of a signal head not mounted over a roadway shall not be less than .
meters nor more than .
meters above the sidewalk or if none above the pavement grade at the center of the roadway .
The bottom of the housing assembly of a signal head suspended over a roadway shall not be less than .
meters nor more than .
meters above the pavement grade at the center of the roadway .
Each signal face shall consist of one or more sections rigidly and securely fastened together capable of being positioned to face one direction of traffic .
Each section shall be a selfcontained assembly consisting of a housing with door visor and optical unit lens and reflector with traffic signal lamp .
B .
Signal Head Section .
Each section shall be constructed to the requirements of ANSI specified in Subsection .
including the following .
Optical units for millimeter sections shall be equipped with traffic signal lamps as specified in Subsection .. . Optical units for millimeter sections shall be equipped with traffic signal lamps as specified in Subsection .. . Optical units for millimeter optically programmed sections shall be equipped with traffic signal lamps as specified in Subsection .
equipped with dimming device to reduce lumen output of each signal lamp for night time operations .
Signal faces containing sections with both millimeter and millimeter lenses may be required .
All signal heads including multiple assemblies shall be completely shop assembled and delivered ready for erection .
Multiple units shall be assembled using millimeter pipe for the supporting framework and include millimeter center supporting pipe for post top mountings .
Span wire and mast arm units shall have approved tie braces for the lower framework without a center support .
Welding shall not be used in frame assembly .
Each socket shall be wired with two AWG stranded leads not less than meters long conforming to the requirements of Subsection .
for Type traffic signal head wire Type TFF or TEW .
The color of the leads from the socket behind the Red lens red and white wire Yellow lens yellow and white wire Green lens green and white wire Green arrow blue and white wire At the option of the manufacturer approved connecting blocks may be installed inside the housing for these connecting wires provided a meter colored lead for each socket and white common lead is furnished as an integral part of each housing .
C. Hangers and Adapters .
Hangers and adapters shall be of bronze or malleable iron or other approved material strongly constructed and of hollow design to permit the suspension of signal heads from mast arms or span wires or mounted on brackets posts or Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
pedestals .
Signal heads intended for post or pedestal mounting shall have suitable slipfitters for post top mounting and be secured to posts by means of set screws .
Mast arm mounted signal heads shall have an approved universal joint and safety chain .
Bracket mounted signal heads shall have suitable brackets to attach them to timber or metal poles to permit either internal or external wiring .
Brackets shall be of proper size to be properly attached to pole as shown on the Standard Drawings .
Spanwire mounted signal heads shall have a spanwire hanger similar in design to that shown on the Standard Drawings .
Hanger shall be specifically designed for supporting a hanging object from steel stranded messenger cable and have U bolts to prevent lateral movement only .
Each hanger shall be complete with a wire entrance device .
Where specified integral terminal compartments shall be provided for any of the above types of mounting .
Terminal compartments shall be fabricated of nonfrangible metal and be of adequate size to accommodate a terminal block containing not less than twelve poles each with two pressure type connectors .
Each connector shall be capable of holding four AWG conductors .
D. Backplates .
Where stipulated backplates shall be furnished and installed .
Backplates shall be constructed of anodized half hard aluminum sheet .
millimeter nominal thickness or polycarbonates and of the dimensions to fit the signal head housing used .
E. Pole Clamps .
When required for mounting signal heads or equipment pole clamps shall conform to the general design shown on the Standard Drawings . .
Controllers .
All controller cabinets control equipment and accessories shall be factory wired ready for operation .
Field work will be limited to placing cabinets and equipment and the connecting of field wiring to terminal strips .
Cabinets shall be mounted on the foundation and a clear silicone sealer shall be used at the base of the cabinet to form a watertight seal with the foundation .
In addition the Contractor shall provide to the Engineer two copies of the Operating and Maintenance Instruction Manuals complete with wiring diagrams of the internal external and field connections for each type of controller furnished on the project and listed in Section .
C. PreTimed Controllers and two copies of the Technical Manuals and Box Prints for each type of controller furnished on the project and listed in Section .
B. Actuated Controllers the required Technical Manuals are listed in Paragraph of the above Section .
B. Actuated Controllers . .
Detectors .
The Contractor shall install the detectors at the locations as shown on the signal layout plan in accordance with the applicable requirements of the Departments Standard Drawings .
All detector leadin cable shall be continuous without splices from the pull box nearest the detector to the controller cabinet terminals provided without passing through any signal bases .
Splices when necessary in the pull box nearest the detector shall be soldered and made completely watertight using an approved rigid body reenterable closure .
Detector leads shall not be run in the same cable sheath jacket with wires carrying signal currents .
Magnetic Detector MultiLane shall be installed inside a millimeter Type NM conduit millimeters below the surface of the road in a cement concrete envelope not less than millimeters thick at any point as shown on the Standard Drawings .
Magnetic Detector Single Lane Detectors shall be installed in accordance with manufacturers recommendations .
UltraSonic Detectors shall be installed overhead on mast arms or on posts sidefired in close conformity with the required lines and grades .
WireLoop and MicroLoop Detectors shall be installed in the slots sawcut in the pavement and oriented to the traffic lane .
The size and type of conductor and method of installation shall conform to the Departments Standard Drawings .
The sawslots shall be filled with an approved roadway loop embedding sealer to protect the wire .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II . .
Disposal of Existing Equipment .
When removal of existing traffic signal equipment and appurtenances is called for the order of work shall be as directed by the Engineer .
Removal of existing traffic signal equipment and their accessories shall be done in a manner that will not damage reusable material .
All signal posts and bases shall be separated from one another without damage to either unit millimeter shaft unscrewed from base .
When stipulated existing material shall be utilized in the construction of the new installation .
Material to be installed shall be thoroughly cleaned before reinstallation .
All reinstalled material after cleaning and spot coating shall receive two brush coats of paint to all parts as specified for new installations .
Paint shall be applied after material is in place .
The Contractor shall furnish and install all necessary materials and equipment including new foundations etc .
required to complete the reinstallation .
All traffic signals flashing beacons and pedestrian signals to be reinstalled shall be relamped with new lamps of the size and type required for new installations .
Existing material removed and not utilized in the new installation shall be salvaged and transported by the Contractor to the Department Storeroom unless directed otherwise .
Underground conduit conductors foundations and detector frames not reused shall be removed from the project except if not interfering with other construction they may with written approval of the Engineer be abandoned in place. . Tests Required Before Acceptance .
The Contractor shall record and make a written report of the following tests to be made on all traffic control signal installations in the presence of the Engineer .
Resistance Test required by Section .. . An insulation resistance Volt megger test shall be made for each inductive loop sensor and leadin at the controller cabinet where the combination is to be terminated .
The following test procedure shall be performed in the presence of the Engineer before and after the loop sensor is sealed in the pavement as detailed below .
The cost of equipment labor and materials to perform such testing and similar retesting following repairs replacement or adjustment of any detector assembly within the project area shall be included in the price bid for the Traffic Control Signal installation for that location or under Item .
if applicable .
After installation of wire loop sensors in the roadway and installation of shielded leadin connecting the loop sensors to the terminals in the controller cabinet each loop sensor and leadin combination shall be tested at the controller cabinet before termination for proper installation .
The resistance from lead to lead of the same loop sensor shall not exceed ohms per meters as measured by a high quality meter suitable for measurements of low resistance .
A megohmmeter test at Volts DC shall be made between the two leads of a loopleadin combination temporarily spliced together but otherwise disconnected from all terminals and the shield drain wire and then the earth ground connection .
These resistances shall be recorded and shall be equal to or greater than one hundred megohms .
The lowest acceptable value shall be megohms under certain worst case conditions as determined by the Engineer .
A megohmmeter test at Volts DC shall be made between leadin shield and earth ground connection .
This resistance should be at least one hundred megohms .
The lowest acceptable value shall be greater than fifty megohms under worst case conditions as determined by the Engineer .
If any loop sensor leadin combination fails to pass any one of the above four tests it shall be repaired and then re tested on two occasions at least two weeks apart and then shall pass on each retest occasion .
If the loop sensor leadin combination does not pass all these retests a new loop sensor andor leadin shall be installed and then shall pass all tests at no additional cost .
After the above tests have been satisfactorily completed all loop sensorshielded leadin inductances shall be measured and a written report of the results shall be filed with the Engineer and a copy stored with the Box Prints at the intersection along with a copy of the ground electrode resistance tests required by Section .B and the above .
Operation Tests After satisfactory completion of the required tests the systems shall be placed in operation .
Final acceptance will not be made until the systems has operated satisfactorily as designed and the timing has been fine tuned for a period of not less than days from a date designated by the Engineer .
This test period shall be included within the specified contract time .
Operation of the systems shall not in any Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
way be construed as an acceptance of the systems or any part of it or as a waiver of any of the provisions of the contract .
The Contractor shall be responsible for the systems during this period of operation and heshe shall make any adjustments or repairs that may be required and remedy defects or damages which may occur at hisher own expense. . As Built Drawings . .
Upon completion of the work the Contractor shall mark and submit five complete copies of as built or corrected copies of the contract plans copies for marking furnished by the Department showing in detail all construction changes especially locations and depths of conduit and locations of posts standards handholes manholes and pull boxes .
All as built drawings shall be dated. . Manufacturers instructions for the maintenance servicing and operation of all equipment wiring diagrams of all equipment except traffic signal controllers specified in Section .B Paragraph and a parts list sufficient for the ordering of any parts and any other data thereof as required by the Engineer .
Copies to be distributed as follows .
District Traffic Maintenance complete set .
Electrical Systems Boston set as described in above .
Control Cabinet one set as described in above with Technical Manuals and Box Prints required by Section .B Paragraph .
COMPENSATION .
Method of Measurement .
Traffic Control Signals Traffic Control Signals removed and reset or stacked or transported Traffic Signal Controllers and accessories shall each be measured for payment as a unit .
Signal post signal post bases mast arms with the specified bracket arm lengths with or without transformer bases and span wire assemblies shall be paid for at the contract unit price each complete in place .
Signal heads mounting assembly louvers backplates and pole clamps will be paid for at the contract unit price each and when specified as complete assemblies which price shall be full compensation for work necessary or incidental to the construction of signal heads modifying existing heads or both including conduit wiring and salvaging existing materials .
All additional materials and labor required to complete all of the above items as specified shall be considered as incidental to the construction and be included in the contract unit price each . .
Basis of Payment .
The accepted quantities of traffic signal controllers and accessories signal posts signal post bases transformer bases mast arms with specified bracket arm lengths span wire assemblies and traffic signal vehicle detectors shall be each measured for payment as a unit which price shall include full compensation for anchor bolts .
When specified in the Contract Traffic Control Signals and Traffic Signals removed and reset stacked or transported shall be paid for as a contract lump sum price which price shall be full compensation for all work necessary to perform the stated work including but not limited to modification of existing signals excavation backfilling compaction concrete foundations conduit wiring restoring facilities destroyed or damaged during construction and salvaging existing materials .
All additional materials and labor necessary to complete the work shall be considered as incidental to the construction and be included in the lump sum price. . Payment Items. . to .
Traffic Control Signal Type ___ DW to DW Lump Sum .
to .
Traffic Control Signal Type ___ to Lump Sum Traffic Signal Removed and Reset Lump Sum ._ Traffic Signal Reconstruction Location No .
Lump Sum .
Traffic Control Signal Removed and Reset Lump Sum .
Traffic Control Signal Removed and Stacked Lump Sum .
Traffic Control Signal Removed and Transported Lump Sum Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II. . Signal Post and Base Standard .
meters Each .
Signal Post and Base Standard .
meters Each .
Signal Post and Base Pedestal .
meters Each .
Signal Post and Base Pedestal .
meters Each .
Signal Base Standard millimeters Octagonal Each .
Signal Base Pedestal millimeters Square Each .
to .
Signal Mast Arm ___ meters Aluminum Each .
to .
Signal Mast Arm ___ meters Steel Each .
to .
Signal and Lighting Mast Arm ___ meter x ___ meter Each .
to .
Signal Head Way ___ ___ Section millimeter Lens Each .
to .
Signal Head Way ___ ___ Section millimeter Lens Each .
to .
Signal Head Way ___ ___ Section millimeter Lens Each .
to .
Signal Head Way ___ ___ Section millimeter Red Lens Each .
Signal Head Way ___ Section millimeter Square Lens Each .
millimeter Incandescent Pedestrian Signal Head International Symbols Each .
millimeter Incandescent Pedestrian Signal Head International Symbols Each .
millimeter Fiberoptic Pedestrian Signal Head International Symbols Each .
to .
___ Way Post Top Mounting Assembly Each .
to .
Mast Arm Mounting Assembly ___ ___ Way Each .
to .
Post Side Mounting Assembly ___ ___ Way Each .
to .
Span Wire Mounting Assembly ___ ___ Way Each .
to .
Louvered Hood for ___ meter Signal Section Each .
to .
BackPlates for ___ millimeter Signal Head millimeters millimeters Each .
BackPlates for Combined millimeter millimeter Signal Head Each .
to .
Ornamental Pole Clamp ___ millimeter Diameter millimeters millimeters Each .
Pole Clamp with Wire Entrance Each .
to .
Traffic Signal Controller Type ___ DW to DW Lump Sum .
Phase MenuDriven Traffic Controller Unit Each .
Railroad PreEmptor Each .
Fire Station PreEmptor Each .
Special Internal Unit Each .
Special Function Unit Each .
to .
Coordinating Unit Type Type FF to Type S Each .
Signal Light Switching Assembly Type DC Each .
Signal Light Switching Assembly Type SS Each .
Detector Unit Conflicting Green Each .
to .
Traffic Signal Controller Type ___ to Lump Sum .
Magnetic Detector Amplifier Each .
Vehicle Detector Directional Compensated Magnetic Each .
Vehicle Detector MultiLane nonCompensated Magnetic Each .
Vehicle Detector SingleLane nonCompensated Magnetic Each .
Detector Amplifier Magnetic Special Each .
Detector Sensing Head Magnetic Special Each .
Vehicle Presence Detector Ultrasonic Each .
Vehicle Motion Detector Ultrasonic Each .
Inductive Loop Detector Amplifier Each .
Wire Loop Installed in Roadway Meter Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II. . Microloop Installed in Roadway Meter .
Pedestrian Push Button Each .
Push Button for Green Light Sign Each .
Push Button for Walk Signal Sign Each SECTION HIGHWAY LIGHTING DESCRIPTION .
General .
This work shall consist of furnishing and installing or modifying highway lighting .
Included in the work is the furnishing and installing or modifying of electrical conduit electric manholes handholes pull or junction boxes concrete foundations wire and cable equipment grounding ground rods service connection lighting poles or towers luminaries control equipment load center assemblies photoelectric control switches contactors time clocks and all incidental materials necessary for operating and controlling highway lighting systems as indicated on the plans .
All systems andor components shall be complete in every respect fully wired thoroughly tested and ready for use .
The locations of highway lighting equipment shown on the plan are approximate and the exact locations will be established by the Engineer in the field with the exception of Lighting Poles or Towers .
The locations of Lighting Poles or Towers may not be altered more than meters without the written permission of the Engineer if obstructions are encountered during installation .
TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES All electrical equipment shall be designed manufactured and tested in accordance with the applicable standards of the ANSI EIA FSS IMSA ITE NEMA and UL and these specifications .
Unless otherwise designated on the plans on the Standard Drawings for Highway Lighting as set forth in the Special Provisions and as specified herein all work and materials shall conform to the requirements of the NEC as amended by the MEC herein referred to as the electrical code .
Wherever reference is made to codes or standards mentioned above the reference shall be construed to mean the code or standard that is in effect on the date of advertising of the project .
All electrical connections splicing grounding resistance tests service connections and circuit identification shall be done by a licensed electrician holding Certificate B issued by the State Examiners of Electricians .
Standard symbols and construction details for highway lighting installations are shown on the current Traffic Signal and Highway Lighting Standard Drawings .
Within days following execution of the Contract the Contractor shall submit to the Engineer for approval a list of equipment which heshe proposes to install .
The submission shall include all equipment identified on the plans or in the specifications by the name of the manufacturer model or identifying number of each item .
The list shall be supplemented by catalog cuts and such other data as may be required including wiring diagrams of any special equipment and of any proposed minor deviation from the plans .
All of the above data shall be submitted in triplicate for checking .
Following checking correction and review not less than five complete approved sets shall be resubmitted to the Engineer for distribution .
The Department shall not be liable for any material purchased labor performed or delay to the work prior to such review and approval .
The warranties that the Contractor receives from each manufacturer of equipment and materials pertinent to the complete and satisfactory operation of highway lighting installation shall be turned over to the Department at the time of acceptance of the project at no cost to the Department .
Each warranty so furnished shall indicate its expiration date and be in effect for a minimum period of one year from the date the highway lighting was placed in continuous operation .
The contractor shall replace at hisher own expense any part of the lighting equipment found to be defective in workmanship material or manner of functioning within six months from the date of final acceptance of all the installations .
If within one year from the date the highway lighting system is placed on continuous operation the equipment and materials do not meet the warrants specified above and the Engineer notifies the manufacturer or hisher authorized representative promptly the manufacturer or hisher authorized representative thereupon shall correct any defect either by Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
repairing or replacing any defective part or parts at no cost to the Department .
It is the intent of the Plans Specifications and Special Provisions to provide a complete highway lighting system through the project .
It is not intended that every fitting minor detail or feature be shown and described as the assumption is made that either the Prime Contractor or hisher Subcontractor is an expert in the particular area of responsibility and is capable of interpreting the plans .
Specifications and Special Provisions so that the bid shall include all items required and that they shall be provided and installed in a neat and workmanlike manner. . Definitions .
A .
Highway Lighting Poles An aluminum or galvanized steel structure providing a . to meter mounting height for luminaries mounted on truss type . . meters bracket arm .
B .
Area Lighting Pole or High Mast Tower A steel structure providing a meter to meter mounting height for luminaries and equipped with a lowering device to permit luminaire maintenance at ground level .
C. The term load center assemblies as used herein shall constitute assemblage of parts equipment and miscellaneous items forming a complete and independent load center and circuit protector system housed in a weatherproof trunk cabinet or building as specified .
D. Luminaries shall consist of a housing reflector refractor or door glass refractor holder or door glass holder lamp socket mounting device ballast components photoelectric control when specified and light source .
MATERIALS .
General .
All materials shall be new .
Luminaries shall incorporate the latest photometric and design standards of IES NEMA and UL .
Where existing systems are to be modified the existing equipment and material shall be incorporated in the revised system salvaged or abandoned as directed .
All equipment and materials shall meet the requirements specified in applicable provisions of Section . . Design Requirements .
The complete structures with all luminaries and appurtenances attached thereto shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO Standard Specifications for Structural Supports for Highway Signs Luminaries and Traffic Signals Current Edition for a wind speed at kilometers per hour. . Equipment .
A .
Highway Lighting Poles Transformer Base. . Poles from to meters unless otherwise specified may be made of aluminum or galvanized steel .
All poles over meters shall be made of galvanized or weathering steel .
All aluminum poles over meters may be in two sections telescoped together and lapped not less than two times the pole diameter at the lappedjoint .
Each pole shall be fabricated in a manner that will accommodate a truss type bracket arm . . meters in length . .
Bracket arms shall be designed for millimeter slipfitter mounted kilogram luminaries with a projected area of .
square meters. . Poles shall have a handhole with a reinforced frame and cover .
The opening shall be approximately millimeters x millimeters located approximately millimeters from the bottom of the pole and placed degrees to the bracket arm .
Shaft cap shall be aluminum weatherproof and arranged to be held securely in place on the shaft by a set screw or screws or stamped cap. . A bonding means shall be provided in the transformer base and at handhole of each pole. . Transformer base for all poles shall be aluminum of the frangible type .
The base shall be approximately millimeters high and be provided with a door having a minimum opening of millimeters x millimeters .
Four hex head connection bolts with four hex nuts eight flat washers and four lock washers galvanized to ASTM A requirements shall be provided with each transformer base. . Anchor bolts for poles with mounting heights of meters or less shall be minimum Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
millimeters x meter with a millimeter L bend at the unthreaded end bolts for poles with mounting heights in excess of meters shall be minimum millimeters by .
meters with a millimeter L bend at the unthreaded end .
Each anchor bolt shall have two hex nuts one for the top and one for the bottom of the base plate to facilitate leveling of the pole two flat washers and one lock washer . .
The bracket arms shall be furnished with a finish similar to that of the shaft to insure uniformity of appearance .
The exterior of the pole and bracket arm shall be free of protuberances dents cracks discolorations and other imperfections marring their appearance. . For shipping purposes the shaft and bracket arm shall be protected to preserve the finish . .
The dead load deflection at the top of the shaft caused by the mass of the arm luminaries and all appurtenances attached thereto shall not exceed of the shaft length. . All aluminum poles over meters in length shall have internal dampers installed to reduce vibrations .
B .
Area Lighting Poles or High Mast Tower .
Where area lighting poles or high mast towers are required plans and Special Provisions will be prepared for the project .
In general requirements will be similar to those specified in Subsection .. Anchorage shall consist of four or more high strength steel bolts having two heavy duty hex nuts and fabricated from high strength low alloy steel having a minimum yield of megaPascals positioned and designed to withstand the forces corresponding to the moment which will cause failure to the shaft .
Anchor bolts shall be furnished with a template and a prefabricated reinforcing cage welded to the bolts .
C. Highway Luminaries .
The luminaire shall be of the horizontal burning gaseous discharge lamp type with IES Type II III or IV lateral light distribution as indicated on the plans with medium vertical light distribution and semicutoff vertical light control .
The luminaire shall have a precisioncase aluminum housing providing for slipfitter end mounting capable of adapting to millimeter or millimeter mounting brackets with provisions for vertical adjustments of not less than .
The reflector shall be of detachable snapin design manufactured of polished aluminum .
The refractor shall be mounted in a door frame assembly and hinged with a safety catch to the luminaire at the house side and fastened at the street side by an automatic type latch .
The refractor and door frame assembly shall be forced upward at the street side by spring pressure when latched against the gasket seat .
Gaskets between the reflector and the refractor and the socket entry shall be made of a material capable of withstanding the temperatures involved and be held securely in place .
Refractor shall be heat resisting glass with inner or outer prisms .
When stipulated luminaries shall be furnished and installed with glare shields .
Luminaries shall have an internal ballast of the regulator type capable of operating from multiple circuit voltages indicated on the plans at a power factor of not less than .
The ballast shall be prewired to the lamp socket and terminal board requiring only connection of the power supply leads to the ballast primary terminals .
The ballast shall provide regulation within for watt units variation in center rated lamp watts with a variation in primary volts from the ballast voltagedesign center .
Ballast shall provide satisfactory lamp starting to C minimum over the recommended line voltage variation .
Ballast and capacitor components shall be arranged so that their operating temperature is not exceeded .
Unless otherwise specified the luminaire shall include a photoelectric control device as specified in Section .I and locking type mounting receptacle in accordance with NEMA standards .
The receptacle shall be prewired to the terminal board .
Lamps shall be of the gaseous discharge type and wattages indicated .
They shall conform to ANSI requirements as listed in reputable lamp manufacturers catalogues .
Lamps failing during the first hours shall be considered defective and be replaced at no cost to the Department .
D. Area Lighting Luminaries .
Area lighting luminaries are used mainly for special applications .
Where this type of lighting is required Special Provisions and Plans will be prepared for the particular project .
In general luminaries will be similar to luminaries specified in Subsection .C .
E. Flood Lighting Luminaries .
Flood lighting luminaries are used mainly for special applications .
Where this type of lighting is required Special Provisions and Plans will be prepared for the particular project .
In general luminaries will be similar to luminaries specified in Subsection .C and will have special mounting arrangements .
F. Underpass Lighting Luminaries .
Luminaries shall consist of a one or two lamp VHOCWRS fluorescent type with internally mounted ballast and recessed sockets .
The housing shall be one piece aluminum with sufficient structural bracing for self support .
The ends of Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
the luminaire shall be tapped for millimeter conduit .
The reflector shall be polished aluminum readily removable for access to the interior of the housing for wiring and servicing .
The refractor shall be heavy plastic and hinged to allow the cover to swing open .
Gaskets shall be provided to form a seal between the housing and refractor .
Luminaire shall be watertight and capable of withstanding water pressures up to kiloPascals with standard cleaning nozzles commonly used in cleaning tunnels .
Luminaries shall be provided with adjustable aluminum or stainless steel brackets to allow a minimum rotation of the luminaire through the longitudinal axis .
Luminaries shall have an internal ballast capable of operating from multiple circuit voltages indicated on the plans and capable of furnishing design voltages and current for the specified fluorescent lamp or lamps .
It shall operate satisfactorily over a voltage range of of its nominal primary voltage rating .
Line feed back from the lamp through the power line shall be corrected by means of a builtin interference suppressor incorporated in each ballast .
Power factor correction shall be not less than and each ballast shall be capable of starting its lamp or lamps at a temperature of C. G. Sign Lighting Luminaries .
Sign lighting luminaries may be of the incandescent gaseous discharge or fluorescent type .
Where this type of lighting is required Special Provisions and Plans will be prepared for the particular project .
In general luminaries will be similar to luminaries specified in Subsection .C and .F .
H. External Ballasts .
The basic ballast housing shall be adaptable by brackets lugs or adapters for either polebase poleside poletop flat wall mounting or direct burial .
The housing shall be of heavy gauge aluminum or fibreglass .
All assembled core windings and terminals shall be sealed within the housing by a highmelting point filling compound .
The electrical characteristics shall conform to ballasts mounted integrally as specified in Subsections .C and .F .
A manufacturers name plate shall be an integral part of the housing .
The name plate shall have the manufacturers name model number serial number hookup diagram power supply data and the load that the ballast is capable of operating .
I .
Photo Electric Control .
The controls shall be twistlock plugin devices to be used with highway lighting equipment conforming to NEMA standards .
They shall be of the tubeless type rated for or hertz alternating current at the following voltages and load capacity with inrush current rating not less than amperes .
volts voltamperes .
volts voltamperes .
volts voltamperes .
volts voltamperes .
volts voltamperes .
volts voltamperes Controls shall have a turnon range of to lux and shall be factory adjusted to turn on at lux .
The turn off level shall be between and lux higher than turn on levels .
It shall be possible by means of simple hand tools or by a calibrated adjustment knob to adjust the turn on time of the lights when the north sky illumination falls within the range of values specified herein .
Normal operation of the photo electric control shall not be affected by line voltage variations of .
Minimum operating temperature range shall be from C to C. The unit shall have a builtin surge protective device for protection from induced high voltage and follow through currents .
A time delay feature shall be incorporated as a part of the control circuit to prevent false turnoffs by transient light .
The controlled lighting load shall remain on or become energized in the event of any functional failure of the photoelectric control circuit .
J .
Multiple Control Switch .
The switch shall be equipped for either pole or wall mounting with all components relays etc .
housed in a weatherproof enclosure and designed for controlling loads up to watts .
The switch shall be prewired complete with NEMA twistlock receptacle for an integrally mounted photoelectric control as specified in Subsection .I or controlled remotely by a switch .
Photo electric control voltage must match multiple control switch voltage .
K. Multiple Circuit Contactor .
The contactor shall be an unenclosed single phase twopole open type magnetic contactor of the rating indicated .
Contactors shall be constructed for surface mounting on a false back .
The contactor coil shall be remotely operated by a multiple control switch as specified in Subsection .J and a photo electric control as specified in Subsection .I or controlled remotely by a switch as specified in Subsection .L or controlled remotely by a time clock as specified in Subsection .M as shown on the plans or specified in the Special Provisions .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
L. Remote or Test Switch .
A heavy duty singlepole tumbler switch rated at amperes encased in a heavy duty metal weatherproof housing shall be installed in the control cabinet or lighting pole bases as a highway lighting test switch .
The switch shall be rated for operation on the voltage specified for the device it controls .
The switch shall be wired so as to shunt the photo electric control multiple control switch multiple circuit contactor or time clock and energize the lighting circuits .
M. Astronomic Time Clock .
Astronomic time switches shall be amperes double pole single throw heavy duty North Latitude astronomic dial street light type with high torque synchronous motor and hour main spring operation to provide accurate timing during power interruptions .
When power is restored after any failure the motor shall resume timing and automatically wind the main spring .
The motor shall be designed to operate on volts hertz alternating current at temperature ranging from C to C. The time clock shall have a wall mounted pressed steel case with raintight gasketed door cover and mounted in the load center housing .
N. Service Riser Pipe .
Galvanized steel conduit shall meet the requirements of Subsection M .. A. O .
Secondary Conductors .
Secondary conductors shall conform to the requirements of Section .. P. Service Cabinet or Housing .
The housing for load center assemblies shall be a trunk type cabinet as specified in Section for vehicle actuated traffic signal controllers and of a size to house all equipment .
The cabinet shall be the product of a manufacturer with an established reputation who has designed and produced similar cabinets .
Q .
Circuit Protection .
The Contractor shall furnish and install on the rear wall of the trunk type cabinet a power distribution panel .
A main bus shall be provided protected by a main and branch circuit breakers .
All equipment shall be designed for the amperage voltage and phase designated .
The general arrangement of circuit breakers shall be in accordance with the circuit diagram shown on the plans .
Circuit breakers shall be unenclosed molded case bolton type with end conductor terminals suitable for surface mounting on a metal false back .
The Contractor shall provide a chart mounted on the cabinet door identifying circuit breakers and the circuits they control .
Circuit breakers shall be of the rating shown on the plans .
R. Load Center Concrete Foundation .
The Contractor shall construct the service cabinet foundation of reinforced cement concrete as shown on the standard drawings on a millimeter gravel subbase .
S. Meter Socket .
A ampere meter socket approved by the serving utility shall be furnished and installed on the service cabinet or where directed by the serving utility .
CONSTRUCTION METHODS .
General .
Details of construction shall conform to all applicable provisions of Sections listed under Subsection .
and the specifications set forth hereinafter .
Highway lighting poles area lighting poles and high mast towers shall be handled in loading unloading and erecting in such a manner that they will not be damaged .
Any parts that are damaged due to the Contractors operations shall be repaired or replaced at the Contractors expense .
Unless otherwise directed by the Engineer poles or towers shall not be erected on concrete foundations until the concrete has set for at least days .
All surfaces of aluminum bases in contact with cement concrete shall be field coated with an aluminum impregnated caulking compound recommended by the manufacturer of the base .
Poles and towers shall be raked sufficiently to be plumb after all loads have been place poles shall be raked by adjusting the two nuts supplied with each anchor bolt .
The mounting height shall be measured from the light source to the roadway surface directly below .
The bracket arm shall be securely attached to the shaft and the pole erected with the bracket arm perpendicular to the center line of the roadway .
The Contractor shall mark on each light pole or tower meters above the roadway suitable numbers and letters Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
millimeters minimum height displaying the pole number and circuit to which it is connected .
The luminaries shall be installed on the brackets specified parallel to the road surface or aimed as indicated on the plans securely fastened lamped connected cleaned and ready for operation .
The service riser the service cabinet and the concrete mat shall be installed as shown on the plans and as required by the Code .
The work under this item shall include all conduit to .
meters beyond the load center .
The service cabinet shall be installed on the concrete mat complete with distribution panel mounted inside .
The electrical components shall be mounted with machine screws and wired as shown on the plans or as directed .
All conduits in the service cabinet shall be bonded together and grounded to the cabinet with not less than AWG bare copper conductors .
A millimeter x . meter long ground rod shall be driven in accordance with Section .
and stubbed millimeters above the concrete foundation .
Not less than a AWG bare copper grounding conductor from the neutral bus shall be run continuously to the ground rod .
Photo electric control devices shall be mounted with the light sensitive unit facing toward the north sky .
Method of mounting shall be as indicated or as specified in Section .I .
Control switch contactors and time clocks shall be mounted as specified herein before .
Test switches shall be mounted as specified .
When mounted in lighting pole base it shall be supported on an L shaped galvanized steel bracket secured by anchor bolt and nut. . Tests Required Before Acceptance .
The Contractor will be required to test the entire system for continuity grounds resistance to ground insulation resistance and make provisions for high voltage dielectric strength tests before any equipment is connected .
This shall be done by means of a Volt megohmmeter test which will indicate the insulation of any circuit or group of circuits .
When the insulation resistance is less than megohms between insulated conductor and ground system ground point at the load center the Contractor shall locate the point or points at fault make proper corrections and then demonstrate by further tests the elimination of such fault .
With all equipment connected to the wiring system a functional test shall be performed by the Contractor using the system power if not available the Contractor shall provide temporary power where and as required .
The tests shall be performed in the presence of the Engineer to demonstrate that the system as a whole and all parts thereof function as specified or intended .
Any defective materials equipment or faulty or improper installation shall be permanently corrected by repairs or replacements to be made by the Contractor .
All tests and any necessary repairs which are indicated by the tests to produce a faultfree system shall be performed at the Contractors expense .
Operation Tests After satisfactory completion of the required tests the system shall be placed in operation .
Final acceptance will not be made until the system has operated satisfactorily as designed for a period of not less than days from a date designated by the Engineer .
This test period shall be included within the specified contract time .
Operation of the system shall not in any way be construed as an acceptance of the system or any part of it or as a waiver of any of the provisions of the contract .
The Contractor shall be responsible for the system during this period of operation and heshe shall make any adjustments or repairs that may be required and remedy defects or damages which may occur at hisher own expense .
Any other incidental work or materials for which no basis of payment is provided will be considered as completely covered by the unit price bid .
COMPENSATION .
Method of Measurement .
Highway lighting poles area lighting poles and high mast towers with the specified mounting heights bracket arm of specified length and anchor bolts luminaries of the size and type specified photo electric control including test switch multiple control switch multiple circuit contactor time clock and highway lighting load center with all necessary nuts bolts connectors clamps equipment grounding connector and incidental material to form a complete unit shall each be measured for payment as a unit .
Highway lighting shall be measured as a complete installation and paid at a contract lump sum price . .
Basis of Payment .
The lump sum price for Highway Lighting and Highway Lighting Load Center shall be full compensation for all work necessary or incidental to the construction of the highway lighting installation modifying existing installations or both including excavation backfilling compaction concrete foundations conduit wiring and salvaging existing materials .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
All additional materials and labor required to complete the highway lighting installation shall be considered as incidental to the construction and be included in the respective lump sum contract price .
All materials shall conform to Section and Division III of the these specifications .
The accepted quantities of highway lighting poles area lighting poles high mast towers luminaries photo electric control including test switch multiple control switch multiple circuit contactor and time clock will be paid for at the contract unit price each for the length type and size specified which price shall include full compensation for anchor bolts and miscellaneous hardware .
No direct payment will be made for the following incidental materials conduit fittings all bolts nuts and washers and wiring. . Payment Items. . Highway Lighting Roadway Lump Sum .
Highway Lighting Underpass Lump Sum .
Highway Lighting Area Lump Sum .
Highway Lighting Sign Lump Sum .
to .
Highway Lighting Pole Anchor Base meter Bracket Each .
to .
Highway Lighting Pole Anchor Base Twin meter Bracket Each .
meters .
meters .
to .
Highway Lighting Pole Transformer Base meter Bracket Each .
to .
Highway Lighting Pole Transformer Base Twin meter Bracket .
meters to .
meters Each .
to .
Area Lighting Hinged Pole meters Mounting Height meters Each .
to .
Area Lighting Mast Pole or Tower meters Mounting Height meter Each .
to .
Area Lighting Mast Pole or Tower meters Mounting Height meter Each .
to .
Highway Lighting Luminaire ___ Watt Watt Each .
to .
Area Lighting Luminaire ___ Watt Watt Each .
Flood Lighting Luminaire Less than Watt Each .
Flood Lighting Luminaire Watt and Over Each .
to .
Underpass Lighting Luminaire ___ meters Fluorescent Each .
to .
Sign Lighting Luminaire ___ meters Fluorescent Each . . meters .
Sign Lighting Luminaire Watt Each .
Sign Lighting Luminaire Watt Each .
Photo Electric Control Each .
Multiple Control Switch Each .
Multiple Circuit Contactor Each .
Time Clock Each .
Highway Lighting Load Center Lump Sum .
Highway Lighting Pole and Luminaire Removed and Reset Each .
Highway Lighting Pole and Luminaire Removed and Stacked Each .
Highway Lighting Pole and Luminaire Removed and Transported Each SECTION FLASHING BEACONS ILLUMINATED WARNING SIGNS AND LIGHTED BARRIER ARROWS DESCRIPTION Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II. . General .
This work shall consist of furnishing and installing or modifying flashing beacons highway illuminated warning signs and lighted barrier arrows at designated locations as shown on the plans and detail sheets in conformance with these Specifications and the Standard Drawings .
Included in the work is the furnishing and installing modifying removing resetting stacking or transporting existing control equipment signal heads electric lamps posts and bases poles pedestals mast arms barriers barrier arrows service connections wire and cable pull and junction boxes electrical conduits and all incidental materials necessary for operating and controlling the beacons signs and arrows .
The locations of beacons signs barriers control equipment and appurtenances shown on the plans are approximate and the exact locations will be established by the Engineer in the field .
MATERIALS .
General .
When existing systems are to be modified the existing equipment and materials shall be incorporated in the revised system salvaged or abandoned as directed .
Equipment and materials shall meet the requirements specified in Section for Signals Wiring. . Highway Illuminated Warning Signs and Barrier Arrows .
Illuminated warning signs and barrier arrows shall be designed so that lamps tubes electrodes transformers or ballasts and all wiring shall be totally enclosed and protected from the weather .
Each sign or arrow shall be delivered to the project completely finished and assembled ready for erection. . Flasher .
The flasher unit shall be twocircuit jack mounted using solid state circuiting no moving parts designed to operate on volt hertz alternating current .
The output load rating with incandescent traffic signal lamps or an inductive load shall not be less than amperes .
The unit shall be capable of providing alternating flashing operation at the rate of to flashes per minute .
The flasher unit shall be individually housed and protected from the weather and must not present a shock hazard to maintenance personnel .
Filter Each flasher shall be equipped with a suitable filter wired or built into the flasher in the manner recommended by the Manufacturer .
Any filter not completely eliminating radio interference shall be replaced .
Housing The combined flasher and filter shall be installed in an approved weatherproof housing equipped with a disconnect block for shutting off the system .
The cabinet shall be fastened to a standard .
meter signal post by means of a suitable saddle or backplate .
The flasher and filter shall be fastened to a backboard and the combined assembly shall be removable from the housing intact .
COMPENSATION .
Method of Measurement .
Flashing beacons highway illuminated warning signs and lighted barrier arrows will be measured as complete units . .
Basis of Payment . .
Basis of Payment .
Flashing beacons highway illuminated warning signs and lighted barrier arrows will be paid for at the respective contract unit price complete in place. . Payment Items . .
Flashing Warning Beacon Type D Lump Sum .
Flashing Warning Beacon Type A Lump Sum Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II . .
Flashing Warning Beacon Type B Lump Sum .
Flashing Warning Beacon Type C Lump Sum .
Flashing Warning Beacon Removed and Reset Lump Sum .
Flashing Warning Beacon Removed and Stacked Lump Sum .
Highway Warning Sign Illuminated Each .
Highway Warning Sign Illuminated Lump Sum .
Highway Warning Sign Illuminated Removed and Reset Lump Sum .
Highway Warning Sign Illuminated Removed and Reset Lump Sum .
Highway Warning Sign Illuminated Removed and Transported Lump Sum .
Lighted Barrier Arrows Each .
Lighted Barrier Arrows Lump Sum .
Lighted Barrier Arrows Removed and Reset Lump Sum .
Lighted Barrier Arrows Removed and Reset Lump Sum .
Lighted Barrier Arrows Removed and Transported Lump Sum .
Lighted Barrier Arrows Removed Transported and Reset Lump Sum SECTION TRAFFIC SIGNS DESCRIPTION .
General .
The provisions of this section shall apply to the fabricating furnishing and erecting warning clusters and signs overhead and roadside guide signs warning and regulatory signs route and project markers and supports for delineators and markers .
Traffic Signs are officially erected devices mounted on fixed or portable supports whereby specific messages are conveyed by means of words or symbols for the purpose of regulating warning or guiding traffic .
The signs foundations and supports shall be fabricated and erected in conformity with the following A. Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices Current Edition hereinafter referred to as MUTCD .
B .
The AASHTO publication entitled Specifications for Design and Construction of Structural Supports for Highway Signs Luminaries and Traffic Signals Current Edition .
C. The Massachusetts Highway Department Construction Standards. . Plans .
The Contractor shall develop plans for the foundations structural supports and sign panels including the spacing of panels except for the designs shown as typical on the standard drawings and plans .
The message and size of legend for sign panels shall be as specified by the Department .
MATERIALS .
General .
Materials shall meet the requirements specified in the following Subsections of Division III Materials Reflective Sheeting M .. Acrylic Prismatic Reflectors and Embossed M .. Aluminum Frames for Signs Acrylic Plastic Reflector Type A M .. Demountable Reflectorized DelineatorGuard Rail M .. Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
Reflectorized Flexible Delineator Post M .. . Reflective Sheeting .
Reflective sheeting shall meet the requirements of Section M A .
Panel Sheeting Type III or IV HighIntensity B. Legend Sheeting Type III or Type IVHigh Intensity C. Channelizing Sheeting Type VI Flexible HighIntensity .
Panels .
A .
Aluminum Sign Panels .
Aluminum sign panels shall be either Type A or Type B .
Sign supporting hardware shall be aluminum or stainless steel .
Aluminum Sign Panels Type A Type A Panels shall be fabricated from flat sheet Aluminum Alloy of the following types A Flat sheet aluminum sign panels shall be fabricated from aluminum sheeting ASTM B Alloy T or Alloy H of the following thickness and mounting unless otherwise specified .
Area square meters Mounting Thickness millimeters Up to Single Post Over to Two Posts Over .
to Single Post Top Mounted A Flat sheet sections with extruded tabs shall be fabricated from .
Sheeting .
millimeters thick ASTM B Alloy H. . Extruded parts ASTM B Allow T. A Flat sheet sections with welded or flush riveted locking tabs and clips shall be fabricated from .
Flat sheet ASTM B Alloy T or Alloy H. . Extruded parts as specified by the Manufacturer .
Aluminum Sign Panels Type B Type B Panels shall be fabricated of extruded Aluminum ASTM B .
Alloy T shall be .
millimeters thick millimeters wide and of bolted joint design .
Only one millimeter panel shall be used where the overall height of a sign requires one panel less than millimeters .
B .
Route Markers and Millimeter Warning Clusters H. These items on aluminum panels shall be fabricated from aluminum sheeting ASTM B Alloy T or Alloy H millimeters thick of the size shown on the plans .
Route marker overlay on directional sign panels may be fabricated from Aluminum Alloy H millimeters thick .
Material for attachment shall conform to the following specifications Part Aluminum ASTM Stainless Steel AISI Bolts B T Alloy Type or Rivets B T Alloy Type or Nuts B T Type or Washers B Alclad T Type or Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II . .
Legends Types A B C and D. The type of legend shall be as specified and shown on the plans except as follows a .
State and U.S. Route Markers shall have Type D Silk Screen Processed Legends .
b .
Interstate Route Markers on Guide Signs on Feeder roads shall have Type C Permanently Applied Legends .
c. Individual Interstate Route Markers shall have Type C Permanently Applied Legends with the required Silk Screen Processed Legend superimposed thereon .
d. Individual Interstate Route Markers and Overhead Signs shall have Type B Permanently Applied Legends .
Finish legends shall show careful workmanship and be cleancut and sharp .
A. Legend Type A Demountable Flat .
Legends shall be reflective or opaque sheeting as specified conforming with the photometric and other requirements of Subsection ..
Legends shall be applied to sheet aluminum in a manner specified by the sheeting manufacturer .
Base material shall be of sheet aluminum ASTM B Alloy H. Demountable legends shall be of sheet aluminum those up to and including millimeters in height shall be millimeter in thickness those over millimeters in height shall be .
millimeters in thickness .
B. Legend Type B Demountable Prismatic Reflectors .
Reflective letters numerals symbols and borders shall consist of embossed aluminum frames fitted with circular plastic prismatic reflexreflectors .
The reflectors shall meet the requirements of Subsection M C. Legend Type C Permanently Applied Legend .
Legends shall be reflective or opaque sheeting applied directly to a clean dustfree background in a manner specified by the sheeting manufacturer .
Legends shall be cut neatly at intersect on panel edges .
Heat activated adhesivecoated material shall be applied only by mechanical means .
Finish shall be as specified in Subsection .B .
D. Legend Type D Silk Screen Processed .
The legends and shields shall be of the series and size specified in the AASHTO Manual for Signing and Pavement Markings Current Edition and the dimensions details of the letters with respect to each series as specified in the FHWA publication Standard Alphabets for Highway Signs Current Edition or as specified and shown on the plans. . Demountable Reflectorized Delineators .
A .
Type A Acrylic Plastic Reflector .
The reflector shall conform to Subsection M B .
Type B Reflective Sheeting Reflector Wide Angle .
The silverwhite and yellow amber reflectors shall be of adhesive coated reflective sheeting permanently adhered to a sheet aluminum backing .
The reflective sheeting shall meet the requirements of Subsection M The sheet aluminum backing shall be ASTM B Alloy T or Alloy H millimeter in thickness properly degreased and etched or treated with a light tight amorphous chromate type coating. . Photometric Requirements .
See Subsection .
Legend Sheeting. . Reflectorized Flexible Delineator Posts .
Reflectorized Flexible Delineator Posts shall meet the requirements of Subsection M . Delineation for Guard Rail Termini Delineators for Guard Rail Termini shall meet the requirements of Subsection M Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
FABRICATION .
General .
Sign fabrication shall be done in a plant properly equipped for the production of the types of signs specified .
Sign panels shall show careful workmanship and present a reasonably plane surface with the message and outlines clear and sharp .
Finished sign panels shall be shipped in such manner as to ensure arrival on the project in an undamaged condition where they shall be properly protected from dirt scratches handmarks and other blemishes until erected and accepted. . Reflective Sheeting .
A .
Application .
Reflective sheeting shall be applied to properly treated base panels with mechanical equipment in a manner specified for the manufacture of traffic control signs by the sheeting manufacturer .
Heat activated adhesive coated sheeting shall be preperforated .
Sign faces comprising two or more pieces or panels of reflective sheeting must be carefully matched for color at the time of sign fabrication to provide uniform appearance and brilliance both day and night .
Alternate successive width sections of either sheeting or panels must be reversed and consecutive to insure that corresponding edges of reflective sheeting lie adjacent on the finished sign .
Nonconformance may result in nonuniform shading and an undesirable contrast between adjacent widths of applied sheeting which will not be acceptable .
Pressure sensitive adhesive coated sheeting shall be overlapped at splices not less than millimeters .
Heat activated adhesive coated sheeting may be spliced with overlap not less than millimeters or butted gap not to exceed .
millimeter .
Only butt splices shall be permitted on signs screenprocessed with transparent color .
Sheeting applied to extruded sections shall extend over top edges and down side legs a minimum of millimeters .
No splices shall be allowed on sign panels square meters or under .
For D guide sign panels over square meters splices shall be avoided however a maximum of one splice is allowed if necessary .
B .
Finish Protective Coating . .
When pressure sensitive adhesive coated reflective sheeting is used all sheeting splices and sign edges shall be sealed with materials recommended by and in a manner specified by the sheeting manufacturer. . Dry heat activated adhesive coated reflective sheeting when applied to aluminum or highdensity plywood shall be edge sealed as specified by the sheeting manufacturer . .
Panels .
White numerals millimeters in height designating the size of sign panel date of fabrication fabricator manufacturer and type of sheeting shall be affixed at the bottom left rear corner of all ground mounted guide historical cultural recreational and specific information service signs .
All other ground mounted signs shall have black numerals millimeters in height designating the size of sign panel date of fabrication fabricating manufacturer and type of sheeting affixed to the bottom left rear of each panel .
White numerals millimeters in height designating the size of sign panel date of fabrication fabricator manufacturer and type of sheeting shall be affixed at the bottom left corner of the face of each overhead sign panel .
The code numbers of fabricators and manufacturers will be obtained from the Department Bureau of Transportation Planning and Development Systems Operations Unit .
Black numerals shall be used in place of white numerals where the background they are affixed to is white or aluminum .
Panel surfaces upon which reflective sheeting is to be applied shall not be painted .
The painting of traffic signs if required shall conform to the following a .
Aluminum signs shall be treated by solvent cleaning and a wash coat of basic zinc chromatevinyl butyral M b .
After pretreatment as specified above the faces if required backs and all exposed edges of the signs shall be given a prime coat of enamel primer conforming with Federal Specifications TTP .
c. After priming the face side of all signs requiring painted backgrounds shall be given two color coats of enamel conforming to Subsection M Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
d. The backs and exposed edges of plywood sign panels shall be given one coat of color enamel matching that specified for the background of the sign face same to conform with the foregoing paint specifications .
e. Bolt heads on the face of sign panels shall be primed as designated in .
c above to accept a permanent coat of matching paint .
Fabricated sections with extruded legs shall be manufactured in accordance with the typical detail plans .
The face shall have a reasonably plane surface free from protrusions and depressions .
Panels shall be composed in increments .
meters wide .
Panels less than .
meters wide shall be composed of one sheet .
Signs greater than .
meters shall have no more than sheets less than .
meters wide .
Sheet increments shall be continuous from top to bottom of sign panel .
No horizontal joints will be permitted .
Panel assembly shall include all fasteners and backing strips also fabricated from aluminum sheeting ASTM B Alloy T. Backing strips shall be provided at every joint and held firmly in place with proper fasteners as recommended by the manufacturer .
Caution shall be used in assembly to prevent any projections dents or gouging of the panel face .
The corners of signs shall be rounded to a radius equal to the minimum dimension of the sign except that a minimum corner radius of millimeters shall be used unless otherwise noted on the plans .
Route markers shall be attached to aluminum sign panels with aluminum or stainless steel millimeter diameter slottedhead bolts with nuts and washers or millimeter diameter rivets .
Treatment of Aluminum Sign Panels Prior to Application of Reflective Sheeting. . Degreasing .
a. Vapor degreasing by total immersion of the panel in a saturated vapor or trichloroethylene .
Trademark printing shall be removed with lacquer thinner or controlled alkaline cleaning system .
b. Alkaline degreasing by total immersion of the panel in a tank containing alkaline solution controlled and titrated to the solution manufacturers specification. . Rinsing .
After satisfactory degreasing the panels shall be thoroughly washed with running water. . Drying .
The panel shall be thoroughly dried by use of a forced hot air dryer. . Metal shall not be handled between cleaning and etching operation and the application of reflective sheeting except with devices or clean canvas gloves. . Metal shall not come in contact with greases oils or other contaminants prior to the application of reflective sheeting .
Panels for Warning Cluster H. Panels shall be attached to the posts with standard bolts as specified on the plans .
The panels shall have one coat of primer and two coats of paint conforming to Subsection M .. of Division III Materials and shall be protected prior to painting in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations . .
Legends .
A .
Type A .
The letters numerals symbols and borders shall be attached to the sign background as specified in Subsection .. B .
Type B .
The reflectors shall be affixed to the aluminum frames by an approved method to prevent loosening .
The use of tape to hold reflectors in place will not be permitted .
Reflector size shall be determined by the dimensions of the legend and spaced diameters on center and diameter from the edge of the letters .
After fabrication the aluminum shall be properly degreased and etched then treated with a light tight amorphous chromate type coating .
All units shall have an embossed height of approximately millimeters .
Embossed aluminum frames following amorphous chromate coating shall be primed and enameled with high quality synthetic baking primer and white or black enamel .
Each letter numeral symbol and border shall be supplied with mounting holes and shall be secured to the sign surface with aluminum or stainless steel screws or rivets .
Mounting holes shall be spaced as required under Subsection .. C. Type C. See Subsection .C .
D. Type D. The legends shall be applied by the Silk Screen Process or by using cutouts from an approved type black film Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
superimposed on reflective sheeting .
The flexible black gloss silk screen ink shall conform to the manufacturers recommendations. . Demountable Reflectorized Kilometer and TenthofKilometer Markers .
A .
The kilometer marker panels shall be fabricated from aluminum sheeting conforming to ASTM B Alloy T or Alloy H and millimeters in thickness .
They shall be millimeters wide and of a length required to display the number of numerals shown on the plans .
The green reflective sheeting shall conform to the requirements of Section ..
The silverwhite numerals shall be Type C permanently applied as specified under Subsection .C .
B .
The aluminum panel for tenthofkilometer marker shall be millimeter x millimeter diamond shape as shown on the plans .
The sheeting and legend shall conform to the applicable requirements of Subsection .
and Subsection .
and the following The panel shall be fabricated from aluminum sheeting conforming to ASTM B Alloy T or Alloy H and .
millimeters in thickness properly degreased and etched or treated with a light tight amorphous chromatetype coating .
The panel shall be punched or sheared to size with millimeter radius corners having two square or round millimeter mounting holes .
Mounting holes shall be spaced on millimeter centers so as to present a diamondshape when installed .
The reflective sheeting shall conform to Encapsulated Lens Reflective Sheeting in accordance with Subsection ..
The reflective sheeting shall be applied to properly treated base panels with mechanical equipment in a manner specified by the sheeting manufacturer .
The numerals shall be Type D black diecut prespaced conforming to the FHWA Standard Series .
Numerals shall have a precoated pressureactivated adhesive and applied as recommended by the manufacturer of the reflective sheeting or be opaque black M permanent inks applied on approved high intensity sheeting Type III . .
Hazard Markers .
A. H Demountable Reflectorized Hazard Marker .
The attaching of the backplate to the P post shall conform to the following requirements Two rivets each consisting of pin and collar shall be used to attach the marker to the post .
The collar shall be coldswaged into annular locking grooves on the pins by a method recommended by the manufacturer .
Pin rivets shall be .
millimeters diameter of aluminum ASTM B Alloy T collars shall be .
millimeters diameter of aluminum ASTM B Alloy T with a minimum washer face of millimeter diameter .
The pin rivets shall have truss heads and grip range of millimeters .
millimeters .
B. H Warning Cluster .
Fabrication shall conform to Subsection .. C. H Abutment Warning Panels .
The stripes shall be alternate yellow and black .
The yellow stripes shall be reflectorized as required under Reflective Sheeting Section .. Black paint shall conform to the requirements of Subsection M . Demountable Reflectorized Delineator .
A .
Type A. Housings shall be of aluminum ASTM B Alloy H . millimeter thickness formed to encase a reflector having a minimum diameter of millimeters and be .
millimeters in depth to retain the acrylic reflector .
Housing shall be provided with four embossed circular reinforcement ribs and marked with name and part number of the manufacturer .
Aluminum grommets of .
millimeters inside diameter shall be expanded within the reflector mounting holes to accommodate .
millimeters aluminum ASTM B Alloy T bolts .
The aluminum housings shall be free from buckles warps burrs corrosion white rust and dirt .
B .
Type B .
The reflective sheeting shall be precoated with either a pressure sensitive adhesive Type I or a tackfree adhesive Type II designed for mechanical application to properly prepared surfaces only when activated by heat .
The Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
sheeting shall adhere securely at temperatures of C to C and be elastic enough at low temperatures to resist shock when struck at C without an appreciable decrease in adhesion vandal resistant and strong enough to resist peeling from the surface .
The precoated adhesive shall have no staining effect on the reflective sheeting and must be mildew resistant .
The reflective sheeting shall be mechanically applied in the manner and with equipment prescribed by the sheeting manufacturer .
The reflective material when processed shall be in accordance with Subsection ..
The sheeting surface shall be such that it may be readily refurbished by cleaning in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
C. Demountable Reflectorized Guard Rail Delineators .
Demountable reflectorized delineators shall conform to M . Reflectorized Flexible Delineator Posts .
Shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations at locations indicated on the Plans andor as directed. . Demountable Reflectorized Station Markers and Project Markers .
The panels shall be fabricated from aluminum sheeting conforming to ASTM B Alloy T and shall be .
millimeters in thickness .
They shall be millimeters wide and of a length required to display the station numerals or Federalaid Number shown on the plan .
The reflective background sheeting attached to the aluminum sheeting shall conform to the requirements of Subsection ..
The color of the background sheeting shall be orange for Beginning and End project markers and white for intermediate Station project markers .
The panel shall be punched or sheared to size with millimeter radius corners having two square or round millimeter mounting holes .
The numerals shall be Type D black diecut prespaced conforming to the FHWA Standard Series millimeters C. Numerals shall have a precoated pressure activated adhesive and be applied as recommended by the manufacturer of the reflective sheeting .
ERECTION .
General .
Warning clusters H shall be mounted on one standard P breakaway post assembly .
The reflectors shall be amber Type A conforming to the requirements of Subsection .A .
Abutment warning sign H shall be constructed of aluminum panel Type A as specified .
Posts shall be one standard P breakaway assembly conforming to Department standards .
Demountable reflectorized project markers shall be fabricated and erected as shown on the plans andor as directed by the Engineer .
Demountable reflectorized kilometer and tenthofkilometer markers shall be mounted on new P Steel posts or on existing posts as shown on the plans and as directed .
Demountable reflectorized hazard marker H shall be mounted on a standard P post .
The reflectors shall be yellow amber Type A as specified under Section .A unless otherwise noted in the Special Provisions .
Demountable reflectorized guard rail delineators shall be attached to the bolts located in the valley of the guard rail beam at the spacings as follows .
Delineators are to be installed on every tenth th guard rail post .
In guard rail runs of less than ten posts two delineators shall be used one at either end. . On curves delineators will be spaced at a minimum of every third rd guard rail post based on the degree of curve .
No less than three delineators shall be visible at normal viewing distance from the travel lane adjacent to the guard rail section . .
Leading and trailing ends at bridges three delineators one at the connection of the terminal the connector and .
meter plate one at the middle of the .
meter plate and one at the connection of the .
meter plate and the normal guard rail panel .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II . .
In no instance shall delineators be installed on sections of guard rail which deviate substantially from the alignment vertical or horizontal of the roadway or which are located more than .
meters from the edge of the paved surface . .
Exceptions andor modifications to the above shall be made only with the approval of the Engineer in the field .
When roadway alignment permits the reflector portion of each delineator shall be positioned so that it will be clearly visible for a distance of meters under normal weather and atmospheric conditions when illuminated by the high beam of standard automobile headlights on vehicles in the lane adjacent to the delineator .
Delineation for Guard Rail Termini shall be mounted within millimeters perpendicular to the web of the first and last full height guard rail posts in a section of guard rail. . Attachment to P Posts .
Demountable Reflectorized Kilometer TenthofKilometer and Project Markers and Delineation for Guard Rail Termini shall be attached to the P posts by a connection fabricated as follows Two rivets each consisting of pin and collar shall be used to attach the marker to the post .
The collar shall be coldswaged into annular locking grooves on the pins by a method recommended by the manufacturer .
Pin rivets shall be .
millimeter diameter of aluminum ASTM B Alloy T collars shall be .
millimeter diameter aluminum of ASTM B Alloy T with a minimum washer face of millimeters diameter .
The pin rivets shall have truss heads and grip range of millimeters .
millimeters .
An approved two piece rivet type sign fastener installed by expanding the blind rivet component inside the semi tubular rivet component may be used .
When demountable reflectorized tenthofkilometer marker excluding post is specified the marker shall be attached to existing delineator post .
The existing delineator reflectors may be removed or retained as directed .
COMPENSATION .
Method of Measurement .
The quantity of Overhead Guide Signs Roadside Guide Signs Warning Signs Regulatory Signs and Route Markers Shields shall be the actual total number of square meters of panel in each sign classification .
The area of Route Markers when attached to destination sign panels will not be added to the total area of panels .
Demountable Reflectorized Hazard Marker H will be measured by the unit including P post complete in place .
Each Abutment Warning Sign with Breakaway P Post Assembly shall be considered as one unit .
Each Warning Cluster mounted on one P Breakaway Post Assembly shall be considered as one unit .
Demountable Reflectorized Kilometer Marker TenthofKilometer Marker with P Post and TenthofKilometer excluding post will be measured by the respective unit complete in place .
Demountable Reflectorized Delineators shall be measured by the unit complete in place with P post or bracket .
Demountable Reflectorized Project Marker including P Post where applicable will be measured by the unit complete in place .
Reflectorized Flexible Delineator Posts will be measured by the unit complete in place .
Delineation for Guard Rail Termini will be measured by the unit each including the P post complete in place . .
Basis of Payment .
Payment for each classification of sign panels will be made at the contract unit price per square meter which shall be full compensation for fabricating furnishing erecting and attaching the completed sign panel preparing all reflectorized materials backgrounds legends borders arrows shields paints hardware and all other materials and labor required for the completion of the signs as specified .
Demountable Reflectorized Hazard Marker H will be paid for at the contract unit price each complete in place .
Payment for Abutment Warning Panels will be made at the contract unit price each complete in place .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
Payment for Warning Clusters will be made at the contract unit price each complete in place .
Demountable Reflectorized Kilometer Marker with P Post TenthofKilometer Marker with P Post and Tenth ofKilometer Marker excluding post will be paid for at the contract unit price each complete in place .
Demountable Reflectorized Delineators will be paid for at the contract unit price each complete in place .
Demountable Reflectorized Project Marker with P Post where applicable shall be paid for at the contract unit price each complete in place .
Reflectorized Flexible Delineator Posts will be paid for at the contract unit price each complete in place .
Delineation for Guard Rail Termini will be paid for at the contract unit price each complete in place. . Payment Items. . millimeter Warning Cluster H Aluminum Panel Type A Each .
millimeter Warning Cluster H Aluminum Panel Type A Each .
Abutment Warning Sign H Plywood Panel Each .
Abutment Warning Sign H Aluminum Panel Type A Each .
Overhead Guide Sign Aluminum Panel Type B Square Meter .
Roadside Guide Sign MR Aluminum Panel Type B Square Meter .
Roadside Guide Sign FR over .
square meters Aluminum Panel Type B Square Meter .
Roadside Guide Sign FR .
square meters and under Aluminum Panel Type A Square Meter .
Warning Regulatory and Route Marker Aluminum Panel Type A Square Meter .
WH Demountable Reflectorized Delineator H Each .
AM Demountable Reflectorized Delineator H Each .
WH Demountable Reflectorized Delineator H Each .
AM Demountable Reflectorized Delineator H Each .
AM Demountable Reflectorized Delineator H Each .
Demountable Reflectorized Delineator Guard Rail Each .
Delineation for Guard Rail Termini Each .
Demountable Reflectorized Kilometer Marker Each .
Demountable Reflectorized TenthofKilometer Marker Each .
Demountable Reflectorized TenthofKilometer Marker Excluding Post Each .
Reflectorized Flexible Delineator Post Amber Each .
Reflectorized Flexible Delineator Post White Each .
Demountable Reflectorized Hazard Marker H Each .
Demountable Reflectorized Project Marker with P Post Each .
Demountable Reflectorized Project Marker Excluding Post Each .
Demountable Reflectorized Station Marker with P Post Each .
Demountable Reflectorized Station Marker Excluding Post Each SECTION SIGN SUPPORTS DESCRIPTION .
General .
The work to be done hereunder consists of the fabrication and erection of steel structural supports on MPa mm kg Cement Masonry Foundations .
The Contractor may select any structural sign support system meeting the design criteria of AASHTO Standard Specifications for Structural Supports for Highway Signs Luminaries and Traffic Signals Current Edition unless otherwise standardized by the Department .
Acceptance of the structural sign supports system will be contingent upon the Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
review and approval of Shop Drawing submitted by the Contractor .
The plans for foundations and ground mounted supports shall be based on the data included on plans titled Standard Sign Support Foundations and Standard Ground Mounted Sign Supports Breakaway Design .
The plans for overhead structures shall conform to the requirements of Section ..
In the absence of boring samples or the actual determination of the soil properties at the proposed spread footing location the Department will accept an assumed soil bearing pressure of kiloPascals for the design of the spread footing .
Boring samples or actual determination of soil properties are required for core footings .
All unsuitable material within the limits of the footing must be removed at the direction of the Engineer Peat organic material material that has been dumped etc ..
The concrete for the footing shall be placed immediately after excavation to prevent water from collecting in the excavated area .
All overhead and cantilever sign support structures shall be designed so as to be supported by single poles or end frames having not more than two vertical main members .
All overhead and cantilever sign structures shall have as an integral part of the structure a Department approved damping device which shall be installed during erection of the structure .
The damping devices shall be installed as follows Overhead structures shall have the damping devices installed at the midpoint of the span plus or minus millimeters regardless of sign panel location .
Twochord structures shall have the damper attached to the top chord at midspan .
Trichord structures shall have the damper attached to the middle chord at midspan .
Box truss structures shall have the damper attached to the rear top chord at midspan .
Cantilever structures shall have the damper attached to the outer end of the horizontal member .
Existing structures which do not have damping devices shall have dampers installed as part of the contract .
Existing structures which have dampers not attached as specified above shall have them removed and attached as specified above .
The approximate locations for the new signs are shown on the plans the exact locations to be determined by the Engineer on the project .
The Department will mark or stake the center point for each sign foundation only once whereupon it shall be the responsibility of the Contractor to furnish and set at hisher own expense all tie and construction stakes necessary for the erection of the sign .
All measurements to fabricate and erect the overhead sign structures and supports for ground mounted signs shall be made by the Contractor .
Field measurements needed to determine the exact span and height of each structure should be taken immediately upon award of the Contract for incorporation in the structural layout on the shop drawings prior to submission for review .
The Contractor shall submit all design work together with hand or computerized calculations and plans used for design purposes to the Department these to become the property of the Department and for which heshe shall receive no additional compensation .
All design work shall bear the seal of a Registered Professional Engineer registered in Massachusetts .
Certificates of compliance shall conform to the requirements of Subsection .. Before fabricating the sign support structures the Contractor shall submit erection plans and shop drawings for approval of the Engineer in accordance with Subsections . . and .
of these Specifications .
Span lengths post heights vertical and horizontal clearances material specifications grade andor alloy anchor bolt layout and all pertinent information shall be included on the shop drawings .
Provisions for cambering shall also be shown to insure that horizontal cross beams will not deflect below the horizontal .
A handhole millimeters x millimeters minimum size with frame and cover shall be installed in each overhead support structure post and positioned approximately millimeters above the top of footing .
The frames and covers shall be the same material as the posts .
A removable cap with set screws shall be furnished on the top of each overhead support structure post .
All supports for ground mounted signs shall be of the Breakaway type .
The design fabrication and erection shall conform with the plans .
The work to be done hereunder shall include the furnishing and installation of Breakaway Post Assemblies for ground mounted signs not guide in accordance with Department Standard Drawings and as shown on the plans .
This specification covers the use of standard tapered square rectangular round and special shape structural Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
metals for sign supports .
Breakaway sign supports shall be designed and fabricated in conformance with plans titled Standard Ground Mounted Supports Breakaway Design .
All vertical supports shall be erected plumb .
Both ends of each truss spanning a roadway shall be set at the same elevation .
Sign panels shall be mounted symmetrically about the horizontal truss or beam and provide a minimum vertical clearance above the roadway surface as shown on the plans .
MATERIALS .
General .
All materials shall be new and shall meet the requirements specified in the following Subsections of Division III Materials MPa mm kg Cement Concrete Masonry M ..
Reinforcing Steel M .. Anchor Bolts M .. Steel Sign Supports M ..
FABRICATION .
General .
Welding shall conform to the applicable provisions of Subsection .
of the Standard Specifications .
No transverse welds will be permitted in the tubular shafts except at the base plate and flange plate connections or where reinforcing sleeves are required .
The shaft shall telescope the flange and the base plate and be welded by two continuous welds one on the inside of the plate at the end of the shaft and the other on the outside surface of the plate .
All welds shall develop the full strength of the section at the point of connection .
CONSTRUCTION METHODS .
General .
Work hereunder includes excavation reinforcing steel MPa mm kg cement concrete masonry anchor bolts backfilling grading and all other labor material and equipment required to construct foundations conforming to the details shown on the plans and as directed .
Single pole foundation holes except in ledge shall be excavated by the auger method to the neat lines of the outside dimensions of the footings without disturbing the soil around or below the proposed footing .
In areas where rock or ledge is encountered the bottom of the footing shall be placed to the design depth shown on the typical detail plan .
Concrete for footings where rock has been excavated shall fill the entire volume of the excavation to the full depth of footing as designed .
Concrete foundations shall be poured monolithically to grade except that where the foundation requires a spread footing it may be poured separately and the pedestal then poured to grade .
The lower portion of the footing may be poured separately and the pedestal then poured to grade .
The lower portion of the footing may be poured against the embankment but the top millimeters below finished grade shall be formed .
Anchor bolts shall be set to conform with the baseplate template as furnished in conformance with the typical detail plans .
The top of the foundation shall be properly finished and dressed to assure that full bearing will be provided on the leveling nuts which are to be set in concrete .
All exposed edges shall have a millimeter chamfer .
Drain grooves shall be provided as shown on the typical plans .
Backfill for foundations if required by the Engineer shall be gravel borrow conforming to the requirements of Subsection M .. of the Standard Specifications except that no stone having any dimensions greater than millimeters shall be allowed .
The gravel shall be placed in layers not exceeding millimeters in depth before compaction .
Each layer of backfill shall be thoroughly compacted by use of power tampers to a minimum of density .
All backfilling and Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
compaction shall be in accordance with the applicable provisions of Subsection .
of these Specifications .
COMPENSATION .
Method of Measurement .
The foundation excavation backfilling and compaction for foundations and the structural supports shall be considered as one lump sum unit .
Breakaway P Post Assembly single or double complete in place shall be considered as one unit . .
Basis of Payment .
Compensation for the work done under Items through shall be by the lump sum bid price and compensation for Items and shall be at the contract bid price each for Sign Support not Guide and Route Marker including Breakaway Post Assembly .
The contract price shall be full compensation for designing furnishing and erecting the supports including construction of the concrete bases steel reinforcement and anchor bolts furnishing and installing post assembly and all excavation including Class B Rock gravel backfill and compensation. . Payment Items. . to .
Supports for Overhead Guide Sign OD thru OD Steel Lump Sum .
to .
Supports for Guide Sign D through D Steel Lump Sum .
to .
Supports for Guide Sign GF through GF Steel Lump Sum .
to .
Supports for Guide Sign D through D Steel Lump Sum .
to .
Supports for Guide Sign G through G Steel Lump Sum .
Supports for Guide Sign E Steel Lump Sum .
Supports for Guide Sign EA I Steel Lump Sum .
Sign Support Not Guide and Route Marker w Breakaway Post Assembly Steel Each .
Sign Support Not Guide and Route Marker w Breakaway Post Assembly Steel Each SECTION TRAFFIC CONTROLS FOR CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE OPERATIONS DESCRIPTION .
General .
Work under this Section consists of providing installing and maintaining various traffic control devices for the protection of the traveling public and working personnel during construction and maintenance operations and includes channelizing devices signs barricades markings lighting devices and hand signal devices .
The design application and installation of all devices shall conform to the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices latest edition Part VI hereinafter referred to as MUTCD andor as directed .
The Contractor shall be responsible for the installation of adequate safety precautions for the protection of the traveling public and hisher own personnel .
All materials provided by the Contractor under the items of this section shall remain the property of the Contractor upon completion of the project .
All work under this Section shall conform to the approved Traffic Control Plan .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II. . Safety Controls for Construction Operations .
Safety Controls for Construction Operations consists of furnishing positioning repositioning maintaining and removing as needed andor as directed traffic cones high level warning devices delineators floodlights Type I and II barricades portable flashing and steady burning lights hand signal devices lanterns and pilot cars .
This item does not include those specific devices listed below. . Safety Signing for Construction Operations .
Safety Signing for Construction Operations consists of furnishing positioning repositioning maintaining and removing as needed andor as directed regulatory warning and guide signs together with their supports .
Signs over square meters will require approval of design calculations and shop drawings of the breakaway support system where the signs will be unprotected . .
Temporary Pavement Markings and Raised Pavement Markers .
Temporary Pavement Markings and Raised Pavement Markers consist of furnishing applying maintaining and removing temporary white andor yellow reflectorized andor black non reflectorized pavement markings during construction and maintenance operations .
For the purpose of this specification temporary markings shall mean an effective marking for a period of days . .
Hazard Identification Beacon Flashing Warning Beacon .
Hazard Identification Beacon Flashing Warning Beacon consists of furnishing and installing complete inplace and in operation a flashing beacon at a location designated by the Engineer. . Special Lighting Unit Arrow Display .
Special Lighting Unit Arrow Display consists of providing operating and maintaining a portable truck mounted or trailer mounted flashing arrow unit on the project at designated locations. . Reflectorized Drums .
Reflectorized Drums with or without warning lights shall consist of furnishing positioning repositioning maintaining and removing reflectorized plastic drums and necessary ballast as needed andor directed. . Pavement Marking Removal .
Pavement Marking Removal consists of obliterating existing pavement markings as required and as directed . .
Temporary Precast Concrete Median Barrier .
Temporary Precast Concrete Median Barrier consists of furnishing maintaining and removing temporary precast concrete median barriers including delineation when positive barriers are needed for traffic control in construction zones . .
Temporary Precast Concrete Median Barrier Removed and Reset .
Temporary Precast Concrete Median Barrier Removed and Reset consists of removing temporary precast concrete barrier units from alignments established along the roadway to new alignments as required by the construction and stage construction operations for the control of traffic or protection of workers. . Portable Breakaway Barricades Type III .
Portable Breakaway Barricades Type III consists of furnishing installing moving maintaining and removing Portable Breakaway Barricades Type III where indicated on the plans and as directed .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II . .
Temporary AntiGlare Screen Paddle Type .
Temporary AntiGlare Screen Paddle Type consists of furnishing installing and maintaining new approved anti glare screen panels where indicated on the plans or as directed . .
Temporary AntiGlare Screen Removed and Reset .
This work consists of removing and resetting antiglare screen where indicated on plans or as directed . .
Temporary AntiGlare Screen Removed and Stacked .
This work consists of removing and stacking antiglare screen off the project as directed . .
Temporary Impact Attenuators and Temporary Impact Attenuators Removed and Reset .
This item shall consist of furnishing and installing temporary impact attenuators in close conformance with the specifications of the manufacturer and in close conformance with the locations lines and grades shown on the plans andor designated in the Special Provisions .
This work also includes maintaining removing and reinstalling temporary impact attenuators where indicated on the plans or as indicated by the Engineer. . Pavement Marking Masking Removable Tape .
This work consists of the masking of existing pavement markings by overlaying with black nonreflective pavement masking tape as required and as directed. . Portable Changeable Message Sign .
This work shall consist of furnishing maintaining transporting and using a Portable Changeable Message Sign .
All messages displayed shall be approved by the Engineer .
MATERIALS .
General .
Materials required under this Section need not be new but must be in first class condition and acceptable to the Engineer .
The condition of the work zone traffic control devices shall meet the quality standards set forth in the Quality Standards for Work Zone Traffic Control Devices compiled by the American Traffic Safety Services Association ATSSA .
Any materials that in the judgment of the Engineer are unsatisfactory in appearance andor performance shall be removed and immediately replaced by acceptable units. . Safety Signing for Construction Operations .
Materials shall conform to Sections and except the plywood material shall conform to the following Plywood sign panels and independent Route Markers shall be fabricated from ply millimeter thick Medium Density Overlaid MDO Exterior Type AB both sides surface in natural color and the whole conforming with the requirements and test for the above as set forth in U.S .
Product Standard PS for Construction and Industrial Plywood .
All plywood shall bear the grade trademark of an approved testing agency .
The entire sign face shall be reflectorized with reflective sheeting conforming to M ..
Type III or Type IV and shall be orange in color .
Background sheeting for the first set of signs on each approach to the work zone shall be of a fluorescent orange color .
The maximum spectral radiance factor in accordance with Section .
of ASTM E for the fluorescence shall be as follows Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
New minimum Weathered minimum .
Temporary Pavement Markings .
Paints tapes and glass beads used for temporary pavement markings shall conform to Subsections M M .. and tapes .
Other materials which will provide satisfactory durability and reflectivity may be used with prior approval of the Engineer .
The reflectivity of Temporary Pavement Markings material shall be equal to or better than the Department minimum requirements for a period of days .
The minimum reflectivity quality shall be determined by comparing the applied marking to the minimum reflectivity standard which is located at the Massachusetts Highway Department Research and Materials Laboratory in South Boston .
The comparison shall be made with low beam headlights at a distance of .
meters .
Final determination as to pavement marking quality shall be made by the Engineer .
The colors of the marking materials shall be the standard highway colors of white yellow or black commonly used for pavement markings and as outlined in the MUTCD .
Raised pavement markers shall conform to Subsection M . Hazard Identification Beacon Flashing Warning Beacon .
Materials shall conform to Section .
Signal heads shall be millimeters in diameter .
Beacon configuration shall be as follows Type A contains horizontally mounted yellow lenses .
Type B contains vertically mounted yellow lenses .
Type C contains horizontally and vertically mounted yellow lenses .
Type D contains a single yellow lens. . Special Lighting Unit Arrow Display .
The unit shall consist of a black background panel meeting the requirements of Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Type C and shall contain at least A or equal amber lamps of approximately initial maximum candela each .
Arrow panels shall have the capability of the following mode selections left or right flashing or sequential arrows or left or right sequential chevrons and double flashing arrows and caution .
The caution mode consists of four or more lamps arranged in a pattern which will not indicate a direction .
Arrow panels shall automatically provide for a minimum of percent dimming from their rated lamp voltage at night .
The flashing rate of the lamps shall not be less than nor more than flashes per minute .
Minimum mounting height should be meters above the roadway to the bottom of the panel except on vehicle mounted panels which should be as high as practicable. . Reflectorized Drums .
Reflectorized Drums shall conform to Subsection M .. no steel barrels shall be used .
Newly developed products providing equivalent target value and stability that are acceptable to the Engineer may be used under this item .
Warning lights shall conform to the MUTCD for Type A or Type C. All drums shall be maintained in a satisfactory manner including the removal of dirt or road film that cause a reduction in sign reflective efficiency. . Pavement Marking Removal .
Pavement marking removal methods shall not cause damage to the pavement or cause drastic change in texture which could be construed as delineation at night and shall be approved by the Engineer .
It is not permissible to paint over existing markings with black paint in lieu of removal . .
Temporary Precast Concrete Median Barrier .
Temporary precast concrete median barriers shall be manufactured in accordance with the plans and Section of these Specifications .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
The Contractor will be allowed the use of precast barrier heshe may presently own providing it meets these Specifications and is in good condition. . Portable Breakaway Barricades Type III .
Portable Breakaway Barricades shall conform to the plans and the following requirements .
MUTCD latest edition. . Reflectorized sheeting conforming to M Pipe shall be Polyvinyl Chloride PVC pressure rated SDR or SDR ASTM D . Fittings may be PVC ASTM D or Acrylonitrile Butadiene Styrene ABS ASTM D Drainage Waste and Vent .
The alternating millimeter wide reflectorized stripes shall be orange and white and shall slope downward at toward the end by which traffic is to pass . .
Temporary AntiGlare Screen Paddle Type .
The antiglare screen paddle type shall conform to the requirements of M The antiglare screen shall have a minimum height of millimeters. . Pavement Marking Masking Removable Tape .
The Pavement Marking Masking Removable Tape shall be nonreflective and shall have a black matte finish so as to blend with the bituminous concrete road surface .
Tape shall exhibit a level of luminance such that the tape distracts the attention of passing motorists as little as possible both in daytime and nighttime applications .
The tape shall exhibit an initial minimum skid resistance value of BPN British Pendulum Number when tested according to procedures specified in ASTM E . The tape shall be capable of adhering to a properly prepared bituminous concrete surface for an entire construction season yet be able to be removed quickly and easily intact or in large pieces without the use of heat solvents or grinding .
The removal of the tape shall not damage the pavement or the permanent markings . .
Temporary Impact Attenuators and Temporary Impact Attenuators Removed and Reset .
All materials used in the foundation and anchorage of temporary impact attenuators shall meet the requirements specified in Division III Materials .
The temporary impact attenuator may be any impact attenuator which meets the requirements of National Cooperative Highway Research Program Report and its subsequent revisions and has been accepted by the Federal Highway Administration for general use in the location intended .
Impact attenuators which have not been accepted by the Federal Highway Administration or which have been designated as approved for experimental use by the Federal Highway Administration shall be rejected by the Engineer .
The manufacturer must provide evidence of the suitability and acceptance by the Federal Highway Administration of the impact attenuator .
The temporary impact attenuator shall be designed to fit within reasonably close tolerance of the dimensions given on the plans or in the Special Provisions for a given location .
The manufacturer shall design the temporary impact attenuator for the design speed given on the plans or other such speed designated in the Special Provisions .
Copies of the design shall be given to the Engineer for inclusion in the contract record. . Portable Changeable Message Sign .
The Portable Changeable Message Sign shall be capable of performing all functions at ambient temperatures ranging from C to C. There shall be no degradation of operation due to fog rain or snow .
All components of the Portable Changeable Message Sign shall be readily accessible for ease of maintenance .
Standard commercially available parts shall be used where possible .
The sign shall require no special scheduled maintenance .
Maintenance shall include periodic cleaning .
When not being used at the discretion of the Engineer the sign shall be stored in an approved secure area .
As a minimum the following documentation shall be supplied with each Portable Changeable Message Sign Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II. . Operating Manual .
Parts Manual .
Wiring Diagrams .
Troubleshooting Guide The Portable Changeable Message Sign shall meet the requirements of this specification and shall consist of the following major components A .
Message Board . .
Type The display can be either Flip Disk LED or a combination of both Flip Disk and LED Hybrid . .
Size The message board shall have a minimum height of .
meters maximum height .
meters and a minimum width of .
meters maximum width of .
meters . .
Colors The display shall be either fluorescent yellow or ITE amber. . Lines The sign board shall have the capability of displaying at least three lines of millimeter characters with to characters per line. . Visibility and Viewing Angle The sign shall be visible from a minimum distance of meters with a viewing angle of no less than degrees .
The sign shall be either internally or externally illuminated for nighttime visibility .
B .
Operator Interface .
A means of creating and controlling the onsite display messages shall be provided with each sign .
The operator interface shall contain as a minimum the following .
Operators Display terminal with keyboard will provide a full screen display to allow the operator to preview the message content and format before it is sent to the sign panel .
The keyboard shall be of a standard design . .
Controller CPU. . Lockable weatherproof enclosure for interface components .
C. Controller .
The controller shall possess as a minimum the following features .
Full K user memory with the option for an additional K archive memory. . Capacity to store a minimum of predefined messages and a minimum of usercreated messages not to exceed K. . Changeable message flash rate capability. . A minimum of hour battery backup . .
Password activation shall be software available .
D. Power Supply .
The sign shall be capable of operation from the following sources .
A diesel powered generator with a battery backup. . A battery with diesel generator charging or solar charging . .
The power supply shall have a cover for weather protection and shall be lockable for security .
E. Towable Trailer .
The trailer shall be of rugged construction suitable for towing at highway speeds and at low speed over rugged construction site terrain .
The trailer shall have at least the following features .
A Registry of Motor Vehicles licensed trailer. . A single axle with two millimeter wheels GVW rated. . A millimeter ball coupler with heavy duty safety chains. . Four cornerlocated leveling swivel jacks capable of leveling the trailer on a vertical to horizontal slope and capable of stabilizing the trailer in high winds of up to kilometers per hour .
In addition a tongue leveling swivel jack shall be provided. . Surge brakes with lockable parking in conformance with Federal weight regulations . .
The sign shall be capable of being locked in a stowed position while being towed. . A hydraulic lift mechanism shall be provided to elevate the sign to its operating position . .
It shall be possible to lock the sign panel in several offangle positions with respect to the trailer axis for enhanced visibility .
CONSTRUCTION METHODS .
Safety Controls for Construction Operations .
All warning devices shall be subject to removal replacement andor repositioning as often as necessary .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
Cones or nonreflectorized warning devices shall not be left in operating position or on the highway when the days operations have ceased .
If it becomes necessary for the Department to remove any construction warning devices or their appurtenances from the project due to negligence by the Contractor all costs for this work will be charged to the Contractor .
All automotive equipment not protected by cones or drums that is working on a project which is open to traffic shall have one amber flashing light mounted on the cab roof or on the highest practical point of the machinery .
The light shall be in operation whenever the equipment is working on the highway andor traveling in the work area at a speed of kilometers per hour or less .
Amber flashers must be visible to both oncoming and overtaking vehicular traffic and shall have a minimum of candela and a flashing frequency of to times per minute .
All vehicles except passenger cars which are assigned to the project and which operate at speeds of kilometers per hour or less shall have an official SLOW MOVING VEHICLE emblem displayed .
All personnel who are working on the traveled way or breakdown lanes unless protected by positive barriers such as precast concrete shall wear Department approved safety vests .
The Contractor shall furnish such vests and maintain a sufficient supply of such at the work site for the Contractors and Department personnel assigned to the project as well as those visiting the work site .
All vests shall remain the property of the Contractor. . Safety Signing for Construction Operations .
Signs which are damaged or are missing from their locations shall be replaced by the Contractor without additional compensation .
All signs shall be maintained in a satisfactory manner including the removal of dirt or road fill that cause a reduction in sign reflective efficiency .
All erected signs not consistent with the use of the roadway shall be removed completely covered or turned away from traffic each day. . Portable Barricade Type III .
Portable barricades shall be constructed in accordance with the Departments Construction Standards with the following revisions The alternating millimeters wide reflectorized diagonal stripe shall be orange and white and shall slope downward at toward the end by which the traffic is to pass .
Barricades that block the passage of traffic or designate the end of the traveled way shall have alternating vertical orange and white stripes on the rails .
Portable barricades shall be maintained in good and serviceable condition throughout the project .
Barricades shall be moved from place to place as required during construction and as directed by the Engineer . .
Temporary Pavement Markings .
The Contractor shall provide all necessary temporary pavement markings temporary raised pavement markers or both following the completion of each days operations and prior to opening the roadway to traffic .
Temporary raised pavement markers shall be supplemented with tape or painted markings to assure lane delineation .
The Contractor will be expected to make all necessary arrangements for this work so that it may be properly coordinated with construction operations . .
Hazard Identification Beacon Flashing Warning Beacon .
The Contractor shall supply the necessary power and shall be responsible for the maintenance of all devices and appurtenances with no additional compensation other than as provided under the contract unit price .
The beacon shall be mounted separately in a stable position on a suitable support and at an approved height .
When the Engineer determines that its use is no longer required at the given location the Contractor shall remove the beacon and its appurtenances including power service and restore the area to an acceptable condition. . Special Lighting Unit Arrow Display .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
The special lighting unit shall be available for immediate use throughout the duration of the project and be positioned at the direction of the Engineer .
The unit shall be properly maintained throughout its use on the project. . Pavement Marking Removal .
Pavement Markings shall be removed to the fullest extent possible by an approved method .
Any damage to the pavement or surfacing caused by pavement marking removal shall be repaired by the Contractor at hisher expense by methods acceptable to the Engineer .
Approved methods include but are not limited to .
Sand blasting using air or water. . High pressure water . .
Steam or superheated water . .
Mechanical devices such as grinders sanders scrapers scarifiers and wire brushes .
Painting over a pavement marking line by use of asphaltic liquids or paints will not be permitted .
Inappropriate pavement markings shall be removed before any change is made in the traffic pattern .
Material deposited on the pavement as a result of removing markings shall be removed as the work progresses .
Accumulations of sand or other material which might interfere with drainage or could constitute a hazard to traffic will not be permitted .
Where blast cleaning is used for the removal of pavement markings and such removal operation is being performed within meters of a lane occupied by traffic the residue including dust shall be removed immediately after contact between the sand and the surface being treated .
Such removal shall be by a vacuum attachment operating concurrently with the blast cleaning operation or by other methods approved by the Engineer . .
Temporary Precast Concrete Median Barrier .
The Temporary Precast Concrete Median Barrier shall be installed as shown on the details indicated on the plans in accordance with these provisions andor as directed by the Engineer .
Each run or bay of temporary precast concrete barrier units shall be fastened together to form a continuous chain .
Delineators shall be installed in conformance with manufacturers recommendations on the barriers at their termini at meter intervals on tangent sections and meter intervals on curved sections depending on radius as determined by the Engineer .
Delineators mounted on top of barriers separating opposing traffic shall have two sided amber reflectors delineating the left edge .
Side mounted delineators shall have amber delineating the left edge white delineating the right edge and have red as the back color .
Delineators shall be mounted at approximate angles which provided maximum reflectorization .
Approved temporary impact attenuators with delineation shall be installed at ends of barriers within meters of approaching traffic .
The Contractor shall not leave a barrier leading end unprotected . .
Temporary Precast Concrete Median Barrier Removed and Reset .
Temporary Precast Concrete Median Barriers shall be removed from existing locations and reset in accordance with above requirements as directed. . Portable Breakaway Barricades Type III .
The Contractor shall furnish set up move and remove Portable Breakaway Barricades Type III as required or directed by the Engineer .
Portable Breakaway Barricades Type III shall be maintained in a good and serviceable condition throughout the project and shall be moved from place to place as required during construction and as directed by the Engineer . .
Temporary AntiGlare Screen Paddle Type .
The Temporary AntiGlare Screen Paddle Type shall be attached to the barrier in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations and the following Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II . .
The paddles shall be installed on top of the barrier at an appropriate angle to eliminate all direct and peripheral glare while eliminating most of the intermittent glare . .
The top of the paddle for most construction zone applications should be a minimum of .
meters above the roadway .
Unusual deviation from work zone practices involving excess radius and elevations may warrant the increase or decrease in overall height or spacing . .
The method of attachment will be such that the antiglare screen units can be easily removed and reinstalled on the barriers . .
Temporary AntiGlare Screen Paddle Type Removed and Reset .
This work consists of removing temporary antiglare screen furnished above from the barriers and reinstalling it on barriers at new locations .
Any glare screen damaged during this work shall be replaced at no additional cost to the Department . .
Temporary AntiGlare Screen Paddle Type Removed and Stacked .
This work consists of removing and stacking temporary antiglare screen furnished above deemed no longer necessary from the project to locations as directed. . Pavement Marking Masking Removable Tape .
Pavement markings will be masked by covering with pavement marking masking tape .
The width of the tape shall be sufficient to overlap the existing markings by millimeters on each side e.g .
millimeter wide markings will be masked by millimeter wide tape .
Prior to the application of the pavement masking tape the roadway shall be clean and dry .
Surface temperature shall be C and rising .
No diversion of traffic patterns by the use of temporary pavement markings shall be made before the pavement marking masking is in place . .
Temporary Impact Attenuators and Temporary Impact Attenuators Removed and Reset .
Excavation for temporary attenuator foundations and anchorage shall be made to the required depth and to a width that will permit the installation and bracing of forms where necessary .
All soft and unsuitable material shall be replaced with gravel borrow .
The temporary impact attenuator shall be installed in accordance with the specifications and recommendations of the manufacturer .
Copies of these specifications and recommendations shall be provided to the Engineer. . Portable Changeable Message Sign .
All warning devices shall be subject to removal replacement andor repositioning as often as necessary .
The changeable message unit shall be available for immediate use throughout the duration of the project and be positioned at the direction of the Engineer .
The Contractor shall be responsible for the maintenance of such device and appurtenances throughout its use on the project with no additional compensation thereof other than as provided under the contract unit price .
Should the unit be found defective in any way it shall be replaced immediately at the Contractors expense .
COMPENSATION .
Method of Measurement .
Safety signing for construction operations will be measured by the square meter and the quantity shall be only that which is actually used on the project .
Regardless of the number of times that a sign may be reused on the project it will not be measured for payment more than once .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II. . meter sections of Portable Barricade Type III and .
meter sections of Portable Breakaway Barricade Type III shall be considered as one unit each .
Temporary Pavement Markings shall be measured by the procedure outlined in Subsection ..
Temporary Raised Pavement Markers will be measured by the unit .
Pavement Marking Removal shall be measured by the square meter of pavement marking actually removed .
Temporary Precast Concrete Median Barrier and Temporary Precast Concrete Median Barrier Removed and Reset will be measured by the meter .
Temporary AntiGlare Screen Paddle Type Temporary AntiGlare Screen Removed and Reset and Temporary AntiGlare Screen Removed and Stacked will be measured by the meter along the top of the barriers receiving the installation from outsides of the end paddles for each continuous run .
Pavement Marking Masking Tape Removable Tape will be measured by the square meter installed .
Temporary Impact Attenuators will be measured as a single unit .
Relocation of an attenuator required by the plans or directed by the Engineer will be paid for as attenuator removed and reset each .
Portable Changeable Message Signs will be measured by the UnitDay . .
Basis of Payment .
The contract prices under these items shall constitute full payment for all material labor and equipment required or incidental to the satisfactory completion of the work as described above .
Any devices provided under this section which are lost stolen destroyed or deemed unacceptable while their use is required on the project shall be replaced without additional compensation .
Lump sum payments will be made in equal amounts on each estimate based on the number of months estimated to complete the work .
Payment for Temporary Pavement Markings and Raised Pavement Markers will include full compensation for furnishing installing maintaining and removing as specified the markings and markers except that removal of painted temporary pavement markings will be paid for under Item .
Pavement Marking RemovalPaint .
The contract unit price for Hazard Identification Beacons will include full compensation for excavation backfilling foundations conduit wiring supports power service costs removal and restoration of the area .
Reflectorized Drums with or without lights will be paid for at the contract bid price per DrumDay and Special Lighting Units at the contract bid price per UnitDay .
Payment will be made at the unit bid price for any portion of a day during which these devices were actually used on the project .
Temporary Precast Concrete Median Barrier and Temporary Precast Median Barrier Removed and Reset will be paid for by the meter for furnishing installing realigning maintaining and removing the temporary median barrier including delineation as specified above .
The Contractor will not be compensated for any work necessary to maintain or re align units or replace damaged units .
The contract unit price for Temporary Impact Attenuators and Temporary Impact Attenuators Removed and Reset includes full compensation for furnishing installing maintaining and removing the attenuators .
Portable Breakaway Barricades Type III will be paid for by the unit price each which shall constitute full payment for all material labor and equipment necessary to furnish install maintain move and remove the barricades .
Temporary AntiGlare Screen Paddle Type Temporary AntiGlare Screen Removed and Reset and Temporary AntiGlare Screen Removed and Stacked will be paid for by the meter which price will include full compensation for all labor materials and equipment to complete installations and removal .
The antiglare screen shall remain the property of the Department upon completion of project .
Payment for Pavement Marking Masking Tape will include the furnishing installing maintaining and removing as specified or directed by the Engineer .
Temporary Impact Attenuators will be paid for at the contract unit price which includes full compensation for furnishing and installing the attenuator as well as all labor equipment materials foundation and anchorage and all incidental work necessary to complete the work as specified and to maintain the attenuator in proper working condition .
Temporary Impact Attenuator Removed and Reset will be paid for at the contract unit price for each relocation and installation which will include full compensation for installing the attenuator all labor equipment materials foundation and anchorage and all incidental work necessary to complete the work as specified .
Gravel Borrow required for any foundation and anchorage work to the Temporary Impact Attenuators will be paid for at the contract unit price under Item Gravel Borrow .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
Portable Changeable Message Signs will be paid for at the contract bid price per UnitDay .
Payment will be made at the unit bid price for any portion of a day during which these devices were actually used on the project. . Payment Items. . Safety Controls for Construction Operations Lump Sum .
Safety Signing for Construction Operations Square Meter .
Portable Barricade Type III Each .
Portable Breakaway Barricade Type III Each .
Temporary Precast Concrete Median Barrier Meter .
Temporary Precast Concrete Median Barrier Removed and Reset Meter .
Temporary Impact Attenuator for Shoulder Incapable of Redirection Each .
Temporary Impact Attenuator for Shoulder Incapable of Redirection Remove and Reset Each .
Temporary Impact Attenuator for Shoulder Capable of Redirection Each .
Temporary Impact Attenuator for Shoulder Capable of Redirection Removed and Reset Each .
Temporary Impact Attenuator for Median Incapable of Redirection Each .
Temporary Impact Attenuator for Median Incapable of Redirection Removed and Reset Each .
Temporary Impact Attenuator for Median Capable of Redirection Each .
Temporary Impact Attenuator for Median Capable of Redirection Removed and Reset Each .
Temporary AntiGlare Screen Paddle Type Meter .
Temporary AntiGlare Screen Removed and Reset Meter .
Temporary AntiGlare Screen Removed and Stacked Meter .
Temporary Raised Pavement Markers Each .
Temporary Pavement Markings mm Painted Meter .
Temporary Pavement Markings mm Painted Meter .
Temporary Pavement Markings mm NonRemovable Tape Meter .
Temporary Pavement Markings mm NonRemovable Tape Meter .
Temporary Pavement Markings mm Removable Tape Meter .
Temporary Pavement Markings mm Removable Tape Meter .
Pavement Marking Removal Paint Square Meter .
Pavement Marking Removal Thermoplastic Square Meter .
Pavement Marking Removal Tape Square Meter .
Pavement Marking Masking Removable Tape Square Meter .
Hazard Identification Beacon Type B Each .
Hazard Identification Beacon Type D Each .
Special Lighting Unit Flashing Arrow UnitDay .
Portable Changeable Message Sign UnitDay .
Reflectorized Drum DrumDay .
Reflectorized Drum with Flasher Type A DrumDay .
Reflectorized Drum with Light Type C DrumDay .
Gravel Borrow Cubic Meter SECTION REFLECTORIZED PAVEMENT MARKINGS DESCRIPTION Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II. . General .
This item of work consists of furnishing materials and the application of Reflectorized Pavement Markings in accordance with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices current edition .
MATERIALS .
General .
Materials shall be as specified under the particular payment item being used and shall meet the appropriate requirements specified in the following Subsections of Division III Materials General Requirements for Paints and Protective Coatings M .. White Thermoplastic Reflectorized Pavement Markings M .. Yellow Thermoplastic Reflectorized Pavement Markings M .. Glass Beads M .. Preformed Permanent Plastic Pavement Markings or Legends M .. Thermoplastic Pavement Marking Compound Alkyd M .. Green Pavement Coatings M .. Fast Drying White Waterborne Traffic Paint M .. Fast Drying Yellow Waterborne Traffic Paint M .. CONSTRUCTION METHODS .
Equipment .
All equipment used for the application of pavement markings shall be of standard commercial manufacture .
All other equipment and devices necessary for the application of the pavement markings and protection thereof and for the protection to the traveling public shall be as usually required for work of this type and shall be furnished by the Contractor .
The pavement marking equipment shall be operated at the speed and in accordance with other requirements of the manufacturer unless otherwise directed by the Engineer .
Truck mounted equipment is approved for the application of pavement markings except in such cases where in the Engineers judgment travel will be unreasonably delayed andor the quality of the work performed by the machine is unsatisfactory . .
Layout of Work .
A schedule of pavement marking operations shall be furnished by the Contractor for the approval of the Engineer prior to the application of any pavement markings .
This schedule must be in the office of the Engineer seven days prior to the proposed date of application of any pavement markings .
The Engineer will provide at a convenient location on the roadway a line of reference for use by the Contractor in establishing the location of the markings .
The line of reference shall be at a maximum of meter intervals by means deemed satisfactory by the Engineer .
All markings shall follow the line of reference without deviation .
Any line deviating from the establishing control or of incorrect width shall be reapplied as directed by the Engineer in accordance with Subsection .. .
Application of Markings .
Pavement markings shall be applied as follows Material Application Temperature C Reflectorized Bead Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
Material Line Thickness mm Application M .. . . . kgm drop on M .. . . . kgm drop on M .. . . kgl M .. . . kgl No thinners shall be used for the above listed pavement marking applications except in accordance with the manufacturers specifications at the direction of the Engineer .
No paint or pavement marking material shall be heated above the temperature marked on the container .
Markings shall be applied only in seasonable weather and in accordance with good painting practices .
The surface shall be dry and free of sand grease oil or other foreign substances prior to the application .
The Contractor shall prepare the surface to accept the application as part of this item with no additional compensation .
The Engineer will make the final determination for all of the foregoing .
Bituminous concrete pavements shall have been in place for hours prior to the applications of pavement markings except preformed permanent plastic pavement markings which can be applied immediately .
When it is necessary to expedite the flow of traffic the Engineer may reduce the waiting period as is deemed necessary .
If for any reason material is spilled or tracked on the highway or any markings applied by the Contractor in the Engineers judgement fail to confrom to Subsection .
because of a deviation from the desired pattern the Contractor shall remove such material by a method that is not injurious to the roadway surface and is acceptable tot eh Engineer and clean the roadway surface and prepare the surface for a reapplication of markings and reapply the markings as directed without additional compensation for any of the foregoing corrective operations .
The ambient air temperature for thermoplastic application is to be a minimum of C and rising at the time of marking operations .
If work has started and air temperatures fall below C and continuous cooling is indicated work shall be stopped .
In cool weather conditions temporary drops down to C will be tolerated providing temperatures also vary upwards .
Sustained striping greater than one hour at C shall not be allowed .
Starting work at air temperatures lower than C shall not be allowed. . Protection of Markings .
Markings shall remain protected until sufficiently dry to bear traffic on highways that are open to traffic .
Markings shall be protected by traffic cones of not less than millimeters in height except in the case of markings which cure to a no track condition in seconds or less in the latter case protection may be provided by a convoy of vehicles with suitable warning devices to warn overtaking or oncoming traffic that the pavement marking operation is in progress .
A .
Broken Lines .
On tangents and on curves of meter radius or greater at least cone shall be placed on every other bar .
On curves of less than meter radius cone shall be placed on every bar unless otherwise directed by the Engineer .
B .
Solid Lines .
On tangents and on curves of meter radius or greater cones shall be spaced not over meters apart and on curves of less than meter radius the spacing shall be not over meters unless otherwise directed by the Engineer .
On edge line adjacent to the median wider spacing may be used at the direction of the Engineer .
In order to control the proper positioning of the cones during the drying period the Contractor shall assign sufficient personnel as determined by the Engineer .
Such control is dependent on traffic density cone widths etc. . Accommodation of Traffic .
All warning signs and traffic control devices as required shall be in accordance with Section of these Specifications .
No work shall be done on this item on roadways open to traffic on Saturdays Sundays the day before a holiday or on a holiday except when otherwise specifically directed by the Engineer .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges II .
Both lanes of twolanes highways shall remain open to traffic at all times .
On multilane highways only one lane shall be closed to traffic at any time .
Work under this item may be suspended at the discretion of the Engineer during peak traffic hours or at any other time when in hisher judgment traffic is being unduly hampered or delayed by the work under this item .
COMPENSATION .
Method of Measurement .
Markings are to be paid for on the actual length of lines applied under the various items of the Contract .
The length of solid lines will be obtained by .
Calculation from established base line stations or .
Use of a measuring wheel or .
Vehicle odometer readings .
The length of broken lines except for broken lines less than meters the actual length shall be used will be obtained by using of the results obtained above for solid lines .
Patterns other than lines are to be paid for by the square meter area under the item in the Contract . .
Basis of Payment .
The work under these items will be paid for at the contract unit price under each item of the Contract based on the measurements as determined by the Engineer .
The contract prices shall include all material labor and equipment required or incidental to the satisfactory completion of the work. . Payment Items .
.. ___ millimeter Reflectorized White Line Painted Meter .. ___ millimeter Reflectorized Yellow Line Painted Meter .
Pavement Arrow Reflectorized White Painted Square Meter .
Pavement Arrow and Legends Reflectorized White Tape Inlay Square Meter .
Pavement Arrow and Legends Surface Applied Tape Square Meter .. ___ millimeter Reflectorized White Line Thermoplastic Meter .. ___ millimeter Reflectorized Yellow Line Thermoplastic Meter .
millimeter White Reflective Tape Inlay Meter .
millimeter Yellow Reflective Tape Inlay Meter .
millimeter White Reflective Tape Surface Applied Meter .
millimeter Yellow Reflective Tape Surface Applied Meter ___ millimeters millimeters II .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges SECTION STRUCTURES SECTION CEMENT CONCRETE MASONRY DESCRIPTION .
General .
Cement concrete masonry with or without reinforcement as required for bridges culverts walls steps drop inlets and other work shall be constructed to the designs and dimensions indicated on the plans or as directed and to close conformity with the lines and grades established by the Engineer .
Where necessary at the direction of the Engineer the dimensions or design may be adjusted to fit foundation slope or construction conditions as encountered .
MATERIALS .
Materials .
Materials shall meet the requirements specified in the following Subsections of Division III Materials Cement Concrete M .. Latex Modified Mortar and Concrete Overlayments M ..
Reinforcing Steel M .. Epoxy Coated Reinforcing Bars M .. StayinPlace Bridge Deck Form M .. Preformed Expansion Joint Filler M .. Preformed Bituminous Fiber Joint Filler M .. Preformed Compression Joint Seals Bridges M .. Polyurethane Joint Sealer Flow Type M .. Polyurethane Joint Sealer NonSag Type M ..
Plastic Water Stops M .. Shear Connectors M .. Curing Materials Impervious Liquid Membrane M .. Waterproof Paper M .. Burlap M .. White Polyethylene for Curing M .. B Polyethylene Coated Burlap M ..
Concrete PenetrantSealer M .. For any project using cubic meters or more of cement concrete the Contractor shall supply to the project for the use of the Engineer the following equipment as an incidental item if not already provided for in a previous section . .
Concrete cylinder molds with plastic covers millimeters in diameter by millimeters high meeting the requirements of AASHTO M . . One complete slump test set meeting the requirements of AASHTO T consisting of one each of the following a. slump cone AASHTO T b. tamping rod AASHTO T c. sheet metal pan millimeters x millimeters x millimeters d. cement mold brush II .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges e. large scoop f. mixing trowel .
One air meter meeting the requirements of AASHTO T Type B. . One concrete curing boxCuramold LA. . Two liter heavy duty buckets .
CONSTRUCTION METHODS .
Forms .
Approved centers and forms shall be provided by the Contractor .
Piles shall be used for falsework if required by the Engineer .
No extra compensation for falsework or falsework piling shall be allowed such work being considered part of the form work .
Falsework shall be set to give the structural camber indicated on the plans or as specified plus allowance for shrinkage shortening under load or settlement .
Forms falsework and centering shall be designed for a liquid head equal to the maximum height of the liquid concrete in the forms for various placing conditions assuming the load of the liquid concrete to be kilograms per cubic meter and in addition thereto a live load allowance of .
kiloPascals on horizontal surfaces .
When not otherwise specified on the plans or in the special provisions forms for all exposed portions of bridges and structures shall be lined with approved material or form sheathing which shall consist of fiveply waterproof plywood approved metal sheathing or other approved material in order to give the concrete a smooth even finish and uniform appearance .
This requirement shall not apply to the underside of the deck of a bridge over a waterway the underside of a bridge over a railroad or any part of a structure that will be at least millimeters below the surface of adjacent ground in the completed project .
Any material that will provide tight forms will be acceptable for such locations .
Full sheets of plywood or other approved material shall be used wherever possible and shall be placed in a regular pattern .
The use of small pieces and leftovers will not be permitted except as they may be needed to complete the design .
Forms in good condition may be reused but forms for any one exposed face shall be all new or all used material and a mixture of old and new forms will not be permitted .
Forms for cylindrical pier columns shall be smooth and reasonably free of joints .
The sheathing shall be jointed tightly to prevent leakage from the mix and it shall be of sufficient strength to hold the concrete without bulging between supports .
Forms shall be properly braced and tied so as to maintain proper dimensions .
Bolts rods or other satisfactory form ties shall be used for internal ties .
Wire ties will not be permitted except when directed or where concrete is not exposed to view .
The Engineer may require the Contractor to employ screw jacks or hard wood wedges in connection with the centering of falsework in order to take up any distortion or settlement in the form work either before or during the placing of the concrete .
Approved inserts shall be used in connection with all ties in the region of exposed surfaces on the concrete .
They shall be so designed as to permit their removal from the concrete without injury to the concrete and the metal remaining in the concrete shall be not closer than millimeters to the surface .
The inserts shall be truly round not more than millimeters in outside diameter and shall be treated with nonstaining mineral oil or other satisfactory material adequate for preventing any adherence to surrounding concrete .
Special tools and methods shall be used to remove the inserts from the concrete in a manner to prevent damage to the concrete .
When forming the concrete surface in front of coated reinforcing mats all ties and any parts thereof that are to be left in place shall be either epoxy coated or galvanized within a minimum of millimeters of that concrete surface .
Form ties of a design with a weakened section millimeters back from the concrete face may be used at places of minor pressure when permitted by the Engineer but such ties shall be provided with special inserts so as to assure the breaking off of the ties at the proper depth inside the face of the concrete .
When such ties fail to break off at the designed depth the tie metal shall be drilled out before the tie hole is patched .
The use of wooden struts within forms or of metal ties without approved inserts as required will not be permitted .
The centers shall be true to the lines satisfactorily supported and firmly secured .
They shall remain in place as long as directed and shall be replaced with new ones if they lose their proper dimensions and shape .
Forms for the roadway deck slabs shall be so construed that under full dead load the thickness of the slabs shall be the required thickness shown on the plans and the surface of the pavement will accurately conform to the profile grades cross sections and alignment shown on the plans .
Allowance shall be made for the camber of the floor members as erected II .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges and for the additional dead load deflections of the floor members .
Slab haunches shall be provided over steel girders floor beams or stringers .
The depth of haunches shall be variable as required to maintain the uniform thickness of slab between the steel supports .
All exposed edges and corners of concrete not otherwise specified on the plans shall be formed with a wooden triangular chamfer strip millimeters on the square sides .
These triangular chamfer strips shall be machine surfaced on all sides and shall be of uniform dimensions throughout the project .
Any chamfered or beveled corners of concrete specified on the plans of larger size shall be formed and finished as required for other parts of the adjacent forms .
Where rustications are called for on the plans as for abutments and wingwalls the form liners for rustications shall be surfaced on all sides true to line plans and dimensions in accordance with the detail on the plans .
The form liners shall be fastened to the forms in such a manner that the form liners will remain in the concrete when the forms are removed .
These moldings shall not be removed until the concrete has hardened sufficiently so that the edges of the concrete adjacent to the moldings shall not be damaged .
Bridge bearing anchor bolts in piers shall be set accurately by template prior to placing concrete .
Anchor bolts in abutments may be set by template or by drilling and grouting .
Grout shall be a nonshrinking type .
The shape strength rigidity watertightness and surface smoothness of reused forms shall be maintained at all times .
Any warped or bulged lumber must be resized before being used .
Forms which are unsatisfactory in any respect shall not be used and shall be removed immediately from the work .
The inside of forms shall be coated with nonstaining mineral oil or other approved material to prevent adherence of the concrete to the forms immediately before placing the concrete .
When oil is used it shall be applied before the reinforcing steel is placed .
Any material which will adhere to discolor or affect the concrete in any manner shall not be used .
Forms for bridge decks shall not be oiled but shall be dampened with water ahead of concrete placement .
In the construction of copings railings and other intricate sections extreme care shall be taken in the construction to insure true lines .
Prior to placing concrete in the forms all foreign matter and any extraneous materials shall be removed .
Forms shall be inspected immediately preceding and during the placing of the concrete .
All dimensions shall be checked carefully and any errors bulges warping or other defects shall be remedied before any concrete is placed .
Temporary openings shall be provided for inspection at the base of the column and wall forms and near the bottom of all deep members .
The foregoing specifications for forms as regards design mortartightness chamfers or moldings bracing alignment treatment by coating with oil or other approved material removing and reuse shall apply to metal forms when such forms are approved for use .
The metal forms used shall be of such strength that the forms will remain true to shape .
All bolt and rivet heads shall be countersunk .
Clamps pins or other connecting devices shall be designed to hold the forms rigidly together and to allow removal without injury to the concrete .
Metal forms which do not present a smooth surface or which do not line up properly shall not be used .
Special care shall be exercised to keep metal forms free from rust grease or other foreign matter that will tend to discolor the concrete .
Metal forms shall be provided with an adjustable metal section or occasional sections where wooden forms may be inserted to compensate for slight inaccuracies in measurement .
Removable or stayinplace forms for bridge decks may be used as alternates except in hazardous locations where stayinplace forms shall be used .
Hazardous locations are defined as high volume roadways and all railroads under the bridge .
Removable forms shall be used for forming end diaphrams bays with longitudinal construction joints and overhanging portions of decks .
Material to prevent concrete from adhering to the forms shall not be used when stayinplace forms are used .
Design of Permanent Steel Bridge Deck Forms .
The following criteria shall govern the design of permanent steel bridge deck form .
The steel forms shall be designed on the basis of dead load of form reinforcement and plastic concrete plus .
kiloPascals for construction loads .
The unit working stress in the steel sheets shall not be more than .
of the specified minimum yield strength of the material furnished but not to exceed megaPascals. . Deflection under the load of the forms the plastic concrete and reinforcement shall not exceed of the form span or millimeters whichever is less .
In no case shall this design loading be less than kiloPascals total .
The permissible form camber shall be based on the actual dead load condition .
Camber shall not be used to compensate for deflection in excess of the foregoing limits .
II .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges .
The design span of the form sheets shall be the clear span of the form plus millimeters measured parallel to the form flutes . .
Physical design properties shall be computed in accordance with requirements of the American Iron and Steel Institute Specification for the Design of Cold Formed Steel Structural Members latest published edition. . All reinforcement shall have minimum concrete cover of millimeters . .
The plan dimensions of both layers of primary deck reinforcement from the top surface of the concrete deck shall be maintained . .
Permanent steel bridge deck form shall not be considered as lateral bracing for compression flanges of supporting structural members . .
Permanent steel bridge deck form shall not be used in panels where longitudinal deck construction joints are located between stringers. . Welding shall not be permitted to flanges in tension or to structural steel bridge elements fabricated from nonweldable grades of steel. . Fabricators shop and erection drawings shall be submitted to the Engineer for approval .
These plans shall indicate the grade of steel deck form sheets and a clear indication of locations where the forms are supported by steel beam flanges subject to tensile stresses .
All forms shall be installed in accordance with approved fabrication and erection plans .
Form sheets shall not be permitted to rest directly on the top of the stringer or floor beam flanges .
Sheets shall be securely fastened to form supports and shall have a minimum bearing length of millimeters at each end .
Form supports shall be placed in direct contact with the flange of stringer or floor beam .
All attachments shall be made by permissible welds bolts or clips of other approved means .
However welding of form supports to flanges of steels not considered weldable and to portions of flange subject to tensile stresses shall not be permitted .
Welding and welds shall be in accordance with the provisions of AWS D. pertaining to fillet welds except that millimeter fillet welds will be permitted .
Any permanently exposed form metal where the galvanized coating has been damaged shall be thoroughly cleaned wire brushed and painted with two coats of zinc oxidezinc dust primer Federal Specification TTP ld Type II no color added to the satisfaction of the Engineer .
Minor heat discoloration in areas of welds need not be touched up .
The Contractors method of construction should be carefully observed during all phases of the construction of the bridge deck slab .
These phases include installation of the metal forms location and fastening of the reinforcement composition of concrete items mixing procedures concrete placement and vibration and finishing of the bridge deck .
Should the Engineer determine that the procedures used during the placement of the concrete warrant inspection of the underside of the deck the Contractor shall remove at least one section of the forms at a location and time selected by the Engineer for each span in the contract .
This should be done as soon after placing the concrete as practicable in order to provide visual evidence that the concrete mix and the Contractors procedures are obtaining the desired results .
An additional section shall be removed if the Engineer determines that there has been any change in the concrete mix or in the Contractors procedures warranting additional inspection .
After the deck concrete has been in place for a minimum period of days the concrete shall be tested for soundness and bonding of the forms by sounding with a hammer as directed by the Engineer .
If areas of doubtful soundness are disclosed by this procedure the Contractor will be required to remove the forms from such areas for visual inspection after the pour has attained adequate strength .
This removal of the permanent steel bridge deck forms shall be at no cost to the project .
At locations where sections of the forms are removed the Contractor will not be required to replace the forms but the adjacent metal forms and supports shall be repaired to present a neat appearance and assure their satisfactory retention .
As soon as the form is removed the concrete surfaces will be examined for cavities honeycombing and other defects .
If irregularities do not justify rejection of the work the concrete shall be repaired as the Engineer may direct and shall be given an Ordinary Surface Finish in accordance with the contract specifications .
If the concrete where the form is removed is unsatisfactory additional forms as necessary shall be removed to inspect and repair the slab and the Contractors methods of construction shall be modified as required to obtain satisfactory concrete in the slab .
All unsatisfactory concrete shall be removed or repaired as directed by the Engineer .
The amount of sounding and form removal may be moderated at the Engineers discretion after a substantial amount of slab has been constructed and inspected if the Contractors methods of construction and the results of the inspections as outlined above indicate that sound concrete is being obtained through the slabs .
The Contractor shall provide all facilities as are reasonably required for the safe and convenient conduct of the Engineers inspection procedure .
II .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges .
Reinforcement .
The Contractor shall submit for approval detailed plans and schedules of the reinforcing bars so that the reinforcement may be properly placed and its mass readily computed .
If it is impractical to obtain or use bars of the full length required the bars shall be lapped for the length shown on the plans .
If no lap length is provided the lap length shall be calculated for the type of bar used according to the latest AASHTO Standard Specifications for Highway Bridges for a Class C splice .
Coated bars shall be either epoxy coated or galvanized as specified on the plans .
Where coated bars are called for without designation they may be either epoxy coated bars or galvanized bars however mixing epoxy coated and galvanized bars will not be permitted .
Where coated bars are used in combination with uncoated bars in a reinforcing mat or cage and the coated bars will touch or be tied to uncoated bars with wire ties only epoxy coated bars may be used .
All support devices and ties for galvanized bars used in deck reinforcing shall be coated so that there is no electrical continuity either between reinforcing mats or between the reinforcing and the stayinplace forms or steel beams .
All support devices and ties for epoxy coated bars used in deck reinforcing shall be either epoxy coated or coated with a plastic material compatible with the epoxy reinforcing bar coating .
The steel shall be bent in the shop true to templates and shall be placed accurately as shown on the plans with the following tolerance .
Cover clearance from face of concrete to bar millimeters. . Horizontal spacing of bars millimeters however the required number of bars must be placed .
The minimum spacing can not be decreased .
The reinforcement shall be placed so as to insure its remaining in the correct position during the placing and hardening of the concrete .
No splicing shall be at points of maximum stress and the clear distances between spliced bars shall not be less than times the nominal diameter of the bars times the maximum size of the coarse aggregate nor less than millimeters .
The required distance between reinforcing steel and the forms shall be maintained by means of stays blocks ties hangers or other approved supports .
The spacing of reinforcing supports shall not exceed .
meters .
Steel reinforcing mats shall be firmly secured against displacement by tying every other intersection point with a maximum of millimeters between tied joints .
In addition steel reinforcing mats top and bottom shall be securely connected together so that uniform vertical spacing can be maintained throughout .
This connection may be accomplished by tying with coated tie wires or other means as approved by the Engineer .
Connections shall be placed no farther apart than .
meters on center .
Support devices may be utilized for this purpose .
Connection devices shall neither deflect the steel reinforcing nor interfere with the smooth flow of concrete .
Blocks for holding reinforcement from contact with the forms shall be precast mortar blocks of approved shape and dimensions .
Blocks for spacing reinforcing bars shall also be precast mortar blocks of approved designs and short enough to permit their ends to be adequately covered with concrete .
The precast mortar blocks shall be made from the same materials and of the same proportions of sand and cement as that of the concrete in which they are to be used .
They shall be cast and properly cured before use and shall have a wire of copper or other nonrusting metal or other approved device cast into each block suitably placed so that the block can be securely fastened to the reinforcement .
Layers of bars except for those placed in bridge decks shall be separated by such blocks which may be reinforced and which shall have slots to receive the bars and hold them in place or by other approved means .
Any parts of metal supports that are left in place within millimeters of an exposed surface of the concrete shall be made of either nonrusting metal epoxy coated or galvanized .
Galvanizing of such parts shall be in accordance with Subsection ..
The use of pebbles pieces of broken stone metal pipe or wooden blocks will not be permitted .
Reinforcement in any member or section shall be in place and approved by the Engineer before the placing of concrete begins .
In no case shall reinforcing steel be driven or forced into the concrete after it has taken its initial set and any reinforced concrete placed in violation of this provision will be rejected by the Engineer and then shall be removed and replaced by the Contractor entirely at hisher own expense .
When wire mesh is used as reinforcement it shall be furnished and placed in accordance with the plans .
If the wire mesh is shipped in rolls it shall be straightened into flat sheets before being used .
Dowels where required shall be furnished and placed as indicated on the plans and as directed .
Reinforcement that extends continuously within the concrete of the substructure and the concrete of the superstructure or any other reinforcement that might stain the exposed surface of the bridge shall be given a light coat of II .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges neat cement grout on the surfaces of the reinforcement that will be exposed for more than three weeks before being encased in concrete .
Subsequent coats of grout may be required . .
Anchors .
Bent plate edging steel curbing expansion dams at back of parapet and fixed dam assemblies shall be anchored to the concrete by use of headed anchors .
Headed anchors shall conform to the requirements of stud shear connectors. . Partition Tile .
The tile under the sidewalk above the bridge deck slab shall be light weight hollow partition tile .
The blocks shall be closely butted .
The end blocks shall be left open at the lower end of the sidewalk. . Shear Connectors .
All shear connections shall be the stud reinforcement type and the following requirements shall apply A .
Stud shear connectors shall be end welded to steel beams or girders with automatically time stud welding equipment connected to a suitable power source .
B .
If two or more stud welding guns are to be operated from the same power source they shall be interlocked so that only one gun can operate at a time and so that the power source has fully recovered from making one weld before another weld is started .
The power source shall be adequate to meet the requirements of the size of stud being welded .
C. At the time of welding the studs shall be free from any rust rust pits scale oil or other deleterious matter which would adversely affect the welding operation .
D. Welding shall not be done when the base metal temperature is below C or when the surface is wet or exposed to rain or snow .
E. While in operation the welding gun shall be held in position without movement until the welded metal has solidified .
F. When necessary to obtain satisfactory welds the areas on the beam or girder to which the studs are to be welded shall be wirebrushed peened prickpunched or ground free of scale or rust .
G. Longitudinal and lateral spacings of studs with respect to each other and to edges of beam or girder flanges shall not vary more than millimeters from the dimension shown on the plans except that a variation of millimeters will be permitted where required to avoid obstruction with other attachments on the beam or where a new stud is being welded to replace a defective one .
The minimum distance from the edge of a stud to the edge of a beam shall be millimeters but preferably not less than millimeters .
H. The first two studs welded on each beam or girder after being allowed to cool shall be bent by striking the stud with a hammer .
If failure occurs in the weld of either stud the procedure shall be corrected and two successive studs successfully welded and tested before any more studs are welded to the beam or girder .
The Engineer shall be promptly informed of any changes in the welding procedure at any time during construction .
I .
When the temperature of the base metal is below C one stud in each studs welded shall be bent in addition to the first two bent as specified in H above .
J. Studs on which a full weld is not obtained may at the option of the Contractor be repaired by adding a millimeter fillet weld in place of the lack of weld using the shielded metalarc process with lowhydrogen welding electrodes .
K. If the reduction in the height of the studs as they are welded becomes less than normal welding shall be stopped immediately and not resumed until the cause has been corrected .
L. Before welding a new stud where a defective one has been removed the area shall be ground smooth and flush or in the case of a pullout of metal the pocket shall be filled with weld metal using the shielded metalarc process with lowhydrogen welding electrodes and then ground flush .
In compression areas of flanges a new stud may be welded adjacent to the defective area in lieu of repair and replacement on existing weld area .
See G above .
M. Inspection Requirements . .
If visual inspection reveals any stud which does not show a full weld any stud which has been repaired by welding or any stud in which the reduction in height due to welding is less than normal such stud shall be struck with a hammer and bent off the vertical .
For studs showing less than a weld the direction of bending shall be opposite to the lack of weld .
Studs that crack either in the weld or the shank shall be replaced . .
The Engineer at hisher option may select additional studs to be subjected to the bend test specified above .
II .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges .
The studs tested that show no signs of failure may be left in the bent position . .
If during the progress of the work inspection and testing indicate in the judgment of the Engineer that the shear connectors being obtained are not satisfactory the Contractor will be required at hisher expense to make such changes in welding procedure welding equipment and type of shear connector as necessary to secure satisfactory results. . Handling and Placing Concrete .
The Contractor shall notify the Engineer at least hours in advance of hisher intention to place concrete .
All concrete shall be placed during daylight and the placing of concrete shall not be started unless it can be completed and finished during daylight hours except that when an adequate and approved lighting system is provided beforehand the Engineer may waive this requirement .
No concrete shall be placed in a bridge or other structure where piles are required until all piles in the structure have been driven unless otherwise directed by the Engineer .
However the placing of concrete in the steel shells for cast inplace concrete piles and steel pipe piles shall be done as specified in Subsection .. No concrete shall be placed until the depth character and water conditions of the foundations the adequacy of falsework and forms the absence of debris in the forms the condition of the construction joints and the condition and spacing of the reinforcing steel have been inspected and approved by the Engineer .
The placing of concrete shall be so regulated that the pressures caused by the wet concrete shall not cause distortion or movement of the forms .
The operation of handling and placing the concrete shall be conducted so as to form an artificial stone of maximum density and impermeability and of uniform texture which shall show smooth surfaces when the forms are removed .
Concrete shall be deposited in such manner that the total deflection or settlement of supporting members and the final finishing of the surface shall have occurred before initial set of the concrete takes place .
An approved admixture shall be used as necessary to retard setting .
Calcium Chloride or any other admixture containing chloride salts shall not be used in concrete placed on permanent steel deck forms .
A .
Transportation .
The concrete shall be transported from the mixer and placed in the forms by a method which will permit handling concrete of the slump required without segregation .
Buggies and wheelbarrows used for this purpose shall be equipped with pneumatic tires .
Chutes may be used but the use of long chutes will be permitted only on authority from the Engineer .
If such conveyors are allowed and the quality of the concrete as it reaches the forms or the methods of placing or working it therein are not satisfactory the Engineer may order their use discontinued and the substitution of a satisfactory method of placing .
Chutes shall be metal or metal lined inclined so as to have a slope of between vertical to horizontal and vertical to horizontal and shall extend as nearly as possible to the point of placing concrete .
Long chutes shall be provided with reverse flow or remixing hoppers in order to correct for segregation .
All chutes shall be kept clean and free from coatings of hardened concrete .
Transportation of concrete by pumping will be permitted provided that the required slump or air content can be maintained at the discharge end of the hose and there is no adverse effect to the mix design .
The equipment shall be suitable in kind and adequate in capability for the work .
The operation shall be such that a continuous stream of concrete without air pockets is produced .
When pumping is completed the concrete remaining in the pipeline shall be ejected in such a manner that there will be no separation of the ingredients .
Pumping through aluminum piping will not be permitted .
At the conclusion of placement the entire equipment shall be thoroughly cleaned .
B. Depositing .
The concrete shall be placed in the form in the approved manner to prevent stone pockets voids or segregation and to reduce handling and flowing in the forms to a minimum .
The concrete shall not be dropped more than meter or dragged more than meters in the forms .
Points of deposit shall be spaced not more than meters apart nor more than meters from the ends of the forms .
Concrete shall be properly distributed in the forms by hand shoveling .
The forms shall be filled at a rate of millimeters to meter in depth per hour unless an alternate form design is submitted and approved by the Engineer .
Care shall be taken to avoid splashing the forms and reinforcing above the level of the concrete as placed .
Beams and slabs shall be placed in one continuous operation .
C. Consolidation .
II .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges Each layer shall be thoroughly consolidated by rodding and vibration .
The face of the forms shall be carefully spaded if possible to bring a dense mortar to the face and produce a good finish .
All concrete for masonry structures unless otherwise directed shall be compacted by means of approved mechanical vibrators operated within the mass of the concrete .
The Contractor shall provide approved methods of vibration to fully consolidate the mix .
Vibrators shall be of internal type of standard make and approved capacity and shall be capable of transmitting vibrations of the concrete at frequencies of not less than impulses per minute .
Vibration of forms or reinforcing shall not be permitted except where internal vibration is not practicable and then only with the approval of the Engineer .
The vibrator shall be applied directly to the mass at the point and time of deposit and moved throughout the mass continuously from point to point in the mix using care to avoid over vibration causing segregations over finished surface and excess water gain .
Vibrators shall not be used close to the forms .
When concrete is placed in lifts vibrators shall be inserted into at least half the depth of the underlying lift so as to thoroughly consolidate the two lifts into an integral mass without streaks or hardened lift lines .
Vibrators shall not be used to move concrete in the forms .
A sufficient number of vibrators shall be provided to obtain proper compaction in accordance with the rate of deposit .
Extreme care shall be taken to prevent penetrating or disturbing previously placed concrete which has become partially set .
D. Placing Concrete Under Water .
Concrete may be deposited in water only when provided by the plans or in the Special Provisions or by approval in writing by the Engineer and only under the direct supervision of the Engineer .
The concrete shall be of the designation required except that an additional percent of cement shall be added to all concrete deposited under water except that mass concrete shall be placed with the cement content required by Special Provisions .
The method and equipment to be used shall be approved by the Engineer before work is begun .
Concrete deposited under water shall be carefully placed in a compound mass in its final position and shall not be disturbed after being deposited .
Special care must be taken to maintain still water at the point of deposit .
No concrete shall be placed in running water and all form work designed to retain concrete under water shall be watertight .
The consistency of the concrete shall be carefully regulated and special care shall be taken to prevent segregation of the materials .
The concrete shall be distributed uniformly over the entire area between forms in order to maintain a level surface .
The work shall be carried out in a continuous operation with sufficient rapidity to prevent the formation of layers or inclined seams .
Concrete shall not be placed in water having a temperature below C. Pumping of water will not be permitted while the concrete is being deposited nor before it is sufficiently hardened .
One of the following methods may be used .
Bottom Dump Bucket .
The bucket shall be open top type and have a capacity of not less than cubic meter and shall also be of a type that can not be dumped until it rests on the surface on which the concrete is to be deposited .
The bottom doors when tripped shall open freely downward and outward .
The bucket shall be filled to strikeoff capacity and shall be slowly lowered to avoid back wash .
It shall then be raised very slowly as the concrete is discharged only to the height necessary to permit emptying of the bucket after which the bucket shall be slowly withdrawn to well above the surface of the water in order to maintain as nearly as possible still water at the point of discharge and to avoid agitating the mixture .
The bottom dump bucket shall not be used in a pile footing or where deposited through reinforcing steel. . Tremie .
The tremie shall be watertight consisting of a tube constructed in sections with flange couplings fitted with gaskets and the inside diameter shall be sufficiently large to permit a free flow of concrete .
The spacing of tremie tubes shall not exceed meters on centers or meters from the forms .
Tremie tubes shall not be moved horizontally or the seal purposely broken once placing of concrete is started .
The radius of influence of a tremie shall not be assumed to exceed meters .
The means of supporting the tremie shall be as such as to permit it to be rapidly lowered when necessary to retard or stop the flow of concrete .
The discharge end shall be closed at the start of the work so as to prevent water from entering the tube and shall be kept entirely sealed at all times and the tremie tube kept full to the bottom of the hopper during the depositing of the concrete .
When a batch is dumped into the hopper the tremie shall be slightly raised but not out of the concrete at the bottom until the batch discharges to the bottom of the hopper .
The flow shall then be stopped by lowering the tremie .
Special care shall be taken II .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges to maintain as nearly as practicable a uniform flow and to avoid dropping the concrete through the water .
The flow shall be continuous until the work is completed .
If the charge is lost during depositing the tremie shall be withdrawn and refilled .
Dewatering may start when the concrete seal has reached a compressive strength of .
megaPascals .
All laitance and scale shall be removed so that sound durable concrete is exposed to the area on which the construction is to be based and shall be leveled off with epoxy bonded concrete or mortar .
E. Concrete Exposed to Sea Water .
Concrete structures so located as to be subject to the action of sea water shall be constructed in a manner to provide a maximum resistance to its disintegrating action .
The concrete shall be of the class required with an additional percent of cement and shall be mixed for a period of time percent more than the time specified in Subsection M The water content shall be carefully controlled and so regulated as to produce concrete of maximum impermeability .
In placing concrete care shall be taken to avoid the formation of pockets and the concrete shall be thoroughly compacted to the satisfaction of the Engineer .
The original surface of the concrete shall be left undisturbed .
In order to secure a thick and dense surface film the surfaces of the forms shall be heavily coated with shellac or an approved form oil .
The range of possible disintegration of the concrete from an elevation below that of low tide to an elevation above that of extreme high tide shall be determined by the Engineer and except with hisher special permission no construction joints shall be located within this range .
In the determination of this range due consideration shall be given to wave action ice formation and other conditions affecting the extreme limits of possible deterioration and disintegration .
Concrete in sea water within the range as above determined shall except when especially provided for by the plans or in the Special Provisions be deposited in the dry and no sea water shall be allowed to come in direct contact with the concrete until it has been permitted to harden for at least days and preferably for a longer period . .
Joints .
A .
Construction Joints .
Concrete in structures shall be placed in such a manner that all construction joints shall be exactly horizontal or vertical as the case may be and that they shall be straight and as inconspicuous as possible .
When construction joints are definitely shown on the plans all concrete between consecutive joints shall be placed in a continuous operation .
In order to allow for shrinkage concrete shall not be placed against the second side of the construction joints for at least hours after that on the first side has been placed .
Approval of the Engineer in writing must be secured before the placing of any construction joints not shown on the plans except in case of emergency as specified in paragraph D hereinafter .
The plans on which a days work is to terminate shall be predetermined before depositing of concrete begins .
They shall in general be perpendicular to the lines of principal stress and in regions of small shears .
Horizontal joints will not be permitted in concrete girders beams abutments or retaining walls unless otherwise indicated on the plans .
Slabs acting with concrete beams or girders shall be place continuously as a unit unless otherwise indicated on the plans .
Unless otherwise indicated on the plans interlocking or keying at construction joints shall be provided by use of keyways or dowels in a manner approved by the Engineer .
Horizontal joints in piers or abutments shall generally be avoided and when used shall not be located within meter of normal water level .
In piers or abutments or walls requiring a construction joint it shall generally be a keyed vertical joint extending the full height above the footing .
In piers abutments or retaining walls the second portion placed at a vertical joint shall be placed not earlier than hours after the first portion is placed except with special permission of the Engineer .
Construction joints not shown on the plans and above ordinary low water level in abutments and retaining walls that retain earth fills shall have approved waterstops and shall be furnished at the Contractors expense .
Joints in cantilevered members unless shown on the plans shall be avoided .
When making a horizontal construction joint care shall be taken to have the concrete below the joint as dry as possible and any excess water or creamy material shall be removed before the concrete sets .
Within hours after the concrete below the joint has been placed the top surface shall be thoroughly cleaned by the use of wire brushes and all laitance and loose material removed so as to expose clean solid concrete .
Care must be taken not to loosen any of the course aggregate in the concrete .
If for any reason this laitance is not removed before the concrete has hardened in place it shall be removed using such tools and methods as may be necessary to secure the results specified above .
Immediately II .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges before placing concrete above the joint the surface of the concrete below the joint which has been cleaned as specified above shall be thoroughly wetted and coated with mortar of the same proportions used in the concrete .
This mortar shall be thoroughly brushed into all openings and crevices with a stiff broom and new concrete shall be placed before this mortar has taken initial set .
On all exposed surfaces the line of the proposed joint shall be made truly straight by tacking a temporary horizontal straight edge on the inside of the form with its lower edge on the line of the joint and then placing the concrete sufficiently higher than this edge to allow for settlement .
Immediately before placing the new concrete the forms shall be drawn tightly against the concrete already in place .
In construction joints approved waterstops of plastic material shall be placed not less than millimeters from the face of concrete and shall extend a minimum of millimeters into the concrete unless otherwise shown on plans .
Prior to the use of plastic waterstops the manufacturers installation instructions shall be furnished to the Engineer .
B .
Expansion Joints .
Expansion joints constructed in bridges walls and other structures shall be of the thickness shown and as located on the plans .
The joint filler shall be cut to the same shape as the area to be covered except that it will be millimeters smaller along all surfaces that will be exposed in the finished work unless shown otherwise on the plans .
The filler shall be fixed firmly against the surface of the concrete already in place in such a manner that it will not be displaced when the concrete is deposited against it .
When necessary to use more than one piece to cover any surface the abutting pieces shall be placed in close contact and the joint between the separate pieces shall be covered with a layer of twoply roofing felt one side of which shall be covered with hot asphalt to insure proper adhesion .
The millimeter spaces along the edges at exposed faces shall be filled with wooden strips of the same thickness as the joint material .
These wooden strips shall be saturated with oil and have sufficient draft to make them readily removable after the concrete is placed .
Whatever material is used the exposed edge of the filler shall be the finished edge as it comes from the fabricator in order to avoid exposure of material roughened by cutting .
Each piece of filler shall be fastened to the concrete on one side of the joint with a single line of No .
gauge insulation nails millimeters long and millimeters on centers .
Immediately after forms are removed the expansion joint shall be carefully inspected and any concrete or mortar that has sealed across the joint shall be cut neatly and removed .
The outer edge of the joint shall be straight parallel and satisfactory in appearance .
In expansion joints approved waterstops of plastic material shall be placed not less than millimeters from the face of the concrete and shall extend a minimum of millimeters into the concrete measured from the center line of the joint unless shown otherwise on the plans .
Prior to the use of plastic waterstops the manufacturers installation instructions shall be furnished to the Engineer .
All surfaces to which sealants are to be applied shall be thoroughly cleaned to remove all loose concrete dirt oil grease paint lacquer rust scales bituminous or other foreign materials .
Projections of concrete into joint space shall be removed .
Steel surfaces shall be sandblasted or mechanically brushed to obtain a bright clean metal surface .
Loose particles or dirt shall be removed and the joint shall be dried before application of primer andor sealer .
A bond breaker shall be used so that the joint sealer shall not be placed in direct contact with bituminous material or bituminous filler .
A primer shall be used when so designated in the manufacturers instructions .
The sealant shall be mixed and applied in accordance with the manufacturers instructions .
Application shall be made only when air temperature is C or over .
The sealant shall be installed in a neat and workmanlike manner to the depth specified on the plans .
The sealant surface shall be either flush with or be not more than millimeters above adjacent joint surfaces .
Any material that does not adhere or bond to the applied surface or fails to set up properly will be removed and replaced at the expense of the Contractor .
Any material improperly mixed or which sets up before placement will likewise be rejected and be replaced at the expense of the Contractor .
C. Bonding to Concrete Already Set .
In bonding new concrete to concrete already set the surface of the concrete shall be thoroughly cleaned roughened wetted with clean water and then flushed with a mortar composed of equal parts of the cement and sand specified for the new concrete before new concrete is placed adjacent thereto .
New concrete shall be placed before mortar has taken initial set .
In lieu of the mortar an epoxy adhesive suitable for bonding fresh concrete to hardened concrete may be used .
The epoxy adhesive shall be applied in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
D. Emergency .
When the work of placing concrete is unexpectedly interrupted by breakdowns storms or other causes and the II .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges concrete as placed would produce an improper construction joint the Contractor shall form a construction joint to the satisfaction of the Engineer .
When such a joint occurs at a section on which there is a shearing stress the Contractor shall provide an adequate mechanical bond across the joint by forming a key inserting reinforcing steel or by some other satisfactory means which will prevent a plane of weakness. . Weep Holes and Drains .
Weep holes shall be provided through all structures as indicated on the plans and as directed .
Ends of weep holes that are to be covered by filling material shall be protected by .
millimeter mesh galvanized wire screen gauge and not less than one cubic meter of screened gravel or crushed stone conforming to Subsection M Drains shall be provided for bridge superstructures as indicated on the plans. . Protection Curing and Finishing .
A .
Protection .
Suitable precautions shall be taken to thoroughly protect the concrete from any damage by weather conditions or otherwise during and after placing . .
Hot and Dry Weather .
During hot dry weather and as directed all new concrete shall be kept shaded from the sun shielded from the wind and kept wet with water or protected by other approved methods to retain the moisture in the concrete throughout the curing period. . Rainy Weather .
During rainy weather all new concrete shall be properly covered as may be necessary to prevent damage .
Sufficient approved material for covering shall be available at the site of the work for immediate use as may be needed . .
Cold Weather .
During cold weather all new concrete shall be fully protected by methods approved by the Engineer until properly set and hardened to prevent damage .
See Subsection .. B. Curing .
All concrete shall be kept fully saturated and protected against any drying action by methods of curing specified herein or as otherwise approved by the Engineer for not less than days after placing standard cement concrete or for not less than days after placing high early strength cement concrete .
All surfaces of concrete which are to receive a rubbed surface finish or on which bitumen is to be placed and concrete at construction joints and exposed bridge deck concrete shall be cured in accordance with requirements below for water curing .
All other concrete may be cured in accordance with requirements below for water curing or waterproof membrane curing. . Water Curing .
Curing of concrete shall begin by fog spraying immediately after the initial set .
Fog spraying shall continue until the burlap cover has been placed .
The amount of fog spray shall be strictly controlled so that accumulations of standing or flowing water on the surface of concrete shall not occur .
Should atmospheric conditions render the use of fog spray impractical the Contractor shall use plastic covers of suitable weight and securely weighed down but not directly in contact with the deck concrete .
The covers shall be used only until the initial set has taken place .
The burlap covers shall be placed immediately thereafter .
On the windward side of the panel being cured the Contractor shall erect canvas barriers of suitable height when necessary to protect the curing concrete from the direct force of the wind .
The area of concrete to be cured shall be covered by wet burlap blankets when concrete has set sufficiently but in no case later than hours after placing of concrete .
Fog spray or covers shall be used continuously during this period .
The materials for the coverings shall conform to the pertinent requirements for the same provided under Subsection M The coverings shall be kept thoroughly wet by sprinkling with a fine spray of water until they may be removed .
Wooden forms without liners if left in place longer than days after the placing of the concrete shall be thoroughly wet down at least once each day for the remainder of the required curing period .
Formed surfaces shall after the removal of forms be cured in like manner for the remainder of the required period the entire surface of the concrete being thoroughly drenched with water and covered immediately after the forms are removed .
Portions of the covering material may be removed temporarily when and as necessitated by any required finishing or waterproofing operation. . Impervious Liquid Membrane Curing .
Immediately after the free water has disappeared on surfaces not protected by forms and immediately after the II .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges removal of forms if such are removed before the end of the required curing period the concrete shall be sealed by spraying as a fine mist a uniform application of the membrane curing material in a manner as to provide a continuous uniform water impermeable film without marring or otherwise damaging the concrete .
The impervious liquid membrane material used shall conform to the requirements for the same provided under Subsection M .. except that only AASHTO M Type I shall be permitted .
The membrane curing shall be applied in one or more separate coats at the rate of at least .
liters per square meters .
If in the Engineers judgment discontinuities or pinholes exist or if rain falls on the newly coated surface before the film has dried sufficiently to resist damage an additional coat of the material shall be applied immediately to those affected areas at the specified rate .
If a slight delay in application shall occur which permits the concrete surface to dry the surface of the concrete shall be thoroughly moistened with water immediately prior to the application of the membrane curing material .
Application of membrane curing may be delayed for hours if the concrete surface is protected and kept moist by the use of wetted burlap .
The membrane compound shall be thoroughly agitated immediately before application .
The liquid shall be applied under pressure by means of an approved pressure spray which shall be held not more than millimeters away from the concrete and the spray protected from any wind by suitable means as may be necessary so as to apply the material directly onto the concrete surface .
The sprayed surface film shall be protected from abrasion or damage for the duration of the required curing period .
The placing of materials or unnecessary walking on the surface will not be allowed until the film is at least days old and then only if no damage is caused to the surface film during the required curing time. . Curing by Other Methods .
a. Waterproof Paper .
Subject to approval by the Engineer waterproofed paper may be used for curing particular surfaces of concrete and if allowed shall be furnished and used entirely in accordance with the provisions for such under Subsection .
except that the length of time for the curing period shall be as specified herein .
b .
Other methods of curing may be used only when approved in writing by the Engineer prior to any use in the work .
C. Finishing .
The external surface of all concrete shall be thoroughly vibrated and spaded during the operation of depositing the concrete by means of tools of an approved type .
The vibrating and spading shall be such as to force all coarse aggregate away from the surface and slowly work the mortar against the forms to produce a smooth finish free from water and air pockets or honeycomb .
Unless otherwise shown on the plans or provided in the Special Provisions the final finish required on particular concrete shall be as follows .
Formed Surfaces not Exposed to View .
Immediately after forms have been removed and form ties cut back from the face of the concrete all voids and cavities shall be filled with a stiff mortar of the same composition and airentrainment as the mortar in the original concrete mix .
The mortar for filling shall have been mixed and let set for minutes and then remixed before placing in the work .
In case the operation of filling is delayed the surface of the concrete shall be thoroughly cleaned and washed with water if necessary before the mortar is applied . .
Formed Surfaces Exposed to View .
Within hours after the forms have been removed and form ties cut back from the face of the concrete all fins projections and irregularities shall be carefully removed and all voids and cavities shall be carefully and completely filled with a stiff mortar of the same composition and airentrainment as the mortar in the original concrete mix .
The same brand and color of cement and the same kind and color of aggregate as was used in the original concrete mix shall be used in this mortar .
The mortar for filling shall have been mixed and let set for minutes and then remixed before placing in the work .
The surface film of all such pointed surfaces shall be carefully removed before setting of the mortar occurs .
If the Engineer determines these surfaces as prepared do not present a uniformly smooth clean surface of even texture and appearance the surface shall be treated and rubbed to obtain a satisfactory finish .
The Engineer shall be the sole judge of the amount of rubbing which will be required .
If rubbing is required the rubbing will start with hours of notification that rubbing is required the surface should be wetted with clean water and rubbed with a No .
carborundum brick or other abrasive of equal quality until even and smooth and of uniform appearance without applying any cement or other coating .
If additional finishing is necessary it shall be obtained by a thorough rubbing with a No .
carborundum brick or other abrasive of equal quality .
Subject to approval by the Engineer rubbing may be performed by use of satisfactory power equipment and tools providing that the operational procedures shall be the same as those outlined above for hand rubbing .
II .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges Rubbing will be kept to a minimum found necessary to produce smooth even surfaces of uniform appearance .
Rubbing will not be required to fill very small surface air bubble holes to remove a uniform wood grain pattern left by forms not to remove inconspicuous lines or marking between form panels .
Rubbing will not be required for the underside of bridge decks .
Patches required for form ties if carefully and properly done may not necessitate rubbing .
If however this work is done in such a manner that these patches are conspicuous the entire exposed face on which they occur shall be rubbed .
After the final rubbing is completed and the mortar has set up the surface shall be thoroughly drenched and kept wet with clean water for a period of days unless otherwise directed .
No rubbing will be permitted when the air temperature is below C. .
The use of mortar cement water mixture or neat cement for topping or treatment of any concrete surface will not be permitted . .
Bearing Areas for Superstructure Metal .
The surfaces of concrete on bridge seats piers and pedestals which are to support shoes or bearing plates of the superstructure unless otherwise shown on the plans shall be finished millimeters higher than the required elevations over areas extending millimeters outside of the shoes or bearing plates .
After the concrete has been cured and thoroughly hardened these areas shall be dressed down by tooling rubbing grinding or otherwise as may be approved so as to provide true level surfaces at the required elevations .
Satisfactory drainage shall be provided where necessary to prevent water accumulation at bearing areas. . Sidewalks and Median Strips on Bridges .
After being placed the horizontal concrete surfaces shall be properly screeded and finished to true grade and surface .
The finish shall be with an approved float followed by light brushing with a fine brush but without the addition of any water to remove the cement film leaving a fine grained smooth but sanded texture .
The surfaces shall then be cured as specified herein. . Bridge Approach Slabs and Bridge Decks .
a Bridge Approach Slabs .
After concrete is placed the top surface shall be struck off to the proper crown and longitudinal profile with an approved template .
Satisfactory supports furnished by the Contractor shall be set and maintained in place for proper operation of the template so that the surface shall be furnished to the required elevations .
These supports shall be carefully removed from the concrete before any set of the concrete occurs and the spaces left by such removal shall be immediately filled and finished to the level of the adjacent surfaces .
The surface shall be checked by means of an approved straightedge not less than meters in length furnished by the Contractor as the Engineer may direct .
Any irregularities measuring more than millimeters vertically shall be corrected and the whole surface shall be made smooth and even .
No load of any kind shall be placed on the concrete after setting of the concrete has begun and any work on the concrete then required shall be performed from approved bridges furnished by the Contractor which will not rest on the new concrete in any manner .
Where membrane waterproofing is to be used the surface of the concrete shall be screeded to the true cross section and left without any projections that might puncture the membrane or depressions that could retain liquid .
b Bridge Decks .
The placing and finishing of these surfaces shall be performed as specified herein .
The Contractor shall submit for approval by the Engineer a detailed schedule showing the time schedule and the sequence heshe intends to use in placing of deck concrete .
Also at least days before the erection of screed rails the Contractor shall submit hisher screed erection plans and details for review and approval by the Engineer .
These plans shall also include details of finishing operation equipment and equipment for placement of the concrete .
No concrete shall be placed in any part of the work until steel reinforcement shear connectors anchors drainage piping conduit lines etc .
have been inspected and approved by the Engineer .
The Contractor shall schedule hisher work in such a manner that all forms and reinforcement and other appurtenances shall be set by himher and checked by the Engineer on the day preceding the day of pour .
The daily placement for the deck slab shall begin early in the morning .
Setting Screed Rails and Checking of Reinforcement Bars .
a The screed rails and their support shall be of steel and be accurately set so that the finished surface shall conform to the profiles shown on the plans .
The supports shall be adjustable of substantial construction and shall be placed and adjusted to properly provide for the deflection of forms supporting beams falsework floor beam stringers and weight of finishing machine which may occur during placement of concrete .
The supports shall be placed in order to fit the concrete placing procedures and furnish continuity in the required contours for the finished surface .
All screed support devices which are to be left embedded in the concrete shall be either epoxy coated or galvanized in accordance with Subsection .. b Prior to the placing of the concrete all reinforcing bars shall be rigidly tied to their supports after being II .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges accurately positioned with proper clearances from the final surfaces of the concrete .
The required concrete cover over the top bars shall be checked by riding the screed over the bars and measuring the distance from bottom of screed to top of bars every meters longitudinally and all bars transversely .
Discrepancies which are in excess of millimeters shall be rectified by repositioning the top bars to secure the required cover .
Placing of Concrete .
Concrete shall be placed in a uniform manner across the entire width being cast .
Dumping of mix in concentrated accumulations shall be avoided .
Concrete shall be uniformly placed in front of the screed so that moving of the concrete is kept to a minimum .
Concrete shall not be placed when the ambient temperature is below C except as stipulated in Section .
or above C. At no time shall the internal temperature of the concrete being placed be higher than C. Finishing of Concrete .
a Only mechanized methods of finishing the freshly placed concrete shall be allowed except at locations inaccessible for mechanical screed and only when approved by the Engineer .
Machine finishing of deck slab will not be required in areas outside of curb line which will support the second lift of concrete for sidewalks safety curbs medians or barriers .
b Finishing Machines shall be mechanically operated of rigid construction riding on rails placed parallel to the bridge centerline and securely fastened to the supporting steel .
They shall be of an approved type and shall be operated such that when concrete is properly consolidated and finished the surface of the concrete will be at the elevation indicated on the plans or ordered by the Engineer .
The finishing machine shall be set on the screed rails and be aligned parallel to abutments and piers and shall not be so light that it tends to ride the concrete rather than the rails .
Only two passes of screed will be allowed over a given area of deck and the lap of consecutive passes shall be limited to a minimum .
c After the concrete has been struck off it shall be further smoothed by means of a longitudinal float of suitable design approved by the Engineer .
The float shall be worked from a bridge with a dragging motion while held in position parallel to the road centerline and passed gradually from one side of the deck to the other .
Where membrane waterproofing is to be used the surface of the concrete shall be checked to ensure that it is without any projections that might puncture the membrane or depressions that could retain liquid .
d Where the surface of the concrete is to be used as the riding surface for traffic once all the irregularities have been removed a wet burlap bag consisting of a double thickness of approved burlap without seams and about meter in drag width and long enough to span the entire width of surface being finished shall be pulled along the surface in a longitudinal sweeping manner by workers operating from outside the edges of the pavement or such a burlap drag may be attached to the finishing machine .
Where narrow areas adjacent to edges of surface have not been reached in the aforementioned operation they shall be satisfactorily finished with approved burlap as directed by the Engineer .
The pavement wearing surface shall then be given a final finish by pulling a light broom about millimeters wide and having two thin rows of flat bristles gently and squarely across the surface from one edge to the other so as to remove any laitance and other surface blemishes and so as to produce uniform corrugations not more than millimeters in depth .
Walking on the fresh surface of the concrete shall not be permitted .
e Where the deck slab will support a sidewalk safety curb median or barrier the surface of the concrete will be finished as follows .
A millimeter wide strip immediately adjacent to the curb and coping lines will be given a smooth tooled finish .
The remainder of the concrete surface will be raked to a maximum millimeter amplitude parallel with the curb line .
f As specified herein and as may be found further necessary in the judgment of the Engineer any required work of finishing shall be done from adequate bridges furnished by the Contractor and they shall not be in contact with the surface of the concrete in any manner .
g While the concrete is still plastic the surface of the pavement shall be tested with a meters straightedge attached to a handle of sufficient length to permit testing of the full width of the slab .
The straightedge shall be laid parallel to the centerline of the pavement and any irregularity of millimeters or greater shall be corrected immediately .
h Within hours after completion and hardening the surface shall again be checked by the Contractor in the presence of the Engineer with the straightedge held parallel to the centerline and variations exceeding millimeters shall be plainly marked and shall be corrected at the Contractors expense in a manner satisfactory to the Engineer .
i Hand Finishing .
When hand finishing is used the surface of the concrete shall be struck off by means of a wooden or steel template of approved section .
The template shall be constructed to produce the desired surface contour and have sufficient strength to retain its strength under all working conditions .
For its proper use the template should be II .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges at least millimeters longer than the width of the surface to be struck off .
In general vibrating templates shall be used for this operation .
Subject to prior approval by the Engineer nonvibrating templates may be used the approval for such use to depend on the extent of the work and design requirements .
Satisfactory supports furnished by the Contractor shall be set and maintained in place for proper operation of the template so that the surface of the concrete shall be finished to the required elevations for the finished surface .
The supports shall be carefully removed from the concrete as soon as possible during the finishing operations and the spaces left by such removal shall be immediately filled and finished to the level of the adjacent surface .
After the concrete has been deposited spread and consolidated as required herein it shall be struck off immediately with the template above the grade so that there will be sufficient concrete to fill low and porous spots .
The template shall be operated by moving forward with a combined longitudinal and transverse motion and so manipulated that it bears fully on the control supports .
A slight excess of material shall be kept in front of the cutting edge .
The concrete shall be worked so as to embed coarse aggregate and to remove porous spots but not so as to force excess mortar or water to the surface .
Low spots shall be filled and the material worked into place .
The resulting surface shall be only slightly above the required grade and shall be uniform in appearance density and composition .
The concrete shall then be brought to the required grade and density and all surplus material removed by striking off the concrete with the template in the operational manner required above except that the template shall be held firmly on the supports and operated in a slow even speed .
Finishing with the template and removing of any projections or depressions shall be continued until the required surface is obtained .
As soon as possible after finishing as specified the surface of the concrete shall be finished in accordance with the operations and requirements prescribed herein after completion of the machine finishing under the subsection Machine Finishing .
Satisfactory supports furnished by the Contractor shall be set and maintained in place for proper operation of the machines so that the surface of the concrete shall be finished to the required elevations .
Unless otherwise shown on the plans the roadway concrete shall be placed and finished the entire width of the roadway area .
When shown on the plans longitudinal keyed and reinforced construction joints shall be constructed at such locations and in accordance with the details required by the plans or as approved by the Engineer . .
Removal of Forms and Loading on Structures .
The word forms as used herein shall include all supports of the actual forms enclosing the concrete .
The forms for any portion of the structure shall not be removed until the concrete is strong enough as determined by the Engineer to avoid possible injury from such removal .
Forms shall not be removed or disturbed without the prior approval of the Engineer .
Form supports shall be removed in such a manner as to permit the concrete to uniformly and gradually take the stresses due to its own weight .
When test cylinders are taken from the concrete in the members of a structure the forms shall be left in place until the concrete has attained the strength designated in the following table and regardless of strength attained for the minimum period indicated .
In the absence of cylinder tests the forms shall remain in place for the period specified under minimum loading period .
However in order to facilitate any particular finishing operations side forms carrying no load may be removed hours to hours depending on weather conditions and class of concrete after the placing of the concrete has been completed subject to the approval of the Engineer and with the complete curing process to be continued as required .
No superimposed load of any kind or for any purpose will be allowed on a structure before the expiration of the period of time prescribed in the table whether or not the forms have been removed except as follows A A superimposed live load not exceeding kilograms operated at a speed not to exceed kilometers per hour may be allowed on bridge deck concrete days after standard cement concrete is placed and days after high early strength cement concrete is placed provided the concrete has reached a compressive strength of megaPascals .
B A superimposed dead load mass not exceeding kilograms per square meter may be allowed under the same time and strength requirements as for a live load provided the load is placed near the ends of the beam spans .
Where possible the load shall be spread over two or more beams .
FOR STANDARD CEMENT CONCRETE Minimum Strength Minimum Minimum Days of Concrete in Days for Forms Before Design II .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges Length of Span MegaPascals in Place Loading Up to meters Over meters Up to meters Over meters Up to meters Over meters FOR HIGH EARLY STRENGTH CEMENT CONCRETE Minimum Strength Minimum Minimum Days of Concrete in Days for Forms Before Design Length of Span MegaPascals in Place Loading Up to meters Over meters Up to meters Over meters Up to meters Over meters In case a particular increase in strength of concrete in a particular period of time is required by the Contract or is directed or approved by the Engineer and is between the strength attained by the use of standard cement concrete and the strength attained by the use of high early strength cement concrete the time periods as required in the tables above shall be adjusted proportionally to fit the particular time in which the stated strength is attained by such procedure .
The strength shall be attained by an extra amount of Standard Cement or by the use of particular elements of approved admixtures .
The time requirements provided in both the above tables date from the complete placing of concrete in the member and are the minimum requirements for the most favorable weather conditions .
Longer periods as directed by the Engineer will be required to compensate adequately for adverse weather conditions .
For a concrete deck supported on steel stringer beams or floor beams the span will be considered as the distance between center of beams .
For composite concrete and steel beams the span governing the Minimum Days for Forms in Place shall be the distance between center of beams and the span governing the Minimum Days Before Design Loading shall be the distance between the center lines of main bearings .
For concrete slabs Tbeams and girders the distance shall be between center lines of main bearings and for arches and rigid frames the distance between springing lines .
If a placing sequence is not stated on the plans or in the Special Provisions of a contract which includes the construction of a continuous span structure the forms for the entire continuous group shall remain in place until every span of the group has been supported for the minimum required period of time .
No backfill or any other operation that could in any way cause stress in the concrete shall begin prior to the period of time required before loading of the structure .
Any defective work discovered after the forms have been removed shall be immediately removed and replaced .
If the surface of the concrete is bulged uneven or show excessive voids or form joint marks which can not be repaired satisfactorily the entire section shall be removed and replaced .
All repairs and renewals due to defective work shall be done at the expense of the Contractor. . Protection of Pipes and Conduits .
The Contractor shall care for and protect from injury all pipes wires and conduits encountered in the work by furnishing and maintaining suitable supports including steel bars where directed on the bridge during construction .
The Contractor shall provide suitable openings in the abutments walls piers and superstructures as shown on the plans and as may be directed .
If required the opening shall be filled with brick masonry in a satisfactory manner . .
Date Seal Bench Marks and Ornaments .
A .
Date .
The Contractor shall place a date on bridges as shown on the plans or as directed .
The date shall be cast or cut in masonry as directed .
Detail drawings of the date will be furnished by the Department .
B. Seal .
II .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges If indicated on the plans the Contractor shall place a bronze replica of the State Seal on Bridges as directed by the Engineer .
The seal will be furnished by the Department .
C. Ornaments .
Concrete ornaments shall be furnished and placed by the Contractor on bridges when indicated on the plans .
The ornamental castings may be either cast in place or precast . .
Concrete Construction During Cold Weather .
Any concrete placed during cold weather shall be placed at the Contractors risk and any damage or unsatisfactory concrete shall be removed and replaced at the Contractors expense .
Concrete mixed or placed when the air temperature is below C will be considered cold weather concrete and will require special treatment .
In general the special treatment is indicated below .
No concrete shall be placed when the atmospheric temperature in the shade and away from artificial heat is below C or when the temperature may be expected to drop below C within hours except upon permission in writing by the Engineer which shall not be granted until satisfactory provisions have been made to protect the work .
If the air temperature in the shade and away from artificial heat may be expected to reach C or lower at any time during the day or night of the hours following the placing of the concrete protective cover heating or protective cover and heating will be required on all exposed surfaces .
When the air in the shade and away from artificial heat is C or lower temperature the mixing water andor aggregates may be heated prior to cement being added by approved methods so that the temperature of the aggregates and water mixture is not less than C nor more than C. The temperature of the concrete shall not be less than C nor more than C at the time of placing it in the forms .
The heating shall be done in a manner to preclude the occurrence of overheated areas which might result in damage to the materials .
Any material containing frost or lumps of hardened material shall not be used .
Where it may be expected that considerable heat will be generated by the hydration of the concrete and in some cases where heat is not rapidly dissipated suitable coverings shall be used to protect concrete .
Heavy footings in which the concrete is placed at a temperature of C and protected by the surrounding earth except on top shall be protected down to an air temperature of about C by a tarpaulin placed over the top with an air space between the concrete and the tarpaulin .
Mass concrete when concrete as such is so specified on the plans or so defined by the Engineer may be protected down to an air temperature of about C by enclosure with tight wooden forms at least millimeters in thickness and the concrete is placed at a temperature of C except at corners and edges .
Double sheating insulation board or tarpaulins with a dead air space between the covering and the forms shall be placed to equally protect such edges and corners .
Enclosures and added artificial heat will be required for such concrete placed at lower air temperatures .
The Contractor shall have readily available for installing on the work adequate material for the proper enclosure or covering of the concrete together with adequate equipment for satisfactory heating as may be necessary .
As much as possible of any enclosure for protection shall be in place before depositing of any concrete and the remainder shall be installed as rapidly as possible in order to reduce heat losses to a minimum .
The temperature of the concrete inside the enclosure shall be held above a minimum temperature of C and the air surrounding the fresh concrete shall be kept a temperature within a C to C range .
The temperature of the concrete shall be maintained above C for the first three days or above C for the first five days after the concrete is completed in place except periods of time may be reduced when satisfactory strength is attained sooner as with the use of high early strength cement concrete then a minimum of C for two days or C for four days will be required .
In any case the periods of time provided above are minimum requirements and extensions of these periods of time will be required provided that such may be necessary to develop satisfactory strength in the concrete .
After the concrete has been cured for the required length of time the temperature within the housing shall be gradually reduced no faster than .
C per hour until it equals the surrounding air temperatures .
Heating within the enclosure shall be attained by such means of artificial heat as will maintain the temperatures specified continuously and with a reasonable degree of uniformity in all parts of the enclosures .
All exposed surfaces of concrete within the enclosure shall be kept sufficiently moist to prevent any rapid drying of the surface concrete with possible resulting damage to the concrete in place .
Heating appliances shall not be placed in such a manner as to endanger the enclosure forms or supports or expose any area of concrete to rapid drying out or other injury due to excessive temperatures .
Should the Contractor wish to secure permission to use other methods than those provided above for protective retaining of heat within the concrete or direct protective heating of the concrete by adequate facilities for same such II .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges request shall be made in writing by himher to the Engineer and shall include verifiable evidence of satisfactory results obtained by use of such methods .
Other methods than those provided herein shall not be used unless approved in writing by the Engineer and then only under the full responsibility of the Contractor . .
Concrete PenetrantSealer .
Concrete penetrantsealer shall be applied to bridge copings beam seats parapets end posts median barriers and other cement concrete surfaces as designated and shown on the plans and in accordance with these and the manufacturers specifications .
This work shall consist of furnishing all necessary labor materials and equipment to treat concrete surfaces including surface preparation and application .
The concrete penetrantsealer shall conform to M Clear concrete penetrantsealers after complete application shall not stain discolor or darken the concrete to any appreciable degree .
Application of the penetrantsealer shall not alter the surface texture and shall be compatible with the use of surface finish coatings andor caulkings .
The surface shall dry to a tack free condition .
Application of the penetrantsealer shall be in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations including condition and preparation of surfaces to be treated .
The preparation process shall not cause any undue damage to the concrete surface remove or alter the existing surface finish or expose the coarse aggregate of the concrete .
Concrete surfaces prepared for treatment shall be approved by the Engineer .
The concrete penetrantsealer shall be used as supplied by the manufacturer and not diluted or altered in any way .
The penetrantsealer shall be applied onto the concrete surfaces at the manufacturers recommended rate of coverage .
Manufacturers safety precautions shall be strictly adhered to .
The Contractor shall exercise all reasonable precaution to prevent the penetrantsealer from coming in contact with any joint sealers so as to prevent any possible loss of bond of the joint sealer. . Dowel Bar SplicerReinforcing Bar Splicer .
Dowel Bar SplicerReinforcing Bar Splicer a mechanical device to join steel reinforcing bars shall meet the following requirements .
All mechanical splicers shall develop as required at least of the specified yield strength of steel reinforcing in tension and compression .
Reinforcing Bar Splicers which have been tested and approved and are on the approved products list are acceptable for use on Massachusetts Highway Department bridge projects .
A copy of the approved product list may be obtained from the Departments Research and Materials Section . .
Equivalent Joining devices may be used but they must be submitted to the MHD Research and Material Laboratory for testing and approval .
The contract time shall not be extended to allow for the above testing and approval process. . Special consideration shall be given to the minimum concrete cover requirements over stirrups ties and spirals at the reinforcing bar splicer locations .
All portions of the reinforcing bar Splicer shall meet the cover requirements as specified in construction drawings. . During testing ultimate testing failure must occur in the reinforcing bar being joined rather than the joining device .
The mechanical connection device must not introduce notch effects that would cause the bar to rupture at the mechanical connection device before the required yielding can occur in the adjoining bar stock .
Assembly features shall provide for reasonably error free work under construction conditions . .
Reinforcing Bar Splicers shall be tested with epoxy coated reinforcing steel and the final assembly shall be in conformance with the specifications for epoxy coating .
The Engineer will be the sole judge for the above criteria .
COMPENSATION .
Method of Measurement .
Cement concrete masonry will be measured by the cubic meter and the quantity shall be determined in accordance with dimensions shown on the plans and such alteration of the plans as are specifically ordered by the Engineer in writing .
No deduction shall be made in bridges for rustications chamfered corners of dimensions less than millimeters on the square sides or for the volume of pipes less than millimeters in diameter drainage inlets or for anchor bolts or reinforcing bars .
The volume occupied by pipe culverts in headwalls shall be deducted .
II .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges Reinforcement for cement concrete masonry structures shall be measured by the kilogram .
The mass of bars shall be the product of the length as shown on the approved plans and schedules and the standard mass per meter of length as adopted by the Concrete Reinforcing Steel Institute .
Wire metal clips metal chairs or other fastening and supporting devices used for keeping the reinforcement continuous and in correct position will not be considered reinforcement and the Contractor will receive no additional compensation for their use .
The mass of wire mesh incorporated in the structure shall be the computed mass in accordance with the plans based on the standard mass accepted by the trade for the unit area of the particular mesh . .
Basis of Payment .
Cement concrete masonry will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic meter under the particular item of Cement Concrete Masonry of the Class required as shown on the plans or as directed complete in place and accepted .
The Contractor shall have no claims for special allowances for extra cement or apparent shrinkage due to inaccurate proportioning or control bulging of forms spilling waste or for any other project conditions within hisher control .
Payment for additional cement required to be used in proportioning by volume and in placing of concrete under water shall be included in the contract unit price paid for the particular designation of cement concrete masonry specified or directed .
When high early strength cement concrete masonry is used where originally standard cement concrete was specified by order of the Engineer after the Contract has been executed the Contractor will be paid in addition to the contract unit price for such standard cement concrete masonry the sum of .
per cubic meter for all high early strength cement concrete masonry as is so directed to be used .
When the contract has specified that high early strength cement concrete shall be used or if the Contractor is permitted to choose such concrete as an option then no additional payment will be made for such concrete .
Latex Modified Mortar and Concrete Overlayments will be paid for at the contract unit price per square meter complete in place and accepted including surface preparation .
Steel reinforcement including wire mesh will be paid for at the contract unit price per kilogram under the item for Steel Reinforcement for Structures complete in place .
No payment will be made for any fastening devices or supports that may be used for keeping the reinforcement in correct position .
Galvanized steel curb bars and steel dowels will be paid for at the contract unit price per kilogram under the item for Steel Reinforcement for Structures .
The work specified under Subsections .
. . and .
shall be done without extra compensation except when openings for pipes wires and conduits are required to be blocked up the brick masonry will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic meter of the kind of masonry in which the opening occurs .
Holes for dowels shall be drilled by the Contractor without extra compensation. . Payment Items. . MPa mm kg Cement Concrete Masonry Cubic Meter .
MPa mm kg Cement Concrete Masonry Cubic Meter .
MPa mm kg Cement Concrete Masonry Cubic Meter .
MPa mm kg Cement Concrete Masonry Cubic Meter .
MPa mm kg Cement Concrete Masonry Cubic Meter .
MPa mm kg Cement Concrete Masonry Cubic Meter .
MPa mm kg Cement Concrete Masonry Cubic Meter .
Latex Modified Mortar and Concrete Overlayment Square Meter .
Steel Reinforcement for Structures Kilogram .
Steel Reinforcement for Structures Epoxy Coated Kilogram .
Shear Connectors Lump Sum .
Allowance for High Early Strength Concrete Cubic Meter SECTION PRESTRESSED CONCRETE BEAMS II .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges DESCRIPTION .
General .
This work consists of fabricating delivering and placing prestressed concrete beams in accordance with the plans and specifications .
The work under this Section shall conform to the relevant requirements of the current AASHTO Standard Specifications for Highway Bridges and shall be supplemented by the relevant provisions of The Manual for Quality Control for Plants and Production of Precast and Prestressed Concrete Products Prestressed Concrete Institute Publication Number MNL except as noted herein .
The horizontal alignment deviation from a straight line parallel to the centerline of the member for precast prestressed concrete box and deck beams shall not be more than millimeters per each meters of beam length nor shall it exceed millimeters maximum for butted precast members .
MATERIALS .
General .
Materials shall meet the requirements specified in the following Subsections of Division III Materials Protective Sealcoat Emulsion M .. Bitumen for Expansion End Anchor Rod M .. Cement Mortar M .. Prestressed Concrete Beams M .. thru M .. Mortar for Filling Keyways M .. Anchor Rods M .. Strand Chuck M .. Elastomeric Bridge Bearing Pads M ..
The transverse ties shall be single millimeter lowrelaxation strands meeting the requirements of AASHTO M . The ties shall be supplied with a seamless polypropylene sheath which has corrosion inhibitor grease between the strand and sheath .
The location of all strands both pretensioning and transverse tie shall be as shown on the plans .
CONSTRUCTION METHODS .
General .
Prestressed concrete beams shall be installed to the line and grade shown on the plans in accordance with the Contractors approved erection procedures and in accordance with relevant provisions of these Standard Specifications .
The prestressed concrete beams shall not be shipped for a minimum of days from casting .
Beams shall not be stacked on top of each other either at the fabricators yard during transit or at the site .
At all times blocking shall be located at the center line of bearing of the beam .
The bridge seats for the elastomeric bearings shall be prepared in accordance with Section .
C. .
Bearing Areas for Superstructure Metal. . Erection .
Within sixty days of the date of the Notice to Proceed the Contractor shall submit an erection procedure .
The submitted method of erection is subject to review comment and approval by the Engineer .
The method must be submitted with detailed procedures which include drawings and calculations sufficient to enable the Engineer to determine the adequacy of the proposed method .
The preparation and submission of this erection procedure including the information and calculations to be provided shall be in accordance with the relevant requirements of Section .
D. Erection for beams and girders .
The prestressed concrete beams shall be lifted only by the lifting hooks and the utmost care shall be taken to prevent distortion of the beams during handling transportation or storage .
Under no circumstances are the beams to be handled in other than an upright position .
The design of the lifting hooks shall be the responsibility of the Fabricator of the beams .
The lifting hooks shall be designed to meet the requirements for lifting devices as specified under Section .
D. Erection .
II .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges Suitable spreaders shall be used during lifting so that only a vertical pull will be made on the hooks .
A non vertical lifting force may be permitted if prior written approval is given by the Engineer .
This approval will be contingent on the Contractor demonstrating by calculations prepared by a Professional Engineer registered in Massachusetts that the beams will not be damaged by the nonvertical lifting force and by documentation that the capacity of the lifting hooks is adequate for the nonvertical lifting force. . Butted Prestressed Concrete Deck and Box Beams .
A. Beam Layout .
Prior to erection the location of the beams on the abutments and piers shall be layed out according to the nominal width of the beams as shown on the plans .
Each beam will be erected such that the distance from its edge to the corresponding nominal width line shall be as shown on the plans everywhere along the entire length of the beam .
After erection the beam shall lie entirely within the horizontal lines defined by its nominal width for its entire length and shall not infringe on the space allocated for any adjacent beam .
After all beams are erected the actual overall width of the butted deck assembly shall not deviate from the nominal dimension shown on the framing plan by more than millimeters .
B. Mortaring Keyways .
The keyways shall not be filled until days have elapsed from casting of the youngest beam in the butted assembly except under the following condition .
If the beams have been cast in a continuous sequence and adjacent beams are not more than two days different in age then keyways may be filled after days have elapsed since casting of the youngest beam .
Mortar M .. shall be placed in strict accordance with the manufacturers recommendations and instructions .
The keyways shall be filled flush to the top of the beams and any vertical misalignment between beams shall be feathered out on a slope of vertical to horizontal .
Curing shall be performed in strict accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
The keyways shall not be filled in cold weather when either the ambient temperature or the precast members temperature is below the mortar manufacturers recommendation .
No localized heating of either the precast members or of the air surrounding the keyway will be permitted in an attempt to reach application temperatures .
No vehicular or construction traffic will be allowed on the bride until the mortar has attained its full strength .
C. Traverse Tie Tensioning .
Unless shown otherwise on the plans the ties shall be tensioned to kiloNewtons before the keyways are filled .
After the keyways are filled with mortar M .. and the mortar has cured the ties shall be tensioned to kiloNewtons .
If the plans show that the ties are to be tensioned before mortaring then the strands shall be tensioned to kiloNewtons with multipolymer plastic shims in place as shown on the plans to maintain a uniform joint width .
If excessive time elapses between the tensioning of the ties and the mortaring of the keyways the Contractor shall verify that the kiloNewton post tension force is still in the strand .
D. Closure Pour for Continuity .
Prior to erecting the beams the restraint key cast into the top of the pier cap shall be lined with closed cell foam to the limits and thickness shown on the plans .
The concrete for the closure pour shall not be placed until after the keyway mortar has cured and the transverse ties have been fully tensioned .
The pier cap restraint key shall be cleaned of all loose and extraneous material prior to placing the concrete .
Stytofoam shall be placed outside of the restraint key as shown on the plans to prevent the closure pour concrete from coming in contact with the pier cap itself .
E. Final Deck Assembly Work .
After the final deck assembly has been accepted by the Engineer the lifting hooks shall be cut off below the top of the beam and the recesses shall be filled with mortar M The Contractor shall also remove projections and fill all depressions in the tops of the beams with mortar M After all mortar has cured the Engineer shall inspect and approve the surface of the deck assembly before the Contractor will be permitted to apply the membrane waterproofing in accordance with the requirements of Section System Preformed Sheet Membranes .
F. Backwalls Curtain Walls and Keeper Blocks .
The backwalls the curtain walls at the abutment bridge seats and the keeper blocks shall be cast only after the deck assembly has been accepted .
Closed cell foam shall be attached to the bridge structure to the limits and thickness as shown on the plans and the backwallcurtain wallkeeper block concrete shall be placed directly against it .
II .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges The sidewalk safety curb or barrier sections may be cast after the curtain walls and exterior pier keeper blocks have been cast .
In this case the curtain walls and keeper blocks shall be accurately formed above the beams to the shape and dimensions of the coping including the thickness of the closed cell foam as shown on the plans .
Closed cell foam will be attached to the curtain wallkeeper block prior to placing the coping concrete. . Prestressed IBeam Bulb Tee and Spread Box Beam Sections .
Anchor bolts where called for on the plans shall be set as follows in piers anchor bolts shall be accurately set by template prior to placing concrete in abutments anchor bolts may be set by template or by drilling and grouting .
Grout shall be a nonshrink type .
Keeper blocks on the abutments and pier caps where called for on the plans shall be cast after the beams have been erected .
Closed cell foam of the thickness shown on the plans shall be attached to sides of the beam within the limits of the keeper blocks prior to placing the concrete .
As beams are being erected temporary blocking or bracing shall be installed at the ends of the beams to prevent the beams from accidentally rotating and tipping over .
The detail for this bracing shall be included with the erection procedure submittal .
After the reinforced concrete diaphragms have been poured and allowed to reach a minimum of of the required day strength the temporary bracing may be removed .
In addition the placement of the deck concrete will not be permitted until these concrete diaphragms have been installed and have reached this minimum strength .
The top of the beam shall be clean free of all laitance and shall have a rough surface raked across the width of the beam .
Deck concrete shall be placed against the beam concrete without the use of any bonding agents .
COMPENSATION .
Basis of Payment .
The above work shall be paid for at the contract lump sum price under the respective items of Prestressed Concrete Deck Beams Prestressed Concrete Beams I or Bulb Section and Prestressed Concrete Box Beams complete in place and accepted. . Payment Items. . Prestressed Concrete Deck Beams Lump Sum .
Prestressed Concrete Box Beams Lump Sum .
Prestressed Concrete Beams I or Bulb Section Lump Sum .
Elastomeric Bridge Bearing Pad Square Meter .
Elastomeric Bridge Bearing Pad Each SECTION DRIVEN PILES DESCRIPTION .
General .
This work shall consist of furnishing and driving piles to the required bearing capacity in accordance with these specifications and in close conformity with the lines and grades shown on the plans established by the Engineer .
II .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges The Contractor will be responsible for furnishing piling of sufficient length to obtain the penetration and bearing value required. . Pile Schedule .
The Contractor shall submit to the Engineer for approval a schedule of the length of piles heshe proposes to order and the schedule shall designate the respective location of the piles .
The scheduled length shall comprise the length expected to be left in the structure plus the length that might be necessary to provide fresh heading .
When test piles and load tests are required the data obtained from driving test piles and making test loads shall be used in conjunction with other available information to determine the lengths of piles to be furnished. . PrecastPrestressed Concrete Piles .
A .
Required Submittals .
The Contractor shall submit to the Engineer shop drawings and design calculations which demonstrate the pile complies with the Contract documents .
The drawings shall include a schedule of pile lengths all structural reinforcing and prestressing details pickup points and splice designs .
All designs shall be in accordance with the latest AASHTO Standard Specifications for Highway Bridges .
B .
Special Tips .
Piles driven to bed rock into dense stratum or through strata with obstructions shall be equipped with embedded steel H sections or equivalent type protection to minimize damage to the pile tip .
C. Extensions .
Extensions on precastprestressed piles shall be in accordance with details shown in the Contract Documents .
The final cutting shall be perpendicular to the axis of pile at such an elevation that at least diameters of reinforcing steel are exposed .
The final cutting shall not cause undue spalling of the pile adjacent to the cut .
Steel reinforcing and concrete for the extensions shall be of the same strength and quality as that used for the original pile .
MATERIALS .
General .
A. Piles shall meet the requirements specified in the following Subsections of Division III Materials Untreated Timber Pile M ..
Treated Timber Pile M .. Steel Pile M .. Steel Pipe Piles M .. CastinPlace Pile M .. PrecastPrestressed Concrete Pile M .. MPa mm kg Cement Concrete M .. Steel Reinforcement M .. Mortar M .. B .
Length of Steel Pipe and H Piles .
When the proposed length is .
meters or less the pile shall be furnished in a single piece of the required length . .
Greater than meters the Contractor will have the option of furnishing the pile in a single piece or of furnishing each pile in pieces approximately equal in length to make up the required length. . meters or less piles shall be spliced on the ground before being placed in the leads .
C. Length of PrecastPrestressed Concrete Piles. . meters or less the pile shall be furnished in a single piece . .
Greater than meters the Contractor shall have the option of furnishing the pile in a single piece or splicing pieces approximately equal in length .
D. Storage and Handling of Piles .
II .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges Special care shall be used in the storage and handling of piles to avoid damage .
The method of handling of precastprestressed concrete piling shall prevent cracking or fracture by impact or induced bending stresses .
At the discretion of the Engineer cracked or fractured piling shall be either rejected or repaired with epoxy .
Fine cracks which do not extend to the reinforcing steel as determined by the Engineer will neither require repair or be cause for rejection .
The Contractors proposed method for repair with epoxy or the like shall be submitted to the Engineer for approval .
E. Pile Shoes and Tips .
Pile shoes of the type and dimensions specified shall be provided and installed when shown on the contract documents .
Timber pile shoes shall be metal and be fastened securely to the pile .
Timber pile tips shall be carefully shaped to secure an even uniform bearing on the pile shoes .
Steel pile shoes shall be fabricated from cast steel conforming to ASTM A or A .
CONSTRUCTION METHODS .
Equipment for Driving Piles. . Hammers .
A .
General .
Piles shall be driven by approved power hammers or by a combination of jetting and power hammers .
Power hammers include single double and differential acting air or steam hammers and open or closedend diesel hammers .
Drop Gravity hammers may be used with the written permission of the Engineer to drive timber piles .
Valve mechanisms and other parts of power hammers shall be maintained in good condition .
Hammers shall be capable of delivering the manufacturers rated energy and shall be operated at the manufacturers specified maximum blows per minute .
Power sources such as steam boilers and air compressors shall be capable of continuously maintaining the hammer manufactures recommended pressure and flow rate at the intake of the hammer .
Boilers and Compressors shall be equipped with pressure gauges or other devices calibrated against the rated hammer energy .
When directed by the Engineer a gauge readable from the ground surface shall be provided at the hammer intake to determine the actual pressure delivered to the hammer .
The Contractor shall equip openend diesel hammers with a calibrated scale to enable accurate observation of ram stroke from the ground surface .
The Contractor shall also provide the Engineer a chart from the hammer manufacturer equating stroke and blows per minute for the openend diesel hammer to be used .
Double acting diesel hammers closedend shall be equipped with a gauge to measure pressure in the bounce chamber .
The gauge shall be readable from the ground surface .
Alternatively the gauge can be equipped with a hose sufficiently long to enable reading on the ground surface .
The gauge and hose assembly shall be calibrated to allow for losses in the hose .
The Contractor shall provide charts relating the throttle setting andor bounce chamber pressure to rated hammer energy .
B .
Minimum Energy Requirements .
Power Hammers shall have a ram mass of not less than kilograms and shall develop not less than joules of energy per blow .
When driving to final resistance the total energy in joules to drive the pile the last millimeters shall not exceed times the pile tip diameter in millimeters .
Drop Gravity Hammers may be used only with the written permission of the Engineer .
Such hammers shall have a mass of between and kilograms but in no case shall the mass of the hammer be less than the combined mass of driving head and pile .
The fall shall be so regulated as to avoid damage to the pile and in no case shall exceed .
meters .
To control excessive stress in concrete piling during driving the Engineer may require .
Increase in cushion thickness or change the materials comprising the cushion .
Reduction of ram stroke .
Reduced ram stroke for driving through very soft soil and increased ram stroke as soil resistance increases .
Combination of increased cushion thickness and reduced ram stroke .
Combination of increased cushion thickness and shorter stroke or .
Use of pilot holes or jetting when driving through hard or alternating hard and soft strata .
C. Submittals .
II .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges The Contractor shall submit to the Engineer for approval a description of the proposed driving equipment with manufacturers specifications .
The equipment description shall include hammer type hammer cushion drivehead and pile cushion etc .
as contained in the Pile and Driving Equipment Data Form included in the contract documents or supplied by the Engineer .
D. Approval Criteria .
Power hammers shall have an energy rating that will provide the required pile capacity with a penetration resistance between and blows per millimeters .
The energy required for these rates shall be determined by the formula given in Section .A for piles with a required capacity less than kiloNewtons .
For piles with required capacity over kiloNewtons or as directed by the Engineer the Contractor shall submit to the Engineer the results of a Wave Equation Analysis performed in accordance with Section .B for the proposed driving equipment .
The analysis shall evaluate the acceptability of the driving equipment with regard to energy transfer to the pile top and the potential for impending pile damage due to induced driving stresses .
The pile stresses which are indicated by the wave equation to be generated by the driving equipment shall not exceed the values where pile damage impends if the equipment is to be acceptable .
That value is determined by the magnitude of the induced compressive stresses .
The point of impending damage in steel piles is defined herein as a compressive driving stress of percent of the yield point of the pile material .
For concrete piles tensile stresses using units of kiloPascals shall not exceed .
multiplied by the square root of the concrete compressive strength fc in kiloPascals plus the effective prestress value .fc .
prestress and compressive stresses shall not exceed percent of the compressive strength minus the effective prestress value .
fc prestress .
For timber piles the compressive driving stress shall not exceed three times the allowable static design strength listed on the plans .
These criteria will be used in evaluating wave equation results to determine acceptability of the Contractors proposed driving system .
The results of the analysis including input parameters shall be subject to the review and approval of the Engineer prior to any pile installations .
The Contractor will be notified of the acceptance or rejection of the driving system within calendar days of the Engineers receipt of the Pile and Driving Equipment Data Form .
If the wave equation analyses show that either pile damage or inability to drive the pile with a reasonable blow count to the desired ultimate capacity will result from the Contractors proposed equipment or methods the Contractor shall modify or replace the proposed methods or equipment until subsequent wave equation analyses indicate the piles can be reasonably driven to the desired ultimate capacity without damage .
Approval of the equipment by the Engineer will not relieve the Contractor of hisher responsibility to provide and install piles capable of supporting the design loads given on the contract documents. . Driving Appurtenances .
A .
Pile Drive Head .
Pile driven with impact hammers require an adequate drive head to distribute the hammer blow to the pile head .
The drive head shall be axially aligned with the hammer and the pile .
The drive head should be guided by the leads and not be freeswinging .
The drive head should fit around the pile head in such a manner as to prevent transfer of torsional forces during driving while maintaining proper alignment of hammer and pile. . For steel and timber piling the pile heads shall be cut squarely and a drive head as recommended by the hammer manufacturer be provided to hold the axis of the pile in line with the axis of the hammer. . For precast concrete and prestressed concrete piles the pile head shall be plane and perpendicular to the longitudinal axis of the pile to prevent eccentric impacts. . For special types of piles appropriate driving heads mandrels or other devices shall be provided in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations so that the piles may be driven without damage .
B. Bands .
Collars bands or other devices to protect timber piles against splitting and brooming shall be provided by the Contractor .
C. Hammer Cushion .
All pile driving equipment shall be equipped with a suitable thickness of hammer cushion material to prevent damage to the hammer or pile and to insure uniform driving behavior .
Hammer cushions shall be made of durable manufactured materials provided in accordance with the hammer manufacturers guidelines except that all wood wire rope and asbestos hammer cushions are specifically disallowed and shall not be used .
A striker plate as recommended by the hammer manufacturer shall be placed on the hammer cushion to insure uniform compression of the cushion material .
II .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges The hammer cushion shall be inspected in the presence of the Engineer when beginning pile driving at each substructure element or after each hours of pile driving whichever is less .
Any reduction of hammer cushion thickness shall be replaced by the Contractor before driving is permitted to continue .
D. Pile Cushion .
The heads of concrete piles shall be protected by a pile cushion made of plywood or other similar material approved by the Engineer .
The minimum plywood thickness placed on the pile head prior to driving shall not be less than millimeters .
A new pile cushion shall be provided for each pile .
In addition during the driving of each pile the pile cushion shall be replaced if during the driving the cushion is either compressed more than onehalf the original thickness or begins to burn .
The pile cushion dimensions shall match the crosssectional area of the pile top .
E. Leads .
The pile driver shall be equipped with fixed leads that are an integral part of the machine .
The pile driving hammer shall ride in the ways of the leads .
Fixed leads shall be used for driving all piles unless written approval to the contrary is obtained from the Engineer .
F. Followers .
Followers shall only be used when approved in writing by the Engineer or when specifically stated in the contract documents .
The follower shall be of such material and dimensions to permit the piles to be driven to the length determined necessary from the driving of the full length piles .
The final position and alignment of the first two piles installed with followers in each substructure unit shall be verified to be in accordance with the location tolerances in this specification before additional piles are installed .
G. Jets .
Jetting shall only be permitted if approved in writing by the Engineer or when specifically stated in the contract documents .
Jetting will not be allowed when driving through newly placed embankment .
The use of water jets will be permitted only when excess of water will not affect adjacent structures .
In general jetting will not be permitted near railroad tracks .
When jetting is permitted the Contractor shall determine the number of jets and the volume and pressure of water at the jet nozzles necessary to freely erode the material adjacent to the pile without affecting the lateral stability of the final inplace pile .
The Contractor shall control treat if necessary and dispose of all jet water such as to meet environmental considerations .
The Contractor shall be responsible for all damage to the site caused by jetting operations .
The jetting plant shall have sufficient capacity to deliver at all times a pressure equivalent to at least kiloPascals at two millimeter jet nozzles .
Unless otherwise indicated jet pipes shall be removed when the pile tip is a minimum of .
meters above prescribed tip elevation and the pile shall be driven to the required bearing capacity with an impact hammer .
H. Preaugering .
Preaugering shall only be permitted if approved in writing by the Engineer or when specifically stated in the Contract documents .
When permitted the Contractor shall provide the necessary equipment such as augers well drilling machines etc .
to preauger holes at pile locations and to the depths required by the Engineer .
PILE INSTALLATION .
Preparation for Driving .
A. Excavation .
When piles are located in an area where excavation is to be made or in an area where embankment is to be placed the piles shall not be driven until the excavation has been made or the embankment has been placed .
For either of the foregoing the grade shall be brought to such an elevation as to compensate for possible uplift or subsidence of the surrounding earth .
Adjustments in the grade shall be made after all the piles at the location have been driven .
Additional excavation or embankment will be considered as part of the process of pile driving and will not be included in the payment for either excavation or borrow .
B. Preaugering .
Where timber castin place precastprestressed concrete piles or steel piles are to be driven through an embankment and the depth of the embankment at the pile location is in excess of .
meters the Contractor shall make a hole for the full depth of the embankment for each pile with an auger or by other approved methods .
The hole shall have a diameter of not less than the butt diameter of the pile .
After driving the annular space around the pile shall be filled to the ground surface with dry sand fine gravel or pea stone .
Material resulting from drilling holes shall be disposed of in accordance with Section Excavation .
II .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges .
Driven Pile Capacity .
For piles with proposed capacities greater than kiloNewtons the safe bearing values shall be determined by a Wave Equation Analysis conducted by a Registered Professional Engineer experienced in the method of analysis at the expense of the Contractor .
For piles with proposed capacities not greater than kiloNewtons the safe bearing values may be determined by the following formula unless directed otherwise by the Engineer .
A .
Formula Method .
Ru E. log N E. Where Ru Ultimate Pile Capacity kiloNewtons E Manufacturers rated energy of the hammer at stroke observed in field in kilojoules .
Log N Logarithm to the base of the quantity multiplied by N the number of hammer blows per millimeters at final penetration blows per millimeters .
The above formula is applicable only when a A follower is not used .
b The hammer is operated within the range established by the manufacturer .
A design safety factor of .
is to be used when using this formula to determine the safe design load i.e .
if a design load of kiloNewtons is required in the bearing layer then an ultimate capacity of kiloNewtons should be used in the formula to determine the necessary hammer blow count .
The above formula may be modified by the Engineer if heshe deems it necessary on the basis of information obtained from a loading test or dynamic field measurements during pile driving .
B .
Wave Equation Method .
When required in the contract documents the ultimate pile resistance shall be determined by the Engineer based on a wave equation analysis .
Piles shall be driven with the approved driving equipment to the ordered length or other lengths necessary to obtain the required ultimate pile resistance .
Jetting preaugering or other methods to facilitate pile penetration shall not be used unless specifically permitted either in the contract documents or approved by the Engineer after a revised driving resistance is established from the wave equation analysis .
Adequate pile penetration shall be considered to be obtained when the specified wave equation resistance criteria is achieved within .
meters of the tip elevation based on ordered length .
Piles not achieving the specified resistance within these limits shall be driven to penetrations established by the Engineer .
The Contractor is required to perform a wave equation analysis upon each pile type each pile size at each significant variation in soil profile and at each pile driven for the static load test as shown on the plans .
When dynamic load tests are required then a wave equation analysis must be performed for each pile to be dynamic load tested by the Pile Driving Analyzer PDA as determined by the Engineer .
The wave equation analysis shall be made as outlined in the latest edition of the FHWA publication entitled Manual on Design and Construction of Driven Pile Foundations .
If more than one driving system is proposed by the Contractor a wave equation analysis shall also be made for each driving system .
The driving system as detailed on the Pile Driving and Equipment Data Form shall be completed by the Contractor and furnished for use as wave equation input data .
No change in driving equipment will be permitted after an evaluation by the Wave Equation Method without prior approval of the Engineer and a revaluation of the driving system .
The Engineer may modify the results from the Wave Equation Analysis if heshe deems it necessary on the basis of information obtained from loading tests or dynamic field measurement .
The wave equation analysis will be performed by an engineer registered with the Commonwealth of Massachusetts as a Professional Engineer and experienced in such work .
The Contractors engineer shall be experienced in the performance of the wave equation analysis and its function as related to pile capacity determination .
The Contractors engineer conducting the wave equation analysis shall be thoroughly familiar with the Geotechnical report for the project the subsurface conditions at the site and with the proposed foundation design .
The Contractor shall submit a written report with a summary of each wave equation analysis to the Department at least weeks prior to pile driving .
That submission shall include a copy of the entire wave equation analysis program II .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges WEAP output in the form as specified in the above referenced FHWA Manual .
The summary in the report will contain the plotted curves of ultimate resistance vs. blowcount and compressive stresses vs. blowcount and tensile stresses vs. blowcount for each WEAP output for each embedded length and for several strokelengths if a variable stroke diesel hammer is used .
The Contractors engineer conducting the wave equation analysis shall also be the same engineer to conduct the dynamic load tests with the PDA when the Contractor is required to perform such dynamic load tests. . Pile Load Tests .
A .
General .
The piles to be tested shall be driven in accordance with the requirements under the item for the type of pile to be used on the project .
These tests shall be made before driving production on piles .
Each pile to be tested shall be driven to the design load as determined by either the Formula in Section .A or a Wave Equation Analysis in accordance with Section .B and at the discretion of the Engineer by dynamic pile measurements in accordance with Section .C .
B. Static Tests .
Static pile load tests shall be conducted in accordance with ASTM D Standard Method of Testing Piles under Static Axial Compressive Load except as modified herein. . General .
The top elevation of the test pile shall be determined immediately after driving and again just before load testing to check for heave .
Any pile which heaves more than millimeters shall be redriven or jacked to the original elevation prior to testing .
Unless otherwise specified in the contract a minimum day waiting period shall be observed between the driving of any anchor piles or the load test pile and the commencement of the load test .
Telltales shall be installed in all test piles to determine the percent of the applied test load being transferred to the bearing stratum .
Number and location of telltales shall be as shown on the plans .
The Department will furnish levels and the personnel necessary to make all evaluations .
All measuring devices and gauges that will be required other than levels shall be furnished by the Contractor .
Readings of settlement and rebound shall be referred to a fixed benchmark and shall be made using at least two micrometer dial extensometers graduated to onehundredth of a millimeter and located degrees apart along the axis of the exposed portion of the pile .
Readings shall be taken at intervals specified in Sections or Test Procedures .
Readings shall be taken from gauges mounted on a reference beam supported at each end by reliable supports located at least meters from the center of the test pile .
In addition to these readings elevations to the nearest onehalf of a millimeter by use of an Engineers level and rod shall be recorded .
The entire measuring installation shall be protected from direct sunlight frost action and other disturbances that might affect its reliability .
The head of each test pile shall be cutoff level or shall be capped in such a manner as to produce a plane horizontal bearing surface .
All records obtained during the test shall be the property of the Department .
Furnishing and driving the piles complete in place will be paid for under the item for the type of piles on which the test is made .
Before starting the work the Contractor shall submit to the Engineer for approval a written description of the equipment and method which heshe intends to use .
The method must be of an approved type and shall be altered as necessary to meet the approval of the Engineer. . Load Application .
The method of applying the load to the pile will be at the option of the Contractor provided the method is adaptable to accurate measuring of the applied load and the method avoids eccentric loading on the pile .
The first increment of load shall include allowance for weight of the equipment .
Hydraulic Jacks shall be of an approved type and capable of supplying a minimum jacking capacity equal to the maximum test load plus .
The Contractor shall provide a load cell subject to the approval of the Engineer which is capable of determining load transfer to the test pile .
The load cell shall have a capacity equal to the jack capacity and shall be calibrated by a certified testing laboratory .
In addition the Contractor shall provide a calibration certificate from a certified testing laboratory relating pressure gauge reading to jack load .
The Contractor shall submit to the Engineer both calibration certificates prior to load testing . .
Reaction Loads .
The total reaction load shall be not less than percent of the design load for both the short duration and maintained load tests and percent of the design load for the quick load test method .
II .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges Any one of the following devices for applying the vertical loads may be used a .
Load Supported Directly by Pile .
A loading platform or box shall be supported on top of the pile to be tested .
The construction of the box and the application of the loads shall be such that no lateral forces will be applied to the top of the pile and no impact will occur as the loads are placed .
In cases where the test pile is in an excavation below the natural ground surface an extension column of structural steel or steel pile may be used to extend from pile head up to the test box .
b .
Load from Weighted Box or Platform Applied to Pile by Hydraulic Jack .
A test box or test platform resting on cribbing shall be constructed over the pile and loaded with suitable material .
A hydraulic jack with a recently calibrated pressure gauge shall be interposed between the pile head and the load box and load applied to the pile by operating the jack .
c. Load Applied to Pile by Hydraulic Jack Acting Against Anchored Reaction Members .
Two or more piles to be used as anchor piles shall be driven at a minimum distance of .
meters from the test pile .
A girder of sufficient strength to act as a reaction beam shall be fastened to the upper ends of the anchor piles .
A hydraulic jack with a recently calibrated pressure gauge shall be interposed between the head of the test pile and the underside of the reaction beam and the test load applied to the pile by operating the jack .
d. Test Procedures .
The Contractor shall use the load sequence specified under Short Duration Load Test unless otherwise directed by the Engineer or the Contract Documents to use the load sequence specified for Quick Load Test or Maintained Load Test .
The application of the test load shall not begin sooner than hours after placing concrete in Castin place and Steel pipe piles and no sooner than hours after other type piles are driven .
A single pile shall be loadtested to not less than twice the design load .
When two or more piles are to be tested as a group the total load shall be not less than one and onehalf times the design load for the group. . Short Duration Test .
The load sequence shall be as follows a .
Apply of the design load every onehalf hour up to the greater of the following two hundred percent of design load to an applied load which transfers one hundred percent of design load to the bearing strata as determined from telltale measurements but not greater than of the reaction load .
Longer time increments may be used but each time increment should be the same .
b .
At the maximum applied load maintain the load for a minimum of one hour and until the settlement measured at the lowest point on the pile at which measurements are made over a onehour period is not greater than .
millimeters .
c. Remove of the applied load every minutes until zero load is reached .
Longer time increments may be used but each should be the same .
d. Measure rebound at zero load for a minimum of one hour .
In no case shall a load be changed if the rate of settlement is not decreasing with time .
For each load increment or decrement take readings at the top of the pile and on the internal instrumentation at and minutes and at minutes intervals thereafter .
Provided that the design load does not exceed one hundred percent of the load transferred to the bearing stratum at the maximum test load the design load from this test type shall be the greater of the following a .
Design Load Based on Settlement During Loading .
For Piles millimeters or less in diameter Fifty percent of the applied test load which cause a gross settlement at the pile cutoff grade equal to the sum of a the theoretical elastic compression of the pile in millimeters assuming all the load on the butt is transmitted to the tip plus b millimeters plus c one hundred twentieth of the pile tip diameter or pile width in millimeters i.e .
Sf S D Where Sf Settlement at failure in millimeters D Pile diameter or width in millimeters S Elastic deformation of pile length in millimeters .
For Piles greater than millimeters in diameter or width II .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges Sf S D If the settlement are so small that the loadsettlement curve does not intersect the failure criterion the maximum test load shall be taken as the failure load .
b .
Design Load Based on Net Settlement After Rebound Fifty percent of the applied test load which results in a net settlement of the top of the pile of millimeters after rebound for a minimum of one hour at zero load . .
Maintained Load Test .
The test loads shall be applied in at least five increments equal to and percent of the design load .
All intermediate load steps shall be maintained constant for a period of two hours .
During the loading cycle the contemplated design load and twice the design load shall be maintained constant until settlement does not exceed .
millimeters in consecutive hours or until the pile has failed as determined by the Engineer .
The loading period for twice the design load shall be no less than hours .
The total test load shall be removed in decrements not exceeding of the total test load .
Each step of unloading shall be maintained constant for a period of hours .
During loading record readings of time load and movement at intervals not exceeding minutes during the first onehalf hour minute intervals up to two hours at one hour intervals up to hours and hour intervals thereafter .
During unloading take readings at intervals not exceeding minutes for the first hour and hour intervals thereafter .
Take a final rebound reading hours after all load has been removed .
The design load shall be determined in accordance with the procedures specified in the Short Duration Load Test. . Quick Load Test .
This load test shall be performed on individual piles only .
The load shall be applied in increments of to kiloNewtons and shall not exceed of the design load .
The time interval between readings shall be minutes or as otherwise specified .
Add load increments until continuous jacking is required to maintain the test load or until the capacity of either the loading apparatus or reaction load is reached .
Hold the failure load or maximum applied load for not less than five minutes .
Unload the pile in no less than four equal increments .
Record time load and movements immediately before and after the application or removal of each load increment .
Take a final rebound reading minutes after removing all loads .
The design load shall be determined in accordance with the procedures specified in the Short Duration Load Test .
C. Dynamic Load Tests . .
Dynamic Load Test Preparation .
Dynamic measurements will be taken by the Engineer during driving piles designated as Dynamic Load Test DLT piles .
Prior to placement in the leads the Contractor shall make each designated concrete andor timber pile available for taking of wave speed measurements and for predrilling the required instrument attachment holes .
When wave speed measurements are made the piling shall be in a horizontal position and not in contact with other piling .
The Engineer shall furnish the equipment materials and labor necessary for drilling holes in the piles for mounting the instruments .
The instruments will be attached near the head of the pile with bolts placed in masonry anchors for the concrete piles or through drilled holes on the steel piles .
The Contractor shall provide the Engineer reasonable means of access to the pile for attaching instruments after the pile is placed in the leads .
If in the opinion of the Engineer the instruments can not be installed before pile is placed in the leads then a platform with a minimum size of .
meters x . meters designed to be raised to the top of the pile while the pile is located in the leads shall be provided by the Contractor .
It is estimated that the Engineer will need approximately hour per pile to install the dynamic load test equipment .
The Contractor shall furnish electric power for the dynamic load test equipment .
The power supply at the outlet shall be ampere volt hertz A.C. only .
Field generators used at the power source shall be equipped with functioning meters for monitoring voltage and frequency levels .
The Contractor shall furnish a shelter to protect the dynamic load test equipment from the elements .
The shelter shall have a minimum floor size of .
meters x . meters and minimum roof height of .
meters .
The inside II .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges temperature of the shelter shall be maintained above C. The shelter shall be located within meters of the test location .
The pile shall be driven to the depth at which the dynamic analyzer indicates that the ultimate pile resistance shown in the contract plans has been achieved unless directed otherwise by the Engineer .
The stresses in the piles will be monitored during driving with the dynamic analyzer to ensure that the pile stresses determined do not exceed the values which would cause pile damage .
The point of impending damage in steel piles is defined herein as a compressive driving stress of of the yield point of the pile material .
For concrete piles tensile stresses in units of kiloPascals shall not exceed .
multiplied by the square root of the concrete compressive strength fc in kiloPascals plus the effective prestress value .fc .
prestress and compressive stresses shall not exceed of the compressive strength minus the effective prestress value .
fc prestress .
For timber piles the compressive driving stress shall not exceed three times the allowable static design strength listed on the plans .
If necessary the Contractor shall reduce the driving energy output of the hammer in order to maintain stresses below these values .
If nonaxial driving is indicated by the dynamic analyzer measurements the Contractor shall immediately realign the driving system .
When directed by the Engineer the Contractor shall wait to hours and then after the instruments are reattached retap the dynamic load test pile .
It is estimated that the Engineer will require approximately hour to reattach the instruments .
A cold hammer shall not be used for the redrive .
The hammer shall be warmed up before redrive begins by applying at least blows to another pile .
The maximum amount of penetration required during redrive will be millimeters or the maximum total number of hammer blows required will be whichever occurs first .
After retapping the Engineer will either provide the cutoff elevation or specify additional pile penetration and testing . .
Dynamic Load Test by Contractor .
When directed in the Contract documents dynamic measurements will be taken by the Contractor during pile driving and shall be subject to the Departments field review .
Those piles to be tested will be designated as dynamic load test piles or DLT on the plans and shall be located by the Department .
Preliminary location of the piles to be tested are subject to revision by the Engineer .
The piles to be static load tested and approximately of the remaining driven piles will be tested by this method unless otherwise directed by the Engineer .
The dynamic tests are to be made by the Contractors engineer who shall be registered with the Commonwealth of Massachusetts as a Professional Engineer .
The same Contractors engineer conducting the wave equation analysis shall perform the dynamic load tests .
Each dynamic test shall also include a CAPWAP analysis in order to closely model actual field conditions .
The damping quake and soil resistance distribution values will be provided by the Contractors engineer .
The Contractors engineer shall be experienced in the use of the Pile Driving Analyzer PDA and its purpose as related to pile capability determination .
The Contractors engineer will also be proficient in the interpretation of the PDA and CAPWAP data and shall determine the tested piles capacity based upon this data .
The Contractor shall submit to the Department a written report with a summary of results upon completion of each PDA test including CAPWAP analysis .
A copy of the entire PDA and CAPWAP analysis output will be submitted to the Department for review along with the Contractors report of each PDA and CAPWAP test .
The PDA and CAPWAP output will not substitute for a written report which includes a summary of the results but will be submitted with such a report .
The Contractor shall submit evidence of the engineers proficiency to the Department at least weeks in advance of the work to allow the Department adequate time for review and approval or comments .
No pile driving will be allowed until written approval has been received from the Engineer .
a. PDA Equipment .
The equipment to perform the dynamic tests shall be a Model GC pile driving analyzer by Globe Rausche Likins and Associates Inc. Emery Industrial Parkway Cleveland Ohio telephone or approved equal .
The equipment shall be complete with all pertinent peripheral equipment necessary to complete and record the test data and complete the analysis of pile capacity .
b .
Pile Testing Program .
At least weeks prior to initiating the pile driving operation the Contractor shall submit a pile testing program outline to the Department for review and approval .
The following procedure is suggested as an example of a pile testing program which incorporates the wave equation analysis and the dynamic pile driving analysis including the CAPWAP portion of the dynamic testing .
The testing should be performed by experienced engineers .
The scope and sequence of testing services is suggested as follows II .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges .
Perform initial wave equation analysis based on subsurface conditions pile type pile capacity and pile driving equipment to be utilized .
See the previously referenced FHWA Manual for examples of the WEAP analysis procedure from static analysis to parameter selection .
Submit written report of each wave equation analysis with complete printout to the Department for review. . Drive piles to be static load tested first at locations specified on the plans using the driving criteria established by the wave equation .
The driving criteria however is subject to change due to actual hammer performance and expected soil strength changes .
Dynamic testing with the PDA shall be made during the driving of all piles to be static load tested. . After performing dynamic load testing on the piles to be static load tested evaluate static load test piles after a minimum waiting period to be determined by the Engineer by restriking the piles with simultaneous dynamic testing by the PDA .
Restrike testing is considered essential for service load capacity determinations if they are to include setuprelaxation effects since the analyzer gives the pile capacity at the time of testing . .
The remaining of the piles at each substructure which have been designated for PDA testing should be tested during additional construction control visits .
They should be tested on initial installation and restrike as soil conditions dictate at the discretion of the Engineer .
Other than these tests the Engineer will determine if further dynamic tests should be made when the hammer system is replaced or modified etc . .
Perform supplementary rigorous laboratory wave analysis of the measured data using CAPWAP on all of the piles tested to verify and refine field results and upon restrike testing . .
Submit to the Department a written report including a written summary of results in addition to a copy of the actual printouts .
This report will show all pertinent information upon completion of the PDA testing and CAPWAP analysis of each pile. . Based on field results the following will be reviewed analyzed and the results of this analysis will be printed in a report by the Contractors Engineer .
a .
Driving stresses compression or tension b .
Hammer system efficiency c. Pile structural damageintegrity d. Bearing capacity .
It should be recognized that each site has unique and often unforeseen characteristics .
Judgments are to be made even during the testing program by the Contractors experienced engineer performing the test as to deletions or additions to a standard program which will result in the most benefit to the foundation design. . Test Piles Indicator Piles .
Test piles shall be driven when shown on the plans at the locations and to the lengths specified by the Engineer .
All test piles shall be driven with impact hammers unless specifically stated otherwise on the plans .
In general the specified length of test piles will be greater than the estimated length of production piles in order to provide for variation in soil conditions .
The driving equipment used for driving test piles shall be identical to that which the Contractor proposes to use on the production piling .
Approval of driving equipment shall conform with the requirements of these specifications .
The Contractor shall excavate the ground at each test pile to the elevation of the bottom of the footing before the pile is driven .
In the absence of a wave equation analysis test piles shall be driven to a penetration of millimeters or less after consecutive hammer blows unless the Engineer provides a hammer blow count established by wave equation analysis within a range of tip elevations or unless the driving criteria is established by the dynamic formula .
Test piles which do not attain the bearing value specified above at a depth of millimeters above the estimated tip elevation shown on the plans shall be allowed to set up for to hours as directed by the Engineer before being redriven .
A cold hammer shall not be used for redrive .
The hammer shall be warmed up before driving by applying at least blows to another pile .
If the bearing value is not attained on redriving the Engineer may direct the Contractor to drive a portion or all of the remaining test pile length and repeat the set up redrive procedure .
Test piles driven to plan grade and not having the bearing required shall be spliced and driven until the required bearing is obtained .
A record of driving of test piles will be prepared by the Contractor which includes the number of hammer blows per meter for the entire driven length the as driven length of test pile cutoff elevation penetration in ground and any other pertinent information requested by the Engineer .
The Contractor shall provide the information listed in the Pile Driving and Equipment Form to the Engineer for inclusion in the record .
If redrive is necessary the Engineer shall record the number of hammer blows per millimeters of pile movement for the first millimeters of redrive .
The Contractor II .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges shall not order piling to be used in the permanent structure until test pile data has been reviewed and pile lengths are authorized by the Engineer . .
Determinations of Required Pile Driving Resistance and Depth of Penetration .
Practical Refusal .
Unless otherwise specified practical refusal will be considered attained when ten blows of an adequate hammer operating at the number of blows per minute for which the hammer is rated by the manufacturer are required to produce a total penetration of millimeters .
Driving should then cease provided that the pile has not hit an obstruction and has been driven to the depth at which the borings indicate refusal material or bedrock .
When pile are not either required or directed to be driven to bedrock or refusal the Engineer shall determine the required driving resistance for safe bearing values and shall establish minimum tip elevations or acceptable bearing stratum depending on subsurface condition .
The required driving resistance will be established as described in Section ..
When determining the final driving resistance of the pile the hammer shall be operated at a speed not less than ninety percent of the maximum blows per minute specified by the manufacturer .
The final driving resistance shall be appropriately adjusted to the actual hammer energy delivered as specified by the manufacturer for the operating speed .
When directed by the Engineer the Contractor shall make dynamic field measurements to demonstrate that the percentage of the hammers rated energy transferred to the pile head. . Procedure for Driving .
A .
General .
No piles shall be driven except in the presence of the Engineer .
Where practicable piles shall be driven continuously to the required penetration and bearing capacity .
When the continuous installation of a pile has been stopped for any reason the pile advancement shall be started in a manner which will not damage the pile .
Any pile which can not be advanced or which is damaged in the process shall be rejected and either cutoff and repaired or replaced at the discretion of the Engineer .
Rejected piles shall be replaced or repaired at no cost to the Department .
Unless specified otherwise by the Engineer any pile restarted shall be advanced no less than millimeters before determining the final driving resistance .
The order of placing individual piles in pile groups shall be either starting from the center of the group and proceeding outwards in both directions or starting at the outside row and proceeding progressively across the group .
If any driven pile is raised more than millimeters by the subsequent driving of adjacent piles it shall be redriven to the required final resistance to penetration with no compensation for the additional driving .
Castinplace and steel pipe piles shall not be filled with concrete until all piles within a footing have been checked for uplift and redriven where necessary unless otherwise directed by the Engineer .
All piles shall be driven a minimum of meters into original ground unless otherwise directed by the Engineer .
B .
Accuracy of Driving .
The tops of piles at cutoff elevation shall be within millimeters of plan locations .
Furthermore the as driven center of gravity of any pile group at cutoff elevation shall be within of the plan location of the center of gravity .
No pile shall be nearer than millimeters from any edge of the cap .
Any increase in size of cap to meet this edge distance requirement shall be at the Contractors expense .
Piles shall be installed so that the axial alignment of the top meters of the pile is within of the specified alignment .
For piles that can not be inspected internally after installation an alignment check shall be made before installing the last .
meters of pile or after installation is completed provided the exposed portion of the pile is not less than .
meters in length .
The Engineer may require that driving be stopped in order to check the pile alignment .
If the location andor alignment tolerances specified are exceeded the extent of overloading shall be investigated and if in the judgment of the Engineer corrective measures are necessary suitable measures shall be designed and constructed by the Contractor at no cost to the Department .
Pulling laterally on piles to correct misalignment shall not be permitted .
C. Obstruction .
If conditions during driving indicate that the pile is hitting an obstruction and the obstruction is not in embankment that has been placed under the contract the following shall apply .
If the elevation of the top of the obstruction is less than .
meters below the elevation of the bottom of the footing the Contractor shall drive through the obstruction or shall use whatever means are necessary to remove or circumvent the obstruction without any additional compensation .
II .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges .
If the elevation at the top of the obstruction is .
meters or more below the elevation of the bottom of the footing the Contractor shall use a combination of water jet and hammer to drive through the obstruction without any additional compensation . .
If the use of the combination water jet and hammer above does not allow pile to be driven through the obstruction upon approval by the Engineer the Contractor shall exercise one of the following options a Drive all surrounding and adjacent piles to the handup pile or piles to determine the approximate size of the obstruction b Employ the services of a test boring or other such exploratory method. . After the approximate size of the obstruction is obtained the Engineer will determine whether the obstruction is to be removed or if the footing will be redesigned leaving the obstruction in place . .
If it is determined that the obstruction above is to be removed the Contractor shall be paid for the work of removing the obstruction under Subsection .. .
If the footing is redesigned any additional piles or excavation required shall be paid at contract unit prices .
Any change in concrete or steel reinforcement shall be paid as specified under Subsection .. . No allowance of any kind other than and above and as provided in Subsection .
will be allowed for the above. . Splices .
A .
General .
Full length piles shall always be used where practical .
B .
Timber Piles .
Splicing of timber piles will not be permitted .
C. Steel Pipe Piles and Steel H Piles .
Where these piles have to be extended the spliced connection shall be a continuous full penetration buttweld .
The buttwelding shall be made to develop the full strength of the pile both in bearing and in bending .
Welding shall conform to the applicable provisions of Subsection .. Buttweld splicing of piles other than as shown on the plans will not be permitted without the express written consent of the Engineer .
Welded splice connections for pipe piles shall be made with a welding or backup ring .
Preheat requirements for the welding of pipe piles shall be as specified for ASTM A steel .
D. PrecastPrestressed Concrete Piles .
Splices shall develop one hundred percent of the pile strength both in direct stress and in bending .
Splices for concrete piles shall be made by the cementdowel method .
Details of the cementdowel splice shall be shown in the plans .
Mechanical splices for concrete or steel piles may be approved by the Engineer if the splice can transfer the full pile strength in compression tension and bending .
Piles shall have only one splice per pile .
Splices in the lower meters of the pile will not be permitted . .
Defective Piles .
The procedure incident to the driving of piles shall not subject them to excessive and undue abuse producing injurious splitting splintering and brooming of the wood deformation of steel breakage and cracking in precast prestressed concrete piles .
Manipulation of piles to force them into proper position will not be permitted when considered to be excessive by the Engineer .
Piles damaged by reason of internal defects by improper handling driving defective welds or piles driven out of proper location shall be corrected at the Contractors expense by one of the following methods approved by the Engineer for the piles in question . .
The pile shall be withdrawn and replaced by a new and if necessary a longer pile. . A second pile shall be driven adjacent to the defective or low pile .
Damaged steel piles may be spliced at some point such that the completed pile shall be satisfactory .
After the shells for castinplace piles and pipe for pipe piles have been driven they shall be inspected and will be classified defective if any of the following are discovered .
The casing shows signs of buckling . .
The diameter varies more than percent from the original value . .
The point of the casing deviates more than of the length of the pile below plan cutoff elevation from the design alignment .
II .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges .
The casing deviates more than of its length from a straight line connecting the midpoints of the ends of the casing .
This requirement shall be taken as satisfied if some segment of the bottom of the casing is visible .
If the bottom of the casing is out of sight the shape and alignment of the casing shall be surveyed with a suitable instrument supplied by the Contractor and approved by the Engineer . .
The inside of the casing shows any signs of water or soil .
The Contractor shall provide sufficient lights and other equipment necessary to inspect each shell throughout its length .
Precastprestressed concrete piles which break within meters from the ground surface shall be at the discretion of the Engineer either replaced or cutoff and spliced at no cost to the Department .
Piles which break below meters from the ground surface shall be rejected and replaced by the Contractor at no cost to the Department .
The Engineer may elect to use dynamic measurements to aid in evaluating pile integrity. . Cutoffs .
A .
Timber Piles .
The tops of piles shall be sawed off to a true plane at the grades shown on the plans .
All cuts and abrasions on treated piles shall be repaired in accordance with AWPA Standard M. Nail holes shall be filled by driving galvanized nails flush with the surface of the pile .
B .
Steel or CastInPlace Piles .
After driving has been completed the steel or castinplace piles shall be cut off at the directed grade .
Cutting of piles shall not be done until it is certain that further operations will have no effect on the previously driven piles .
Temporary capping devices shall be provided for castinplace and steel pipe piles immediately upon cutoff to prevent soil and water from entering driven piles prior to placing concrete .
C. PrecastPrestressed Concrete Piles .
Precastprestressed concrete piles shall be cutoff at the grades specified on the plans or contract documents .
Piles shall not be cutoff until it is certain that further pile driving operations will have no effect on the driven piles . .
Placing and Protecting Concrete Filled Piles .
No concrete shall be placed in a shell or pipe until all piles within a footing have been satisfactorily driven inspected and approved by the Engineer .
No concrete shall be placed except in the presence of the Engineer .
Prior to placing concrete in each pile .
cubic meter of mortar having a slump of not more than millimeters shall be deposited in the bottom of the pile .
Concrete shall then be deposited in the casing through a funnel having a neck not more than millimeters long and not more than millimeters in diameter .
The funnel shall be provided with supports at the neck to permit air to escape during the concrete placing operation .
Placing of concrete in each pile shall be continuous and in a manner which will assure complete filling of the casing .
The slump of the concrete shall be from to millimeters .
Special care shall be exercised in filling the casing to prevent honeycomb and air pockets from forming .
Internal vibrators and other means shall be used to the maximum depth practicable as determined by the Engineer to consolidate the concrete .
During cold weather the pile heads and surrounding ground shall be covered by straw or other suitable protection to prevent frost from damaging the concrete itself or heaving the ground .
During hot weather pile heads shall be protected by suitable covering material .
COMPENSATION .
Method of Measurement .
The length of piles to be paid for shall be the total length in place measured from the tip of the pile to the plane of the plan cutoff elevation .
Timber pile cutoffs will be measured by the meter and the length to be paid for will be the difference between the length of piles approved by the Engineer on the schedule submitted by the Contractor and the length of piles in place but will not include any lengths cutoff for correction of damaged ends or for piles rejected by the Engineer .
II .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges Precastprestressed piles will be measured by the meter from the tip of the pile including any steel extension installed for protection to the plan cutoff elevation and any extensions required to reach the cutoff elevation . .
Basis of Payment .
Timber piles will be paid for at the contract unit price per meter under the item for Untreated Timber Piles left in place or under the item of Treated Timber Pile left in place .
If timber piles furnished according to the approved schedule of length prove inadequate to sustain the required load the Engineer may in writing make changes in the schedule previously approved by himher and the piles ordered and driven according to the revised schedule will be paid for at the contract unit price per meter .
If as a result of the revised schedule or as a result of timber pile cutoff being used as piles any of the timber piles which have been purchased by the Contractor in accordance with the approved schedule can not be used elsewhere on the project such piles not used will be paid for under the provisions of Subsection .
except that no profit or overhead will be allowed and subject to an allowance for their fair salvage value of the piles .
In no case will payment for these piles exceed of the bid price per meter of either treated timber piles or untreated timber piles .
Payment for cutoff allowance on treated and untreated timber piles will be made at of the respective bid price per meter .
The cutoff shall become the Contractors property .
Timber test piles whether used in the structure or driven outside the structure will be paid for at the contract unit price for each pile driven under the item for Timber Test Pile .
When the test pile is not used in the structure the price shall also include full compensation for the removal of the test pile or cutting off meter below finished grade of ground and backfilling the hole with suitable material .
Steel piles will be paid for at the contract unit price per meter under the item for Steel Piles complete in place .
Castinplace concrete and steel pipe piles will be paid for at the contract unit price per meter under the items CastinPlace Concrete Piles and Steel Pipe Piles complete in place including the concrete and steel reinforced cement .
Piles driven as Test Piles or for Load Tests if incorporated in structures will be paid for at the contract unit price for the length in place under the item for the type of pile .
No payment will be made for the cutoff of precastprestressed concrete or steel piles .
Pile shoes will be paid per each on piles accepted for payment by the Engineer .
All costs for splicing piles shall be included in the contract unit price per meter for the respective pile item which price shall also include full compensation for delays incurred by splicing of piles or by any other operations in connection with the work on piles .
Pile loading tests will be paid for at the contract unit price for each pile tested under the item for a specific load sequence .
The contract price shall also include full compensation for any interruptions to pile driving or other operations in the vicinity of the pile loading tests .
The test at each pile shall be considered completed when all materials and equipment used in the test have been removed .
If a pile load test is applied to a steel pipe pile castinplace concrete pile or precastprestressed concrete pile then the contract price for a load test shall also include full compensation for cutting the pile to the grade necessary to properly incorporate the pile in the structure or if it is not to be incorporated in the structure for cutting the pile to the grade necessary to avoid its interference with the proposed construction .
The cost of performing Wave Equation Analysis shall be included in the contract unit price per meter of pile .
Payment for initial and restrike dynamic pile measurements will be at the contract unit price per pile tested .
The price shall include costs for all sensory and wiring devices monitoring equipment the setting up and checking of equipment monitoring personnel costs associated with Contractors down time during regular working hours while settingup equipment and making dynamic measurements. . Payment Items. . Untreated Timber Piles Meter .
Treated Timber Piles Meter .
Steel Pile HP ___ x ___ Meter .
Steel Pipe Pile ___ millimeters OD Meter .
CastinPlace Concrete Piles Meter .
PrecastPrestressed Concrete Pile Meter II .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges .
Timber Test Pile Each .
Short Duration Load Test Each .
Maintained Load Test Each .
Quick Load Test Each .
Dynamic Load Test Preparation Each .
Dynamic Load Test by Contractor Each .
Pile Shoes Each .
Untreated Timber Pile Cutoff Meter .
Treated Timber Pile Cutoff Meter Designation by size and mass .
SECTION SHEETING DESCRIPTION .
General .
This work shall consist of furnishing and placing lumber wood or steel sheeting of the kinds and dimensions required complying with these specifications where indicated on the plans or where directed .
All dimensions specified for lumber are nominal dimensions .
MATERIALS .
General .
Materials shall meet the requirements specified in the following Subsections of Division III .
Materials Lumber Sheeting M .. Wood Sheeting M .. Steel Sheeting M .. CONSTRUCTION METHODS .
General .
Work shall not be started until all materials and equipment necessary for their construction are either on the site of the work or satisfactorily available for immediate use as required .
Sufficient labor and equipment shall be employed to insure the completion of the excavation placing of the concrete and backfilling in the shortest possible time .
Where no other direction is given sheeting shall be driven to such depth that the footing may be lowered at least millimeters below the elevation shown on the plans without any change in the sheeting as driven .
Sheeting that is to be paid as sheeting left in place shall be driven to a minimum depth of .
meters below the proposed bottom of the concrete footings unless otherwise directed .
After sufficient progress has been made on the construction the sheeting shall be cut off at the tops of the footings or as otherwise directed . .
Placing of Sheeting .
The sheeting shall be securely and satisfactorily braced to withstand all pressures to which it may be subjected and be sufficiently tight to prevent any flow of water or material into the space in which concrete is deposited .
The bottom II .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges edge of each piece of lumber and wood sheeting shall be so sharpened as to lead the toe of the sheeting away from the excavation .
Jetting may be done only with the approval of the Engineer but it will not be permitted when excess of water may endanger railroad tracks or other structures .
Where sheeting is to be used as a form for placing concrete the sheeting shall be driven entirely outside the neat lines shown on the plans for the concrete .
When in the Engineers judgment the foundation must be altered to such an extent that changes must be made in the depths to which sheeting has been driven or the area enclosed by the sheeting must be changed the Contractor shall make the directed changes in accordance with the provisions of Subsection .
Payment for Extra Work . .
CutOff .
The sheeting shall be driven down or cut off to the elevation shown on the plans or directed by the Engineer .
No sheeting may be left so as to create a possible hazard to navigation of a stream safety of the public obstruction to flow of water or a hindrance to traffic of any kind. . Care Near Railroads .
When sheeting is driven adjacent to railroad tracks the Contractor shall keep on the work site quickly available for use such equipment and operators needed to immediately burn or cut off any sheeting that can not be driven into the clear before the arrival of trains . .
Disposal of Cutoff and Waste Materials .
No cutoff shall be allowed to float away in a stream or left in such a manner as to obstruct the flow of water .
All cutoff will become the property of the Contractor and shall be removed by himher from the site .
At the option of the Contractor steel sheeting cutoffs may be used as sheet piling or parts of sheet piling .
If welding is used such welds shall be full buttwelds designed to develop the full strength of the sheet pile both in bearing and bending and shall conform with any of the prequalified joints shown in the AASHTOAWS Bridge Welding Code ANSIAASHTOAWS D .. .
Defective Work .
The responsibility for the exact satisfactory construction and maintenance of sheeting complete in place shall rest with the Contractor and any work done which in the performance of incidental construction is not acceptable for the intended purpose shall be either repaired or removed and reconstructed by the Contractor at hisher expense .
COMPENSATION .
Method of Measurement .
The items of Lumber Sheeting Wood Sheeting or Steel Sheeting will be a pay item only if indicated on the plans or in the Special provisions to be left in place or when ordered left in place by the Engineer as a permanent part of the foundation .
Otherwise the Contractor may remove the sheeting or abandon it at hisher option provided that sheeting may be abandoned only to the extent permitted by the Engineer .
Lumber or Wood Sheeting when indicated on the plans or in the Special Provisions to be left in place or when ordered by the Engineer to be left in place as a permanent part of the foundation will be measured by the cubic meter of II .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges lumber or wood sheeting .
The quantity to be paid for will be the area of sheeting left in place multiplied by the nominal thickness .
Steel sheeting when indicated on the plans or in the Special Provisions to be left in place or when ordered by the Engineer to be left in place as a permanent part of the foundation will be measured by the kilogram .
The mass of the quantity to be paid for shall be calculated on the basis of kilograms per square meter of wall in place .
No additional compensation will be allowed if a heavier sheeting is used unless such heavier sheeting is specified in the Special Provisions or shown on the plans . .
Basis of Payment .
Steel sheeting when indicated on the plans in the Special Provisions or when ordered by the Engineer to be left in place as a permanent part of the foundation will be paid for at the contract unit price per kilogram under the item for Steel Sheeting .
The contract unit price per kilogram shall also include full compensation for anchors when required for the sheeting .
Lumber or Wood when indicated on the plans or in the Special Provisions to be left in place or when ordered by the Engineer in writing to be left in place as a permanent part of the foundation will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic meter for Lumber Sheeting or Wood Sheeting .
No direct payment will be made for any sheeting not indicated on the plans or in the Special Provisions or not ordered in writing by the Engineer to be left in place as a permanent part of the foundation .
Such sheeting will be considered as incidental work necessary for the proper prosecution and protection of the work during construction operations and compensation therefor shall be included in the prices bid for the various items of work for which the sheeting was used .
If the Contractor elects to leave such sheeting in place with the approval of the Engineer no payment will be made for same as sheeting left in place .
For purposes of partial payment except as noted below the sheeting item will be considered percent done when the sheeting has been completely driven and the area within the sheeting is ready for such work as may be required to be done therein .
The sheeting item will be considered completed when the sheeting has been cut at the required elevation. . Payment Items. . Lumber Sheeting Cubic Meter .
Wood Sheeting Cubic Meter .
Steel Sheeting Kilogram SECTION TREATED TIMBER DESCRIPTION .
General .
II .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges Treated timber shall be used where indicated on the plans and where directed .
MATERIALS .
General .
Material shall meet the requirements specified in the following Subsections of Division III Materials Treated Timber M .. Fastenings M .. Tar Paper M .. Preservatives M .. CONSTRUCTION METHODS .
General .
Treated timber shall be carefully handled without sudden dropping breaking of outer fibers bruising or penetrating the surface with tools .
It shall be handled with rope slings .
Cant hooks peaveys pikes or hooks shall not be used .
The Contractor shall keep available at the site the preservatives and equipment for brush coating all treated timber that has been bored for fastenings or otherwise cut after treatment .
The preservatives applied at the site shall be the same grade and concentrations used at the plant .
They shall be applied hot and in two coats the second application made after the first has been fully absorbed .
Holes that would otherwise remain unfilled shall be treated with a pressure bolt hole treater and then closed with a treated plug .
A washer of the size and type specified shall be used under all bolt heads and nuts which would otherwise come in contact with timber .
The nuts of all bolts shall be effectively locked after they have been finally tightened .
Fastenings shall conform to Subsection M .. for anchoring bridge bearings .
Stringers and other members supporting planking shall be capped with tar paper . .
Inspection .
All materials will be inspected either at the place of manufacture or upon arrival at the site where it is to be used .
All materials not conforming in every detail with the requirements of these specifications will be rejected and removed from the work by the Contractor .
COMPENSATION .
Method of Measurement .
All treated timber used will be measured by the cubic meter in place .
The quantities will be measured according to the following dimensions For wheel guards sleepers blocking bracing isolated timbers and similar lumber the nominal size of the timber and the actual length in place .
For platforms decks and similar lumber the nominal thickness of plank and the overall area with no deduction for directed spaces between planks .
No allowance will be made for waste or cutoff . .
Basis of Payment .
Treated timber will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic meter under the item for Treated Timber complete in place. . Payment Items .
II .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges .
Treated Timber Cubic Meter SECTION STRUCTURAL STEEL AND MISCELLANEOUS METAL PRODUCTS DESCRIPTION .
General .
This section shall apply to the furnishing fabrication erection and painting of all structural steel and metal work in the contract .
The work shall be done in accordance with the requirements of the AASHTO Standard Specifications for Highway Bridges the Bridge Welding Code ANSIAASHTOAWS D. and these specifications .
MATERIALS .
General .
Materials shall meet the requirements specified in the following Subsections of Division III Materials Structural Steel M .. Steel Pins M .. High Tensile Strength Bolts M ..
Bronze SelfLubricating Bearing Plates M .. Iron Casting M .. Paints and Protective Coatings M .. Steel Baffles Drainage Troughs M ..
Bearing Pad Supports Molded Fabric M .. RubberCotton Duck M ..
If a Contractor proposes to use steel from sources other than a mill the source must be approved by the Engineer .
The Contractor shall supply the Engineer with a description of the proposed facility along with the method used by the facility to segregate identify and otherwise assure the Engineer that the supplied material is in conformance with the specifications .
All sources must supply the actual mill test reports .
CONSTRUCTION METHODS .
Shop Drawings .
After the contract has been awarded and before any shop work is commenced the Contractor shall submit complete sets of prints of the shop drawings as specified in Subsection .. On projects that contain more than one bridge each bridge will be considered separately in submitting shop drawings .
Shop work can commence on each bridge as the shop drawings on that bridge are approved .
On projects which contain complicated steel structures such as a viaduct long span bridge etc .
the Contractor II .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges shall submit a schedule showing how heshe intends to divide the steel structure into sections .
After this schedule is approved shop work can commence on each section as the shop drawings for that section are approved. . Design Fabrication and Erection .
All structural steel and appurtenant material shall be designed fabricated and erected in accordance with these specifications the AASHTO Standard Specifications for Highway Bridges and the AASHTOAWS Bridge Welding Code ANSIAASHTOAWS D .. All aluminum material shall be designed fabricated and erected in accordance with these specifications the AASHTO Standard Specifications for Highway Bridges and the AWS Structural Welding Code Aluminum ANSIAWS D .. A .
Fabrication .
All metal fabricators shall be approved by the Engineer prior to the bid opening date .
Fabricators shall be approved for work in one or more of the following categories Major Bridge Structures Miscellaneous Steel or Poles and Sign Structures .
Fabricators approved to perform work in the Major Bridge Structure category are also approved to perform work in the Miscellaneous Steel category .
Fabricators of major bridge structures including rolled beams with coverplates girders and more complex work shall meet the requirements of AISC Category III .
Fabricators of miscellaneous steel which includes steel products such as expansion joints bridge rail etcetera shall meet the requirements of AISC Category I. Fabricators of poles and sign structures shall meet the requirements of AISC Category I .
A list of approved fabricators may be obtained upon request .
Fabricators wishing to be approved by the Department shall submit the following .
Description of facility including history capacity and equipment. . Quality Control Manual. . Table of Organization. . Welding Procedure Specifications and Welding Procedure Qualification Test Records. . Welder and Welder Operator Qualification Test Records. . Resumes of supervisory personnel and resumes of all personnel involved in quality assurance quality control and testing . .
Copy of American Institute of Steel Construction Quality Program Certificate .
After receiving the material listed above the Engineer shall review it and conduct a shop inspection before approval can be granted .
The Contractor shall submit a shop schedule to the Engineer .
The shop schedule shall be provided sufficiently in advance for the Engineer to determine the level of quality verification inspection required and to arrange for the inspectors attendance .
No material shall be fabricated until the shop schedule has been reviewed .
The Contractor will be required to submit to the Departments Inspector for approval certified copies of the mill test reports for each kind of steel and aluminum furnished .
These certificates shall certify compliance with the specifications and shall give the chemical and physical analysis of the metal .
Any cost involved in furnishing the certificates shall be borne by the Contractor .
B .
Inspection .
Quality Control inspection and testing is the responsibility of the fabricator and shall be performed by a sufficient number of qualified inspectors to guarantee product integrity .
Quality control inspection shall be performed throughout the entire fabrication process from receiving material to shipping material .
The fabricator shall maintain adequate inspection records .
Such records will be provided to the Engineer upon request .
Quality control inspectors at the fabricating shop shall be certified by the American Welding Society in accordance with the provisions of the Standard for Qualification and Certification of Welding Inspectors AWS QC .
The Engineer upon written request from the fabricator may accept other certifications or experience and training consistent with AWS QC .
Assistant inspectors may be used to perform specific inspections under direct supervision of a Quality Control Inspector .
Quality Verification Inspectors will be employed by the Engineer and act on hisher behalf .
The inspector has the authority to act for the Engineer on matters relating to quality including inspection and testing within the scope of the contract .
Quality Verification Inspectors will be assigned at the discretion of the Engineer .
The presence or absence of the Verification Inspector does not relieve the Contractor of quality control responsibility .
The fabricator shall provide facilities for the Departments inspectors in direct proximity to the work .
These II .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges facilities shall include a secured office with a desk and chair for each inspector a file cabinet provided with a lock a plan rack and a table adequate to review plans and drawings .
The office shall have a minimal floor area of square meters .
The office shall contain a telephone and a system of heating and cooling that will maintain a temperature of C. No material shall be shipped to the job site until the Quality Control Inspector certifies that the material has met all provisions of the Contract .
Such certificate shall be endorsed by the Verification Inspector who then shall place hisher stamp on the material .
The Verification Inspector shall affix hisher stamp only when the material is ready for shipment and properly loaded on trucks or rail cars .
Material delivered to the job site without such stamp affixed will be considered rejected and immediately returned to the Contractor .
C. Process .
Steel shall be blast cleaned prior to starting fabrication .
Fabrication includes but is not limited to drilling cutting welding and stripping of plate .
The blast cleaning shall conform to the Steel Structures Painting Council Surface Preparation Specification NearWhite Blast Cleaning SSPCSP .
Heat numbers shall be transferred in the presence of the Verification Inspector to all pieces which are to be major component parts of a main member .
Main members are considered to be all webs flanges coverplates floor beams and stringers as well as any other member as specified on the drawings .
Heat numbers are not required to be transferred to component parts of secondary members or to minor components of a main member i.e .
stiffeners clip angles etc .
Welding shall not commence until the welding procedures and welder certifications have been approved by the Engineer .
All welding procedures shall conform to the applicable welding code i.e .
AASHTOAWS Bridge Welding Code the AWS Structural Welding Code Aluminum AWS Structural Welding Code Reinforcing Bars etc .
as determined by the Engineer .
Shop welders shall be certified in accordance with the applicable AWS Welding Code as determined by the Engineer .
All field welders shall be certified by the Department and possess the Departments Welder Qualification Test Record and the Welder Qualification Certificate .
Material fabricated that does not meet the plans and specifications will not be incorporated into the work .
Repair procedures other than those allowed under the Bridge Welding Code shall be submitted to the Engineer for approval .
Structural rolled beams shall be cambered to the amount shown on the plans with a tolerance of millimeters for beams meters or less .
For beams greater than meters the plus tolerance of millimeters shall be increased by millimeters for each meters or fraction thereof in excess of meters .
Plate girders shall be cambered to the amount shown on the plans with a tolerance as specified in the AASHTOAWS Bridge Welding Code .
The beams and girders shall be handled and stored in such a manner that they will have the required camber after erection .
When steel beams or girders are to be spliced in the field they shall be assembled in the no load position in order that the assembly including camber alignment accuracy of punched holes and fit of beam or girder ends may be done in accordance with the requirements of the type of splice .
When members are assembled with the webs vertical they shall be supported at intervals no greater than meters .
The requirements of AASHTO for shop assembly shall apply .
Reaming of holes shall be performed in accordance with AASHTO .
Hand held reamers shall not be used .
All detrimental material such as oil grease dirt slag etc .
shall be removed from unpainted portions of M Grade W steel prior to shipping .
All structural parts shall be provided with adequate drain holes at points where water could otherwise accumulate .
Unless otherwise noted dimensions indicated at expansion joints and similar construction are determined for a temperature of C. The proper adjustments for temperature must be made by the Contractor when the structure is placed at any other temperature .
If steel expansion joint assemblies are used they must be properly fitted in the shop and shipped with a device for maintaining proper spacing and fit as shown on the plans .
Bolts on shipping device must be loosened within one hour after concrete is placed so that movement may take place .
The device shall be removed after concrete has set on both sides of the assembly .
D. Erection .
Within sixty days of the date of the Notice to Proceed the Contractor shall submit an erection procedure .
The submitted method of erection is subject to review comment and approval by the Engineer .
The method must be submitted with a detailed procedure which includes drawings and calculations sufficient to enable the Engineer to determine the adequacy of the proposed method .
II .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges The method and all submissions shall be prepared under the supervision of a professional engineer registered in Massachusetts .
Such Engineer must be familiar with these Specifications those of the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials AASHTO the work and be experienced in this technical field .
All submitted sheets shall be stamped by the supervising engineer .
As a minimum the following information shall be included in the submittal .
Plan showing the location of all roadways utilities railroad tracts and other appurtenances in areas of erection . .
The location of cranes both horizontally and vertically and their operating radii . .
Lifting equipment information including rating data .
Information shall include counter weights to be used and boom capability .
The capacity of the crane and of all lifting and connecting devices shall be adequate for of the total pick load including spreaders and other material except that in the area of railroads or other traffic the capacity shall be adequate for of the total pick load . .
The type size and arrangements of slings shackles or other lifting and connecting devices including relative technical data . .
The order of lifts repositioning of equipment and counterweights and location and method of attaching deadmen. . Methods and materials for temporary structures or the strengthening or bracing of a member either temporarily or permanently for erection purposes .
The stresses shall be investigated at each stage of erection with allowance for wind pressure determined by the table shown below .
Height of Members Above Ground meters West of Longitude Shrewsbury kiloPascals East of Longitude Shrewsbury kiloPascals Beams Girders Trusses Girders Girders Trusses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . For heights not given wind pressures shall be interpolated .
Curved girders and long span straight girders shall be stabilized with falsework temporary braces or holding cranes until a sufficient number of adjacent girders are erected with all diaphragms and cross frames connected to provide necessary lateral stability .
All trusses shall be erected on falsework unless otherwise approved by the Engineer .
The falsework shall provide for proper camber and alignment and shall be properly designed constructed and maintained for the loads which will be imposed upon it .
When erecting trusses the falsework shall be left in place until all connections are bolted and accepted by the Engineer unless otherwise provided in the approved erection procedure .
Care shall be taken in the use of falsework and other temporary supports to insure that the temporary elevation of structural steel provided by the falsework is consistent with the deflections that will occur as the structure is completed .
In instances where falsework is required by the contract or proposed as part of the erection procedure it shall be properly designed constructed and maintained for the loads that it will bear .
Plans for falsework along with necessary engineering data shall be submitted to the Engineer for review comment and approval under the same guidelines as the erection procedure .
Plans details and calculations shall be submitted to the Engineer in those instances where changes in an existing structure are necessary to maintain traffic II .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges The Contractor shall keep a full record of piles driven for falsework .
If the Contractor does not make a pile loading test the pile bearing formulas of Subsection .
shall be used to determine the bearing values .
Erection drawings shall show bolting or welding procedures necessary to complete erection .
Procedures shall include sequence and method of connecting main members and secondary members .
For stringer and girder spans the following minimum information shall be included in the notes modified as necessary to conform to design and erection requirements for each structure .
Splices and field connections of main stress carrying members shall be made with a minimum of of the holes filled with approved high strength bolts and erection pins before the external support system is released .
At least onehalf of this percentage shall be bolts tightened to specification requirements .
The bolts and pins shall be installed uniformly throughout the connection except that erection pins shall be used in the extreme corners of all main connections. . Members to be assembled on the ground before erection shall be blocked to their proper no load profile and percent of the approved high strength bolts shall be installed and tightened to specification requirements before erecting the member. . All diaphragms and crossframes shall be installed between stringer lines as the work progresses . .
Unless otherwise noted dimensions indicated at expansion joints and similar construction are determined for a temperature of C. Proper adjustments must be made when the structure is placed at any other temperature .
After the erection of beams and girders has been completed expansion bearing sole plates shall be realigned so that they will be centered at C. E. Connections Using High Strength Bolts .
The certification testing installation and inspection for all high strength bolts shall conform to the requirements of the current edition of the AASHTO Standard Specifications for Highway Bridges except as amended herein .
Documentation Mill Test Reports shall be furnished for all mill steel used in the manufacture of bolts nuts or washers .
These reports shall indicate the place where the material was melted and manufactured .
The manufacturer shall furnish Manufacturers Certified Test Reports for the items supplied .
These reports shall show the relevant information required .
The manufacturer performing the rotationalcapacity test shall include in the test report .
The lot number of each item tested . .
The rotationalcapacity lot number . .
The results of all tests . .
The location and date of tests. . A statement that the Manufacturers Certified Test Report for the items are in conformance to this specification and the appropriate AASHTO specifications . .
The location where the bolt assembly components were manufactured .
The Distributor shall include the Manufacturers Certified Test Reports for the various bolt assembly components .
The rotationalcapacity test may be performed by the distributor in lieu of the manufacturer and reported on a Distributor Certified Test Report .
This report shall show all the information required on the Manufacturers Certified Test Report .
The Distributor shall certify that the manufacturers reports are in conformance to this specification and the appropriate AASHTO specifications .
Installation .
All bolting shall be performed using the calibrated wrench method in accordance with the current edition of AASHTO .
Particular care should be exercised so that the snug tight condition is achieved .
In addition the rotational capacity tests described in Section M .. shall be performed on each rotationalcapacity lot number prior to the start of bolt installation .
Hardened washers are required as part of the test even though they may not be required in the actual bolt assembly .
A SkidmoreWilhelm Calibrator or an acceptable equivalent tension measuring device shall be required at each job site during erection .
The Contractor shall submit to the Engineer a certification that the calibration device has been checked by qualified personnel acceptable to the Engineer within the previous thirty days .
The device must also be checked for accuracy upon completion of the work on the project and proof of this certification must be submitted to the Engineer .
Shipping .
Bolts nuts and washers from each rotationalcapacity lot shall be shipped in the same container .
If there is only one production lot number for each size of nut and washer the nuts and washers may be shipped in separate containers .
II .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges Each container shall be permanently marked with the rotationalcapacity lot number such that identification will be possible at any stage prior to installation .
F. Nondestructive Testing .
Personnel .
Personnel performing radiographic magnetic particle and dye penetrant tests shall be certified by a Level III technician who shall have attained certification by examination .
Personnel performing radiographic magnetic particle and dye penetrant tests shall be qualified in accordance with the current edition of the American Society for Nondestructive Testing Recommended Practice SNTTCA .
Only individuals qualified for NDT Level II and certified as noted above may perform these tests .
When ultrasonic testing is required it shall be performed by technicians who meet the qualifications above and who shall be qualified by a written examination and performance test administered by the Engineer .
The Engineer at hisher discretion may accept other properly documented certifications and tests .
Procedures .
Nondestructive testing shall be performed by the Contractor in accordance with the procedures and standards set forth in the AASHTOAWS Bridge Welding Code .
The Department reserves the right to perform additional testing at its own cost during fabrication and up to final acceptance of the project .
All welding must meet acceptable quality standards which are defined by the acceptance criteria for the particular test method .
All nondestructive testing shall be witnessed by the Departments Verification Inspector .
Certification that all tests were performed in the presence of the Inspector shall be furnished to the Engineer .
In addition to that required by the Bridge Welding Code all radiographs shall be identified as to date bridge number and girder or beam number .
All costs for these tests including necessary rework and repair shall be at the Contractors expense . .
Preparation of Bridge Seats .
Masonry bearing plates shall not be placed upon bridge seat bearing areas which are improperly finished deformed or irregular .
Bearing plates shall be set to grade and level in exact position and shall have full and even bearing upon the masonry after the following preparation .
Bearing plates shall be set to grade on a system of cotton duck impregnated with rubber or molded pads with a full and even bearing .
The bearing area of concrete millimeters outside of the bearing plate shall be constructed at least millimeters above the proposed finished grade and shall then be dressed down sufficiently so that the cotton duck or molded pads will bring the area to the correct grade. . Painting .
General .
Before painting can begin each batch of paint shall be sampled tested and approved in accordance with Section M. The surfaces of structural steel which are to be in contact with concrete shall be painted with a shop coat of paint meeting the requirements of a modified M .. as noted hereinafter .
All other structural steel shall receive three coats of paint except as noted .
Structural steel meeting AASHTO specification M Grade W shall not receive a coat of paint except as noted on the plans .
No paint shall be applied to shear connectors nor to the flange surface of the beams to which the shear connectors are to be welded .
Steel shall not be painted until shop welding is complete .
Prior to painting the welds shall be cleaned thoroughly in accordance with good practice and shall have a suitable surface to accept the primer the steel shall have no visible rusting or detrimental material such as oil grease dirt etc .
If rusting or other detrimental material has appeared on the steel the steel shall be reblasted to a SSPCSP cleaned surface .
Paint shall not be applied when the air temperature is below C nor shall the paint be applied when the air temperature is greater than C. Painting shall not be undertaken in rain fog snow or mist or when the temperature of the metal surface is less than above the dew point .
Paint shall not be applied when the relative humidity exceeds .
When paint must be applied in damp or cold weather the steel shall be painted under cover and shall remain under cover until dry or the weather conditions permit its exposure in the open .
Paint shall not be applied when in the Engineers judgment conditions are unsatisfactory for painting .
II .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges The Contractor shall supply mechanical paint mixers on the job .
Paints shall be mixed in clean containers and agitated thoroughly before drawing off paint through a strainer into the painters buckets or spray machines .
Paint shall be kept thoroughly stirred in spray pots or containers during application and the zinc rich primers shall have continuous agitation .
Paints specified are formulated ready for application and if for any reason it is necessary to thin the paint the method used shall not produce a dry film thickness less than that specified .
The method used to thin the paint and the thinner used shall be approved by the paint manufacturer and the Engineer .
The date year month of painting and the maintenance bridge number shall be stencilled on the bridge as directed by the Engineer .
The stencils shall be furnished by the Contractor at hisher expense .
Shop Paint .
Unless otherwise noted the steel shall receive one shop coat of inorganic zincrich primer modified M .. having after application a minimum dry film thickness of .
micrometers .
The steel shall not be shipped from the fabricator to the job site in less than days after application of the shop coat of paint .
Paint shall not be applied to shop contact surfaces .
Field contact surfaces shall receive a shop coat of paint .
Machined finished surfaces except abutting joints and base plates shall be coated with a material suitable to the Engineer .
Surfaces not in contact but inaccessible after assembly erection shall be painted in the shop with one coat of inorganic zincrich primer modified M .. having after application a minimum dry film thickness of .
micrometers and followed with one coat of coal tar epoxy polyamide paint M .. having after application a minimum dry film thickness of .
micrometers .
Erection marks for field identification shall be painted on previously painted surfaces with a paint or ink compatible to the coating system being used .
Field Paint .
When erection of steel work is fully completed all adhering rust scale concrete dirt laitance grease welding flux and slag white rust or other foreign matter shall be removed .
Immediately after cleaning of the steel has been done to the satisfaction of the Engineer and prior to the application of the first field coat of paint all steel surfaces that require painting bolts welds etc .
the base metal that has become exposed or any surface from which the shop coat has become defective shall be thoroughly covered with one coat of the same paint used in the shop .
The minimum dry film thickness after application shall be .
micrometers .
The steel shall receive a second coat of high build epoxy having after application a minimum dry film thickness of .
micrometers .
Within hours of application of the second coat the steel shall receive a finish coat of aliphatic polyurethane having after application a minimum dry film thickness of .
micrometers .
All coats of paint shall be from the same manufacturer .
The colors of the shop coat second coat and top coat shall have a definite color contrast between them .
The shop coat shall be tinted with red so as to contrast with the blast cleaned steel .
Full protection shall be provided in the field for all surfaces that are not to be painted and for all private property .
In order to avoid subsequent discoloring or staining due to dripping or running of concrete the finish coat of paint shall not be done until all concrete nearby has been placed and all forms have been removed .
Concrete stone masonry and other parts of the structure that are not to be painted shall be fully protected by covers during the painting operations. . Galvanizing .
Masonry plates sole plates diaphragms cross frames and bottom lateral bracing shall be hot dipped galvanized in accordance with AASHTO M . The galvanizing bath shall contain nickel .
to .
by mass .
Galvanized members requiring shop fabrication and assembly shall be cut welded milled andor drilled prior to galvanizing .
All structural steel conforming to AASHTO M Grade W ASTM A Grade W with the exception of masonry plates and sole plates shall not be galvanized .
Galvanized members that are to be field welded or which are to be shop welded to ungalvanized members shall be masked millimeters on either side of the weld line prior to galvanizing .
After welding the weld areas shall be cleaned in accordance with the Steel Structures Painting Council Surface Preparation Specification Power Tool Clean SSPCSP and coated with High Zinc Dust Content paint M The galvanizing shall be repaired in accordance with ASTM Repair of Hot Dip Galvanizing .
The paint shall be applied such as to achieve a dry film thickness of a minimum of .
micrometers and not more than II .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges micrometers .
Application shall be in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
COMPENSATION .
Method of Payment Payment will be based only on computed masses of steel complete in place in the structure .
No additional allowance in mass will be made for the shop coat of paint or for any other coat of paint or other protective covering .
The mass of the rolled shapes and of the plates regardless of the width of the plates shall be computed on the basis of their nominal mass and of their dimensions as shown on the approved shop drawings deducting for copes and cuts and for all open holes that are not to be filled with rivets bolts or plug welded .
Steel for expansion assemblies at the roadway level of bridges and similar structures whether or not attached to the structural steel of the deck and bronze or other metal for expansion bearings drainage troughs and baffles shall be included in the mass to be paid for as structural steel .
Where no separate items are in the contract for galvanized nose angles on piers or curb plates or angles in bridge curbs such steel will be paid for by the kilogram as structural steel with no additional compensation for the galvanizing .
The computed mass shall not include the mass of welds .
The density of the various metals shall be assumed as follows Steel Structural Cast Galvanized kilograms per cubic meter Cast Iron kilograms per cubic meter Bronze kilograms per cubic meter The mass of the nuts and heads of bolts shall be included in the computed mass assuming the mass to be as shown below .
Payment for bolt heads and nuts will be made by the kilogram .
Where rivets are used in the permanent construction the heads of the rivets shall be considered for purpose of payment as bolt heads for bolts equal in diameter to the rivets regardless of the material of which they are composed or the materials which they fasten .
All permanent washers will be paid for by the kilogram .
The shank of a bolt will be considered as part of the material through which it passes and will be paid for as that material .
No allowance or payment will be made for that part of a bolt shank that extends through and past the nut .
Diameter of Bolt milimeters Mass Per Bolts heads and nuts kilograms M . M . M . M . M . M . II .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges M . .
Basis of Payment .
The furnishing fabricating erecting and painting of all structural steel and all metal work for the structure not otherwise provided for will be paid for at the contract unit price per kilogram under the item for Structural Steel complete in place .
To avoid delay in computation of the mass for partial and final payment the Contractor shall submit hisher computations for the steel shown on each of the approved shop drawings as soon as practicable after the sheet has been approved .
The computation by the Contractor shall show the mass for each member except that duplicate members may be grouped together. . Payment Items .
Structural Steel Kilogram .
Structural Steel on Hand Kilogram SECTION MEMBRANE WATERPROOFING AND PROTECTIVE COURSE FOR BRIDGE DECKS DESCRIPTION .
General .
Membrane waterproofing applied to the surface as indicated on the plan and elsewhere as directed shall consist of one of the following systems .
Coal tar emulsion reinforced with two plies of coated glass fabric . .
Hot applied rubberized asphalt membrane. . Preformed sheet systems either reinforced rubberized asphalt or reinforced tar and resin .
The protective course will be bituminous concrete .
Type of mix shall be Dense Binder Course as specified in Table A of Section M .. and placed in accordance with Item .
hereinafter .
System shall not be used on grades in excess of percent .
System is the only system acceptable for butted deck beam and box beam superstructures .
MATERIALS .
General .
Materials shall meet the requirements specified in the following Subsections of Division III Materials Protective Seal Coat Emulsion Coal Tar Emulsion M ..
Coated Glass Fabric M .. Bituminous Concrete M .. Thermoplastic Asphalt Membrane M .. Asphalt Primer M .. Preformed Sheet Membrane M .. II .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges Portland Cement M .. CONSTRUCTION METHODS .
Preparation of Surface .
All concrete surfaces which are to be waterproofed shall be screeded to the true cross section .
Depressions shall be filled to a smooth flush surface with mortar part cement to two parts sand or an approved rapid setting patching mortar .
Other surfaces shall be trimmed free of rough spots projections or other defects which might cause puncture of the membrane .
No waterproofing shall be done in wet damp or foggy weather nor when the ambient temperature is C or below without permission of the Engineer .
The membrane waterproofing on bridge decks shall not be placed unless the Contractor is ready to follow within hours with the first layer of bituminous concrete pavement a longer period of time will be allowed only with the approval of the Engineer .
Immediately prior to the membrane application the concrete surface shall be thoroughly swept and blown clean with an air compressor to remove any loose debris . .
Application .
A .
System Coal Tar Emulsion reinforced with two plies of Coated Glass Fabric .
Apply the first coat of coal tar emulsion on a dampened but puddle free concrete surface .
Application shall be made by squeegees or suitable push broom .
The emulsion shall be evenly spread to a uniform thickness .
When this application is thoroughly dry a second application of emulsion shall be placed at the same rate of spread .
Immediately following the second application the first ply of coated glass fabric shall be laid .
After the second application of emulsion with fabric has thoroughly dried the third and fourth applications of emulsions shall be spread .
No applications of emulsion shall be spread until the previous application has thoroughly dried .
Immediately after the fourth application of emulsion the second ply of coated glass fabric shall be laid at a right angle to the first ply .
This shall be followed by the fifth application of emulsion .
All applications of coal tar emulsion shall be uniformly spread at a minimum rate of .
liters per square meter .
The coated glass fabric shall be laid with edges slapped at least millimeters .
The first ply shall be laid transverse to the center line of the bridge and the second ply parallel with the center line .
Where curb or edging is placed the membrane shall be turned up as shown on the plans .
Where membrane waterproofing is placed abutting steel expansion joints scuppers manholes or other metal projecting through the concrete the membrane will be turned up about millimeters and sealed to the metal .
The bituminous overlayment shall be placed within hours in accordance with Item .
but not before the membrane has completely cured .
B .
System Thermoplastic Asphalt Membrane .
Surface preparation shall be the same as in Item .
with the added requirement that if the concrete surface is damp it shall be dried by use of a propane gas torch or similar equipment .
Immediately prior to the application of the primer and by use of an air compressor the surface shall be blown clean of all debris dust etc .
Priming The primer shall be applied by a hand sprayer or similar equipment .
Application shall be at the rate recommended by the manufacturer of the thermoplastic membrane .
The primer shall thoroughly dry before application of the thermoplastic membrane .
Membrane Application Melting of the thermoplastic membrane shall be done in a double jacketed indirectfired heating kettle .
Oil shall be used as the heat transfer medium .
The kettle shall be equipped with a suitable agitator and temperature gauges for both the kettle and the oilbath jacket .
Sufficient lead time shall be allowed for heating of the thermoplastic so that it will be in a fluid state at the time scheduled for application .
Usually two to three hours are required for this phase of the operation .
A few packages of the thermoplastic shall be placed in the heating kettle and continuously agitated until thoroughly fluid .
More material shall be added until the kettle is full and the material is fluid .
As material is drawn off for application additional packages shall be added .
II .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges Caution should be observed that the melting temperature does not exceed manufacturers recommendation .
This is usually between C to C. When fluid the material shall be drawn off in suitable containers and poured onto the primed and dried deck surface .
It shall be evenly spread with squeegees to a minimum thickness of millimeters .
All horizontal surfaces shall be completely covered and vertical surfaces curbing edging etc .
shall be covered up to a minimum of millimeters .
Cracks greater than millimeters but less than millimeters shall be covered with millimeter to millimeter wide strips of butyl or neoprene sheeting .
The sheeting shall be embedded in the freshly spread hot membrane material .
A second coat of membrane material shall be spread overlapping the strip edges at least millimeters .
After application of the membrane is completed and the material has set it shall be dusted thoroughly with dry portland cement .
This will eliminate all tackiness .
To eliminate any possible damage to the membrane and in accordance with Subsection .
the bituminous overlayment shall be applied as soon as possible .
The only caution that must be observed is that the paving spreader travel in a straight course and not make any turns that could cause damage to the membrane .
C. System Preformed Sheet Membranes .
This system shall consist of the application of preformed reinforced rubberized asphalt or reinforced tar and resin sheet membranes .
Composition and dimensional requirements shall be as stipulated by the manufacturer of the sheet membrane .
Membrane application shall be in accordance with the manufacturers instructions .
The only exception if required by the manufacturer shall be the need for a separation or protection layer .
As with System and the first course of the bituminous concrete overlayment shall serve as the protective course .
The bituminous overlayment shall be placed as soon as possible and as described in Subsection .. . Bituminous Concrete Protective Course .
The first course of the bituminous concrete overlayment shall serve as the protective course .
It shall be placed within hours after the membrane has been installed .
The bituminous concrete protective course shall be spread upon the entire membrane to a finished depth as specified in accordance with the following requirements The precautions hereinbefore noted for Section Bituminous Concrete Pavement shall be strictly observed . .
Spreading Mixture .
a .
The use of rubber tired mechanical pavers and trucks on the membrane during the paving operations will be permitted provided workmanship is satisfactory to the Engineer .
If work is judged unsatisfactory the Engineer will require that subsequent placement be by hand .
b .
Hand spreading of the mixture shall be accomplished by dumping the mixture from the trucks onto metal or wooden platforms which shall be of such a size that the mixture will not fall off when dumped thereon or work off during spreading .
Each load of mixture shall be dumped outside of the area over which it will be spread and only as fast as can be handled by the shovelers .
The mixture shall be deposited upon the membrane with shovels and spread with lutes care being taken not to spread the mixture faster than it can be handled by the rakers. . Compacting .
After the mixture has been properly spread it shall be rolled .
Delays in the initial rolling of the freshly placed mixture will not be permitted .
In all places inaccessible to a roller the required compression shall be secured with hot tampers .
Rolling shall be done with a roller conforming to the requirements as specified for Class I Bituminous Concrete in Section except where power rollers are impracticable to use approved hand rollers and tampers shall be used as directed .
Steel wheel rollers will not be allowed on bare membrane . .
Joints .
The bituminous concrete shall be so placed that the number of joints required shall be reduced to a minimum .
Where joints are necessary they shall be constructed in the manner specified in Section .
Edges of the bituminous concrete at the edge of parapets shall be protected by planks which shall be firmly secured and left in place until the course has been properly rolled and is thoroughly set .
No bituminous work shall be done during rainy weather or when weather conditions as to temperature or otherwise are in the Engineers judgment unsuitable for obtaining satisfactory results .
II .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges COMPENSATION .
Method of Measurement .
Membrane waterproofing for bridge decks will be measured by the square meter and the quantity to be paid for shall be the number of square meters of surface covered with no allowance for overlapping or for edges turned up or carried into recesses for seals except that the area of the full membrane turned down in back of the backwalls and extended under and in back of curb or edging will be included for payment .
The protective course will be measured by the metric ton and the quantity to be paid for shall be the actual and verified tonnage complete in place and approved . .
Basis of Payment .
The membrane waterproofing will be paid for at the contract unit price per square meter under the item for Membrane Waterproofing for Bridge Decks complete in place .
The mass of protective course will be paid for at the contract unit price per metric ton complete in place. . Payment Items. . Membrane Waterproofing for Bridge Decks Square Meter .
Class I Bituminous Concrete Dense Binder Course Metric Ton SECTION MEMBRANE WATERPROOFING AND PROTECTIVE COURSE FOR ABUTMENTS AND WINGWALLS DESCRIPTION .
General .
Membrane waterproofing applied to the surface indicated on the plan and elsewhere as directed shall consist of one of the following systems Coal tar emulsion reinforced with two piles of coated glass fabric .
Biodegradable corrugated kraft paper panels with flutes filled with bentonite and ends sealed .
The protective course if required will be cement concrete brick cement concrete block or protection board as specified by manufacturer .
MATERIALS .
General .
Materials shall meet the requirements specified in the following Subsections of Division III Materials Protective Seal Coat Emulsion Coal Tar Emulsion M ..
Coated Glass Fabric M .. Cement Concrete Brick M .. Cement Concrete Block M .. Portland Cement M .. Bentonite Panels M .. II .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges CONSTRUCTION METHODS .
Preparation of Surface .
All concrete surfaces which are to be waterproofed shall be finished .
Surfaces shall be trimmed free of rough spots projections or other defects which might cause puncture of the membrane .
Immediately prior to the membrane application the concrete surface shall be thoroughly swept and blown clean with an air compressor to remove any loose debris . .
Application .
A .
System Coal Tar Emulsion reinforced with two plies of Coated Glass Fabric .
This system shall be applied in accordance with the requirements of Subsection .. B .
System Bentonite Panels .
This system shall consist of applications of bentonite panels as indicated on the plans and elsewhere as an option to System with the approval of the Engineer .
The placement and protection shall be in accordance with manufacturers instructions . .
Protective Course .
The protective course if required shall be placed within hours after the membrane is installed in order to protect the membrane .
A longer period of time will be allowed only with the approval of the Engineer .
The protective course shall consist of either cement concrete brick solid cement block or protection board as recommended .
The protective course shall be applied in a single layer of the thickness required .
A .
Cement Concrete Brick .
Brick used as protective course shall be laid over the entire membrane in regular courses as shown on the plans except around drainage castings and other openings and obstructions around such obstructions cement mortar shall be used for the protective course .
When the brick protection is to be laid against a vertical wall or on a steep slope the bricks shall be laid in cement mortar .
B .
Cement Concrete Blocks .
Cement concrete blocks shall be machine made solid segments of a thickness corresponding to the required thickness of the protective course .
C. Protection Board for Bentonite Panels .
Protection Board will be used for Bentonite Panels when backfill contains sharp rocks larger than millimeters .
The hard surface fiber board .
millimeters thick which is biodegradable and nailable shall be nailed over the panels to provide a continuous protective layer between the panels and the soil area .
Boards shall be overlapped with the ends of joints staggered and cut to fit for complete protection .
COMPENSATION .
Method of Measurement .
Membrane waterproofing will be measured by the square meter and the quantity to be paid for shall be the number of square meters of surface covered with no allowance for overlapping or for edges turned up or carried into recesses for seals .
The protective course will be measured by the square meter and the quantity to be paid for shall be the number of square meters of membrane surface covered . .
Basis of Payment .
The membrane waterproofing will be paid for at the contract unit price per square meter under the item for II .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges Membrane Waterproofing complete in place .
The protective course will be paid for under the item for protective course. . Payment Items. . Membrane Waterproofing Square Meter .
Waterproofing Protective Course Square Meter SECTION BITUMINOUS DAMPPROOFING DESCRIPTION .
General .
Bituminous dampproofing to be applied as shown on the plans shall consist of a cutback asphalt a protective seal coat emulsion or an asphalt emulsion .
If material other than that specified herein is permitted to be used the method of application shall conform to the published specifications of the manufacturer .
MATERIALS .
General .
Materials shall meet the requirements specified in the following Subsections of Division III Materials CutBack Asphalt M .. Emulsified Asphalt M ..
Protective Seal Coat Emulsion M .. CONSTRUCTION METHODS .
General .
Concrete surfaces shall be allowed to dry for a period of at least days after the removal of forms before damp proofing is applied .
Surfaces to be dampproofed shall be made reasonably smooth and free from all projections and holes .
All holes in concrete surfaces shall be satisfactorily filled with part cement to parts sand mortar before dampproofing is applied .
Concrete surfaces shall be properly cured before being dampproofed .
Surfaces shall be dry and immediately before the application of the dampproofing shall be thoroughly cleaned of dust and all loose material .
Dampproofing shall not be done during wet weather nor when the weather conditions as to temperature otherwise are unsatisfactory .
The material for dampproofing shall be mopped or sprayed on the designated surfaces as directed and in amounts necessary to obtain a coat coverage of not less than liters of asphaltic material per square meters of area .
The initial coat of dampproofing shall be allowed to dry thoroughly before a second coat is applied .
The final coat shall be thoroughly dry before any fill is placed against it .
COMPENSATION .
Method of Measurement .
Dampproofing will be measured by the actual area of surface covered in square meters .
II .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges .
Basis of Payment .
Bituminous dampproofing will be paid for at the contract unit price per square meter of surface under the item for Bituminous DampProofing complete in place. . Payment Item. . Bituminous DampProofing Square Meter SECTION METAL BRIDGE RAILINGS DESCRIPTION .
General .
Work under this item shall consist of furnishing and erecting metal bridge railing in accordance with the design and in close conformity with the lines and grades shown on the plan or as established by the Engineer .
MATERIALS .
General .
Materials shall meet the requirements specified in the following Subsections of Division III Materials Bridge Railing Aluminum M .. Bridge Railing Galvanized M .. RubberCotton Duck M .. Galvanizing M ..
The Contractor will be required to submit specifications showing the chemical and physical analyses to the Department Inspector for approval .
CONSTRUCTION METHODS .
Shop Drawings .
After the Contract is awarded the Contractor shall furnish the Engineer with complete detail or shop drawings of the proposed work in accordance with the requirements of Subsection .. No material for the bridge railings shall be fabricated before the approval of the detail or shop drawings by the Engineer. . Welding .
Fabrication of Metal members can only be performed by fabricators who are approved by the Department as specified in Subsection .. Steel components shall be blast cleaned prior to fabrication .
The blast cleaning shall conform to the steel Structures Painting Council Surface Preparation Specification NearWhite Blast Cleaning SSPC II .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges SP .
Aluminum components shall be cleaned of any foreign matter .
In assembly and during welding the component parts of builtup members shall be held by sufficient clamps or by other adequate means to keep parts straight and in close contact .
Welding and fabrication of steel shall conform to the AASHTO Standard Specifications for Highway Bridges and the ANSIAASHTOAWS D. Bridge Welding Code .
If the members are tubular sections the fabrication and welding shall conform to AASHTO and the ANSIAWS D. Structural Welding CodeSteel .
Welding and fabrication of aluminum shall conform to AASHTO and the ANSIAWS D. Structural Welding Code Aluminum . .
Setting Railing .
The threerail aluminum and steel posts shall be plumb except when the grade is less than .
and then they shall be set normal to the grade .
Onerail aluminum and steel posts shall be set to normal grade .
Longitudinal members shall follow the grade of the coping .
In setting up the railing care shall be taken to insure proper level and alignment in order to prevent springing or bending of the railing during erection .
Where required on curves the rails shall be accurately formed to the required radius .
Steel base plates shall be set on a millimeter thick rubbercotton duck bearing pad .
If additional shimming of the plates is required the shims shall be of the same material as base plates .
The edges of the base plate shall be caulked to make a water tight joint .
The bottom of the aluminum post plate shall be thoroughly coated with an aluminum impregnated caulking compound conforming to Federal Specification TTCA and shall be grey in color .
Where shims are required for aluminum posts such shims shall be made from fully annealed aluminum alloy sheets or plates .
All anchor bolts shall have between millimeters and millimeters of exposed thread after nuts have been properly tightened. . Galvanizing .
All bolts screws nuts rods and washers shall be galvanized in accordance with AASHTO M and the Supplemental Specifications .
Stainless steel studs shall not be galvanized .
The posts base plates backing panel components splice tubes and structural tubing shall be galvanized after fabrication in accordance with AASHTO M . Backing panels should not be galvanized fully assembled since field adjustment may be required i.e .
by racking to align panels with the rail connections .
The galvanizing bath shall contain nickel .
to .
by mass .
Galvanized members requiring shop assembly shall be welded and drilled prior to galvanizing. . Bridge Rail Coatings .
Aluminum bridge railing shall not be painted unless specified .
Prior to applying a coat over the galvanizing the fabricator shall ensure that all rails are smooth and without sharp protrusions that would present an injury hazard to pedestrians .
Also all welds shall be cleaned thoroughly in accordance with good practice and shall have a suitable surface to accept the primer .
A two coat painting system shall be applied by the Galvanizer in hisher own facility within twelve hours of galvanizing the railing components .
The prime coat material shall be a polyamide epoxy applied to a minimum dry film thickness of .
micrometers and force cured as given below for the finish coat .
The finish coat material shall be a two component catalyzed aliphatic urethane applied by airless spray to a minimum dry film thickness of .
micrometers .
Unless otherwise specified the color shall be dark bronze which will match Color Number of the Federal Standard B Colors Used in Government Procurement .
The fabricator shall submit to the Engineer for approval paint chips of the intended color prior to any work being done under this heading .
All finish coat material shall be applied under conditions within the following tolerances A .
Air Temperature C min .
C max .
B .
Surface Temperature C min .
C max .
C. Humidity max .
II .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges The finish coat shall be cured in a booth capable of maintaining C for two to four hours. . Touch Up and Repairs .
Should any damage occur to the galvanized coating during shipping or handling at the job site the Contractor shall repair and touch up any damaged areas to the satisfaction of the Engineer and the following .
Touch up of galvanizing before finish coat is applied shall be accomplished by applying a galvanizing repair paint in accordance with Section M The dry film thickness of the applied repair paint shall not be less than .
micrometers .
Applications shall be in accordance with the Manufacturers instructions .
Field touch up procedures shall conform to the recommendations of the Galvanizer .
Touch up of the finish coat shall be by applying a coating of a two part urethane as supplied by the Galvanizer to achieve a dry film thickness of at least .
micrometers .
Prior to the application of the paint remove all damaged coatings down to a solidly adhered coating and apply galvanizing repair paint as primer .
Allow the primer to dry for at least four hours .
The Contractor shall also use the touch up paint material to paint the galvanized hardware used in the field erection of the railing that has not been finish coated previously . .
Inspection .
Inspection may be done at the mill andor fabricating plant by the Engineer or the Engineers representative verification inspector .
The Contractor shall give sufficient notice to the Engineer when the work will begin so that the Department may arrange for inspection .
No material shall be shipped to a project until the verification inspector affixes hisher stamp to the material .
Material shipped without such stamp shall be rejected and immediately removed from the jobsite .
COMPENSATION .
Method of Measurement .
Metal bridge railings will be measured by the meter along the line and grade of the railing for the distance from outside to outside of metal end posts above the base plates or outside to outside of top rail whichever is greater .
Curved portion of railings shall be measured along the centerline of the top rail . .
Basis of Payment .
Metal bridge railings will be paid for at the contract unit price per meter under the item of railing required complete in place. . Payment Items. . Metal Bridge Railing Rail Aluminum Type AL Meter .
Metal Bridge Railing Rail Aluminum Type AL Meter .
Metal Bridge Railing Rail Steel Type SPL Galvanized Meter SECTION REVETMENT DESCRIPTION II .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges .
General .
Revetment shall consist of slope protection of the required type at the location shown on the plans and in accordance with these specifications and in close conformity with the lines and grades shown on the plans or established by the Engineer . .
Classification .
A. Dumped Riprap .
This work shall consist of angular shaped stones dumped in place to form a well graded mass with a minimum of voids in locations where damage may be caused by water conditions and below water level as a foundation for slope paving .
B. Riprap .
This work shall consist of a protective covering of angular shaped stones laid on slopes in front of abutments wingwalls piers and elsewhere as required to insure protection of structures and embankments .
C. Slope Paving .
Slope paving shall consist of angular shaped stones having a reasonably flat face carefully placed on slopes to insure their protection .
D. Special Slope Paving under Bridges .
This special slope paving is intended for use on slopes under bridges where not in contact with flowing water and shall consist of quarry stone precast concrete blocks or cement concrete masonry laid on slopes in uniform courses under bridges .
E. Channel Paving and Grouted Channel Paving .
Channel Paving of the type specified shall be placed as protective covering along the slopes around culvert inlets or outlets around foundations bridge berms and dikes .
F. Modified Rockfill .
This work shall consist of slope protection of ditches and at ends of crossculverts .
MATERIALS .
General .
Materials shall meet the requirements specified in the following Subsections of Division III Materials Dumped Riprap M ..
Modified Rockfill M .. Riprap M .. Slope Paving M .. Special Slope Paving under Bridge Quarry Stone M .. Special Slope Paving under Bridge Precast Concrete Blocks M .. Channel Paving M .. MPa mm kg Cement Concrete Masonry M ..
Reinforcing Steel M .. Joint Filler M .. Joint Sealer M ..
Crushed Stone for Drainage Foundation M .. Mortar M .. CONSTRUCTION METHODS .
General .
Areas to be protected by revetment shall be free of brush trees stumps and other organic material and be dressed to a smooth surface .
All soft or spongy material shall be removed to the depth shown on the plans or as directed by the II .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges Engineer and replaced with approved materials .
A toe trench as shown on the plans shall be dug and maintained until the revetment is placed .
Protection for structure foundations shall be provided as early as the foundation construction permits .
The area to be protected shall be cleaned of waste materials and the surface to be protected prepared as shown on the plans .
Where shown on the plans a foundation shall be placed on the area before the stone is placed .
The foundation will be specified as either gravel borrow or crushed stone and at least millimeters in thickness. . Dumped Riprap .
Stone for riprap shall be placed on the prepared slope or area in a manner which will produce a reasonably well graded mass of stone with the minimum practicable percentage of voids and minimum thickness of millimeters .
Riprap protection shall be placed to its full course thickness at one operation and in such a manner as to avoid displacing the underlying material .
Placing of riprap protection in layers or by dumping into chutes or by similar methods likely to cause segregation will not be permitted .
The larger stones shall be well distributed and the entire mass of stone shall conform approximately to the gradation specified in Subsection M All material going into riprap protection shall be so placed and distributed that there will be no large accumulations of either the larger or smaller sizes of stone .
It is the intent of these specifications to produce a fairly compact riprap protection in which all sizes of material are placed in their proper proportions .
Hand placing or rearranging of individual stones by mechanical equipment may be required to the extent necessary to secure the results specified .
Unless otherwise authorized by the Engineer the riprap protection shall be placed in conjunction with the construction of the embankment with only sufficient lag in construction of the riprap protection as may be necessary to allow for proper construction of the portion of the embankment protected and to prevent mixture of embankment and riprap material .
In no case will the elevation of the embankment be greater than .
meters above the elevation of the riprap material. . Riprap .
The stones shall be placed upon an approved bed of gravel crushed stone or other acceptable material to the lines and grades shown on the plans and as directed .
Each stone shall be carefully placed by hand or machine on a prepared bed normal to the slope and firmly bedded thereon .
The larger stones shall be placed closely together and the intervening spaces filled with smaller stones in such a manner that the entire surface will form a compact mass. . Slope Paving .
The stones shall be placed upon an approved bed of gravel crushed stone or other acceptable material to the lines and grades shown on the plans and as directed .
The larger stones shall be placed closely together throughout the surface and the interstices carefully chinked with smaller stones .
All stones shall be securely bedded with the exposed surfaces approximately parallel to and within millimeters of the slope shown on the plans .
When the paving can not be laid to the required line and grade below water a suitable foundation of dumped riprap shall be constructed. . Special Slope Paving Under Bridges .
A .
General .
This type of slope paving shall consist of either quarry stone precast concrete blocks or cement concrete masonry and shall be firmly bedded on a millimeter gravel foundation .
The finished paving shall have a continuous surface of uniform appearance approximately parallel to and within millimeters of the slope shown on the plans .
B .
Quarry Stone or Precast Concrete Blocks .
The paving shall be laid in uniform courses with broken joints not exceeding millimeters in width .
The joints shall then be filled with sand or fine gravelly material to within millimeters of the paved surface .
Cement mortar M .. shall then be placed in the joints to the top of the paved surface .
II .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges C. Cement Concrete Masonry .
The paving shall be placed as specified in Section the surface shall be finished as specified in Subsection .C. . Channel Paving and Grouted Channel Paving .
All stones shall be placed upon an approved bed to the lines and grades shown on the plans and as directed .
The larger stones shall be placed as closely together as possible throughout the surface .
All stones shall be securely bedded and laid so that the exposed surfaces will be approximately parallel to and within millimeters of the grade shown on the plans .
The finished paving shall present a continuous uniform surface of stonework .
Grouting when required shall be done after the paving is completely in place .
The paving stones shall be sprinkled with water immediately before placing the grout .
The grout shall conform to Subsection M . Modified Rockfill .
Stone shall be placed on the prepared area in a manner which will produce a reasonably well graded mass with a minimum practical percentage of voids and a minimum thickness of millimeters .
The stone will be placed to its full thickness in one operation and in such a manner as to avoid displacing the underlying material .
It is the intent of these specifications to produce a fairly compact Rockfill protection in which all sizes of material are placed in their proper proportions .
Handplacing or rearranging of individual stones by mechanical equipment may be required to the extent necessary to secure the results specified .
Unless otherwise authorized by the Engineer the Modified Rockfill shall be placed in conjunction with the adjacent construction as shown on the plans .
COMPENSATION .
Method of Measurement .
The quantity of Dumped Riprap Riprap and Modified Rockfill shall be the mass of the stones .
Slope Paving Special Slope Paving under Bridges Channel Paving and Grouted Channel Paving will be measured in place by the square meter on the surface of the paved slope as constructed . .
Basis of Payment .
No deduction from the excavation pay quantities will be made for stone taken from excavation and used in any type of revetment provided that any additional filling material made necessary by such use shall be furnished as specified in Subsection .. Excavation below the original ground surface at the toe of slopes when required in the construction of revetment unless otherwise shown on the plans will be paid for under the Item for Class A Trench Excavation but where the excavation is made along the slopes of an existing or proposed channel such excavation will be paid for under the Item for Channel Excavation .
Excavation in cuts when required in the construction of revetment will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic meter under the Item of Earth Excavation or Bridge Excavation whichever is applicable .
Gravel Borrow required in the construction of revetment will be paid for under the contract unit price per cubic meter for Item .
Gravel Borrow complete in place .
Crushed stone when required for foundation revetment will be paid for at the contract unit price per metric ton for Crushed Stone for Drainage Foundation .
The tonnage of Dumped Riprap Riprap and Modified Rockfill will be paid for at the contract unit price per metric ton for the kind of stone required complete in place .
Slope Paving Special Slope Paving under Bridges Channel Paving and Grouted Channel Paving will be paid at the contract unit price per square meter complete in place. . Payment Items .
II .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges .
Dumped Riprap Metric Ton .
Riprap Metric Ton .
Stone and Stone Chips for Waterway Revetments Groins Jetties Breakwaters and Mounds Metric Ton .
Slope Paving Square Meter .
Modified Rockfill Metric Ton .
Special Slope Paving under Bridge Option Square Meter .
Special Slope Paving under Bridge Quarry Stone Square Meter .
Special Slope Paving under Bridge Quarry Stone Grouted Square Meter .
Special Slope Paving under Bridge Precast Concrete Blocks Square Meter .
Special Slope Paving under Bridge Cement Concrete Masonry Square Meter .
Channel Paving Square Meter .
Grouted Channel Paving Square Meter .
Earth Excavation Cubic Meter .
Bridge Excavation Cubic Meter .
Class A Trench Excavation Cubic Meter .
Channel Excavation Cubic Meter .
Gravel Borrow Cubic Meter .
Crushed Stone for Drainage Foundation Metric Ton SECTION BRIDGE STRUCTURE DESCRIPTION .
General .
Work included in this section shall consist of constructing bridge structures in accordance with the designs and to the lines and grades shown on the plans and in accordance with these specifications complete in place including the furnishing and installation of all materials that are part of the structures .
The work also includes approach slabs wing II .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges walls and retaining walls when specified .
The work under this section does not include the various classes of excavation bituminous concrete pavement any work on piles backfill revetments temporary structure removal of present superstructure cofferdams control of water or other items noted in the contract .
MATERIALS .
General .
The materials to be used shall be in accordance with the applicable sections of these specifications andor the Special Provisions for each respective item included in the construction of the structure .
CONSTRUCTION METHODS .
General .
The method of construction shall be in accordance with the applicable sections of these specifications and the Special Provisions for each respective item .
COMPENSATION .
Basis of Payment .
The above work will be paid for at the contract lump sum price under the respective item of Bridge Structures .
Where more than one structure is included in the Contract the following provisions shall apply to each structure .
Where reference is made to other sections in these specifications the parts thereof which apply to payment are specifically excluded .
Except as stipulated in the following paragraphs the payment shall be a lump sum for each bridge structure complete in place .
In general payment will include the full compensation for all concrete including approach slabs and all concrete sidewalks adjacent to the wingwalls prestressed concrete beams and deck beams steel reinforcement for structures structural steel shear connectors bituminous dampproofing membrane waterproofing protective course curbing edging scuppers drains bridge railings concrete penetrant sealer and incidental work such as flashings waterstops fillers tile under sidewalk brickwork at parapet walls crushed stone for weep holes fastenings painting and other materials equipment and labor that are indicated or implied as part of the construction for the bridge structure .
Payment for each bridge structure includes all work indicated on the plans under one bridge number even though two or more structures may be included under one bridge number due to a wide center reservation or some other physical feature .
Walls other than wingwalls or connecting walls between the structures will not be included for payment under an item for Bridge Structure unless specifically included in the Special Provisions or indicated on the plans .
When the Engineer orders changes made in the plans that reduce or increase the quantity of concrete such changes will be compensated for as follows For additional quantities of concrete ordered by the Engineer for footings and unreinforced gravity walls the Contractor will be paid at the rate of .
per cubic meter for cement concrete masonry placed in excess of that indicated on the plan drawings .
If changes are made that require less concrete than that indicated on the plan drawings for footings and unreinforced gravity walls the payment to the Contractor under the item for Bridge Structure will be reduced at the rate of .
per cubic meter for the difference in volume of concrete as indicated on the plan drawings and the actual volume of concrete used in construction as measured in place .
The cost of any other changes from the contract plans for any of a bridge structure included under the respective item shall also be on a negotiated lump sum price regardless of the quantity of the change .
No work shall be done on any of such changes in concrete or other elements until the price has been agreed on in writing between the Contractor and the Engineer .
The negotiated cost increase or decrease of each change will be based on the provisions of Subsection .. Where more than one structure is included in the contract under separate items the foregoing paragraphs apply to each structure separately and only to the structure for which changes are ordered .
II .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges Placing concrete on the deck in excess of that shown on the plans to compensate for camber of structural steel will not be considered a change from the plans .
Full compensation for the additional concrete is included in the lump sum bid price .
Basis for Partial Payments .
Within days after award of the contract the Contractor shall submit in duplicate for approval by the Engineer a schedule of the quantities and unit prices for the major components of the respective items for Bridge Structure as listed in the Special Provisions .
Each component part shall be considered as including all its concomitance so that the total cost listed for the components is the contract cost for the item .
The approval of the schedule by the Engineer shall not be considered as a guarantee to the Contractor that the quantities shown on the schedule are the approximate quantities actually included in the structure as indicated on the plans .
The schedule is only for the purpose of estimating partial payments and it shall not affect the contract terms in any way .
The volume occupied by the tile under the sidewalk shall be considered as an equivalent volume of cement concrete .
Fillers flashings brickwork at parapet walls tar paper fastenings painting and other materials and work shall be included with the appropriate components .
The schedule shall list the item the quantity and the unit of measurement the Contractors price per unit the amount for the item and the total that the Contractor bid for the lump sum .
Each schedule applies only to the respective bridge structure .
Similar materials and constructions at other locations are not included in the schedule. . Payment Item. . Bridge Structure Bridge No .
___ Lump Sum .
Increase in Concrete Quantity Cubic Meter .
Decrease in Concrete Quantity Cubic Meter Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges III .
DIVISION III MATERIALS SPECIFICATIONS SECTION M SOILS AND BORROW MATERIALS SECTION M AGGREGATES AND RELATED MATERIALS SECTION M BITUMINOUS MATERIALS SECTION M CEMENT AND CEMENT CONCRETE MATERIALS SECTION M PIPE CULVERT SECTIONS AND CONDUIT SECTION M ROADSIDE DEVELOPMENT MATERIALS SECTION M PAINTS AND PROTECTIVE COATINGS SECTION M METALS AND RELATED MATERIALS SECTION M MISCELLANEOUS MATERIALS III .
This page intentionally blank Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges III .
MATERIALS SPECIFICATIONS Approval and Acceptance .
All materials must be approved prior to incorporation in the work .
Approval of materials shall be in accordance with the applicable requirements of Subsection .
and Section .
Control of Materials .
Materials may be approved at the source of manufacture or at the project site .
Information regarding the origin composition andor manufacture of any material shall be furnished if requested by the Engineer .
Approval and acceptance of any material intended for use in the work of the Department is contingent upon the particular material conforming to a designated specification .
Unless otherwise stipulated all questions relating to materials will be resolved by the Research and Materials Section of the Department or its duly authorized representative .
Sampling and Testing .
Materials will be sampled and tested in accordance with the designated Standards .
The applicable edition of the Standard shall be as stipulated in Subsection .
References .
Sampling of materials will be performed by Department personnel personnel authorized by the Department or personnel under Department supervision .
Certification .
Materials accepted on certification as stipulated in Subsection .
Source of Supply and Quality fall into two categories .
Those accepted on a particular certification and sampling frequency. . Those accepted on certification alone .
A listing of materials falling into one or the other of the above categories will be furnished upon request to the Research and Materials Section of the Department .
SECTION M SOILS AND BORROW MATERIALS M .. General .
All Soils and borrow materials shall conform to the requirements of the specification as designated hereinafter .
M ..
Ordinary Borrow .
Ordinary Borrow shall consist of a material satisfactory to the Engineer and not specified as gravel borrow sand borrow special borrow material or other particular kind of borrow .
This material shall have the physical characteristics of soils designated as group A A or A under AASHTO M . It shall have properties such that it may be readily spread and compacted for the formation of embankments .
The use of Processed Glass Aggregate PGA meeting the requirements of M .. may be homogeneously blended with the borrow material up to an addition rate of by mass in areas that will not be exposed providing the AASHTO M physical characteristics are maintained .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges III .
M .. Special Borrow .
Special Borrow shall consist of one of the following a A native insitu soil that is classified under AASHTO M as A or that portion of A and A with less than passing the m sieve as determined by AASHTO T and T . Maximum size of stone for testing purposes shall be millimeters nominal .
For Muck Backfill only or less passing the m sieve will be allowable .
b A crushed rock either obtained from ledge excavation on the project or other approved sources that meets the following requirements Percent of wear L.A. Abrasion Test Maximum Plasticity Index Maximum Gradation Requirements Sieve Designation Percent Passing mm mm .
mm m c The use of Processed Glass Aggregate PGA meeting the requirements of M .. may be blended with either special borrow material outlined above .
An addition rate of by mass in areas where the borrow will not be exposed will be allowed providing the physical characteristics are maintained .
The PGA will be blended so as to produce a homogeneous borrow material .
M .. Gravel Borrow .
Gravel Borrow shall consist of inert material that is hard durable stone and course sand free from loam and clay surface coatings and deleterious material .
Gradation requirements for gravel shall be determined by AASHTO T and T and shall conform to the following Sieve Designation Percent Passing .
mm .
mm m m Maximum size of stone in gravel shall be as follows M ..
Type a millimeters largest dimension M ..
Type b millimeters largest dimension M ..
Type c millimeters largest dimension The use of Processed Glass Aggregate PGA meeting the requirements of M .. may be homogeneously blended with the processed gravel up to an addition rate of by mass providing the subbase material will not be Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges III .
exposed .
The resulting blend will meet the physical requirements of gravel borrow types a b and c specified above .
M ..
Processed Gravel for Subbase .
This specification covers the quality and gradation for subbase material of crusher run gravel .
Gravel shall consist of inert material that is hard durable stone and coarse sand free from loam and clay surface coatings and deleterious materials .
The course aggregate shall have a percentage of wear by the Los Angeles Abrasion Test of not more than .
The gradation shall meet the following requirements Sieve Designation Percent Passing mm .
mm .
mm .
mm m The approved source of bankrun gravel material shall be processed by mechanical means .
The equipment for producing crushed gravel shall be of adequate size and with sufficient adjustments to produce the desired materials .
The processed material shall be stockpiled in such a manner to minimize segregation of particle sizes .
All processed gravel shall come from approved stockpiles .
The use of Processed Glass Aggregate PGA meeting the requirements of M .. may be homogeneously blended with the processed gravel up to an addition rate of by mass providing the subbase material will not be exposed .
The resulting blend will meet the physical requirements of processed gravel specified above .
M ..
Sand Borrow .
Sand Borrow shall consist of clean inert hard durable grains of quartz or other hard durable rock free from loam or clay surface coatings and deleterious materials .
The allowable amount of material passing a m sieve as determined by AASHTO T shall not exceed by mass .
The maximum particle size for Sand Borrow shall be as follows M ..
Type a . mm M ..
Type b . mm The use of Processed Glass Aggregate PGA meeting the requirements of M .. will be allowed at an addition rate of by mass to Type b sand borrow .
This addition is allowed providing the material will not be exposed that the blended material is homogeneous and that the physical requirements specified for Sand Borrow above are maintained .
M ..
Sand Borrow for Subdrains .
Sand for use in subdrain installations shall conform to the requirements of Section M .. with the following grading limitations as determined by AASHTO T and T Percent by Mass Passing Through Sieve Designation Minimum Maximum .
mm .
mm .
mm .
mm Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges III .
m m M .. Loam Borrow .
Loam Borrow shall consist of a fertile friable natural topsoil typical of the locality without admixture of subsoil refuse or other foreign materials and shall be obtained from a welldrained arable site .
It shall be such a mixture of sand silt and clay particles as to exhibit sandy and clayey properties in and about equal proportions .
It shall be reasonably free from stumps roots heavy or stiff clay stones larger than millimeters in diameter lumps coarse sand noxious weeds sticks brush or other litter .
Prior to stripping the loam shall have demonstrated by the occurrence upon it of healthy crops grass or other vegetative growth that is reasonably well drained and that it does not contain toxic amounts of either acid or alkaline elements .
The loam shall contain not less than nor more than organic matter as determined by the loss on ignition of ovendried samples .
Test samples shall be ovendried to a constant weight at a temperature of C. M .. Peat Borrow .
Peat Borrow shall consist of specified material obtained from the locality of the project or commercially from other sources to be used as detailed or as directed by the Engineer to fit adequately the intended purpose .
Peat Borrow shall conform to the following requirements .
Organic content minimum .
Acidity pH .. . Water absorbing capacity minimum .
Soluble salt index maximum M ..
Processed Planting Material .
Processed Planting Material shall consist of suitable organic soil containing a reasonable amount of fibrous material procured from within the project limits or elsewhere and mixed with a suitable type of subsoil resulting in a homogeneous material free from hard lumps brush or litter satisfactory as a substitute for natural loam and capable of supporting plant growth .
This material shall conform to the following requirements Soluble salt index maximum Acidity pH .. Organic content As determined with a type RD Solu Bridge electrical conductivity tester at a dilution ratio of part oven dried material in parts of distilled water by mass .
Organic content will be determined by the loss on ignition of ovendried samples .
Test samples shall be ovendried to a constant weight at a temperature of C. Percent by Mass Passing Through Sieve Designation Minimum Maximum .
mm Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges III .
m m This requirement shall be waived when the amount of fibrous material precludes an acceptable test procedure .
M .. Topsoil and Plantable Soil Borrow .
Topsoil and Plantable Soil Borrow shall consist of fertile friable natural topsoil reasonably free of stumps roots stiff clay stones larger than millimeter diameter noxious weeds sticks brush or other litter .
Prior to stripping the topsoil from the construction project it shall have demonstrated by the occurrence upon it of healthy crops grass or other vegetative growth that it is reasonably well drained and capable of supporting plant growth .
Material classified as Topsoil can only be obtained within the project limits .
M .. Impervious Soil Borrow .
Impervious Soil shall have the physical characteristics of one of the following under AASHTO M . A A A A soils .
A soils containing more than by mass passing the micrometer sieve .
Peats and other highly organic soils .
The Impervious Soil shall be reasonably free of stumps brush and stones larger than millimeters diameter .
Material excavated near salt water to be used as impervious soil will be tested for salt content .
The maximum soluble salt index shall be .
M .. Reclaimed Pavement Borrow Material for Base Course .
Reclaimed base borrow material for subbase course shall consist of crushed asphalt pavement crushed cement concrete and gravel borrow meeting M .. free from loam clay and deleterious materials such as brick reinforcing steel glass wood paper plaster lathing and building rubble etc .
The coarse aggregate shall have a percentage of wear by the Los Angeles Abrasion Test of not more than .
The gradation shall meet the following requirements Sieve Designation Percent Passing mm .
mm .
mm .
mm m m The approved source of reclaimed pavement borrow material shall be processed by mechanical means .
The equipment for producing crushed material shall be of adequate size and with sufficient adjustments to produce the desired materials .
The processed material shall be stockpiled in such a manner as to minimize segregation of particle sizes .
All reclaimed pavement borrow material shall come from approved stockpiles .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges III .
SECTION M AGGREGATES AND RELATED MATERIALS M ..
Crushed Stone .
Crushed stone shall consist of one or the other of the following materials .
Durable crushed rock consisting of the angular fragments obtained by breaking and crushing solid or shattered natural rock and free from a detrimental quantity of thin flat elongated or other objectionable pieces .
A detrimental quantity will be considered as any amount in excess of of the total mass . .
Durable crushed gravel stone obtained by artificial crushing of gravel boulders or fieldstone with a minimum diameter before crushing of millimeters .
Thin or elongated pieces are defined as follows .
Thin stones shall be considered to be such stones whose average width exceeds four times their average thickness .
Elongated stones shall be considered to be such stones whose average length exceeds four times their average width .
The crushed stone shall be reasonably free from clay loam or deleterious material and not more than .
of satisfactory material passing a micrometer sieve will be allowed to adhere to the crushed stone .
Where crushed stone is to be used for surfacing this requirement shall be not more than .
of satisfactory material passing a m sieve .
The crushed stone shall have a maximum percentage of wear as determined by the Los Angeles Abrasion Test AASHTO T as follows .
For Class I Bituminous Concrete .
For Cement Concrete Aggregate .
Crushed Stone for Subbase .
Special Borrow Ledge Crushed stone for this use shall consist of crushed or shattered natural rock only .
Crushed gravel stone will not be permitted .
Except for megaPascals or greater cement concrete and prestressed concrete which shall be .
The crushed stone shall be uniformly blended according to the grading requirements for the respective stone sizes shown in Table .
TABLE Tabulation of Stone Sizes Percent by Mass Passing Through Sieve Opening M .. M .. M .. M .. M .. M .. . mm .
mm .
mm .
mm .
mm mm mm .
mm .
mm .
mm .
mm .
mm .
mm .
mm .
mm .
mm Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges III. . mm M .. to M. See Table for grading requirements M ..
Dense Graded Crushed Stone for Subbase .
This specification covers the quality and gradation requirements for a subbase material combining crusher run coarse aggregates of crushed stone trap only meeting M .. and fine aggregates of natural sand or stone screenings uniformly premixed with a predetermined quantity of water .
Coarse aggregate shall consist of hard durable particles of fragments of stone .
Materials that break up when alternately frozen and thawed or wetted and dried shall not be used .
Coarse aggregate shall have a percentage of wear by the Los Angeles test of not more than .
Fine aggregate shall consist of natural or crushed sand .
The composite material shall be free from clay loam or other plastic material and shall conform to the following grading requirements Percentage by Mass Sieve Passing Square Designation Mesh Sieves mm .
mm .
mm .
mm m m Sampling and testing shall be in accordance with the following standard AASHTO methods Sieve Analysis T Passing m T The use of Processed Glass Aggregate PGA meeting the requirements of M .. will be allowed at a maximum addition rate of by mass providing the blended material is homogeneous and the physical requirements of dense graded crushed stone are maintained .
M ..
Processed Glass Aggregate PGA .
Processed Glass Aggregate PGA shall be manufactured from an approved supplier of crushed cullet .
The material shall consist of recycled glass food or beverage containers free of debris such as paper metals fabrics toxins clay loam or other materials that would be associated with the glass recycling process .
A maximum of mass of the material may be produced from china dishes ceramics plate glass or other glass products .
The material will have a nominal aggregate size of millimeters and meet the following gradation requirements Percentage by Mass Sieve Passing Square Designation Mesh Sieves .
mm .
mm .
mm .
mm m m Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges III .
The percent wear as determined by the Los Angeles Abrasion Test Class C or D will be a maximum of .
M .. Riprap .
Riprap shall be sound durable rock which is angular in shape .
Rounded stones boulders sandstone or similar soft stone or relatively thin slabs will not be acceptable .
Each stone shall have a mass of not less than kilograms and at least of the volume shall consist of stones with a mass of not less than kilograms each .
The remainder of the stones shall be so graded that when placed with the larger stones the entire mass will be compact .
M .. Rockfill .
Stone for rockfill shall be sound angular in shape free from structural defects and comparatively free of chemical decay .
From to of the stones shall have a mass of not less than kilograms each and the remainder shall have a mass of not less than kilograms each .
M .. Dumped Riprap .
Stone used for dumped riprap shall be hard durable angular in shape resistant to weathering and shall meet the gradation requirement specified .
Neither breadth nor thickness of a single stone should be less than onethird its length .
Rounded stone or boulders will not be accepted unless authorized by special provisions .
Stone shall be free from overburden spoil shale and organic material and shall meet the following gradation requirement specified Maximum Percent of Total Mass Smaller Size of Stone Than Given Size kg kg kg kg No more than by mass shall pass a micrometer sieve .
Each load of riprap shall be reasonably well graded from the smallest to the maximum size specified .
Stones smaller than the specified size and spalls will not be permitted in an amount exceeding by mass of each load .
Control of gradation will be by visual inspection .
The Contractor shall provide at the locations specified a mass of rock of at least metric tons meeting the gradation for the class specified .
The sample at the construction site may be a part of the finished riprap covering .
At the quarry an additional sample shall be provided .
These samples shall be used as a frequent reference for judging the gradation of the riprap supplied .
Any difference of opinion between the Engineer and the Contractor shall be resolved by dumping and checking the gradation of two random truck loads of stone .
Mechanical equipment a sorting site and labor needed to assist in checking gradation shall be provided by the Contractor at no additional cost to the Department .
M .. Stone for Pipe Ends .
Stone for pipe ends shall be sound durable rock which is angular in shape .
Rounded stones boulders Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges III .
sandstone or similar stone or relatively thin slabs will not be acceptable .
Each stone shall have a mass of not less than kilograms not more than kilograms and at least of the volume shall consist of stones having a mass of not less than kilograms each .
The remainder of the stones shall be so graded that when placed with the larger stones the entire mass will be compact .
M ..
Modified Rockfill .
Modified rockfill shall consist of hard durable angular shaped stones which are the product of the primary crushing of a stone crusher .
Rounded stone boulders sandstone and similar soft stone or relatively thin slabs will not be acceptable .
Stone shall be free from overburden spoil shale organic material and meet the following gradation requirements Size of Stone Passing Percentages mm mm mm M ..
Granite Rubble Block .
Rubble pavement blocks shall be granite basically light grey in color free from seams and other structural imperfections or flaws which would impair its structural integrity and of a smooth splitting appearance .
Natural color variations characteristic of the deposit from which the paving blocks are obtained will be permitted .
Rubble pavement blocks shall be not less than millimeters nor more than millimeters in length not less than millimeters nor more than millimeters in width and depth .
Rubble blocks shall be rectangular in shape with one good face .
Opposite faces of rubble blocks shall be approximately parallel and adjoining faces shall be approximately at right angles to each other .
Blocks shall be dressed so that they may be laid with millimeter to millimeter joints .
M ..
Aggregate for Sand Blasting .
Aggregate to be used for sand blasting shall be an approved material currently used in the industry .
It shall be graded to produce the profile requirements of the material being cleaned and shall meet the applicable requirements of OSHA EPA and DEP .
M .. Stone Screenings .
Stone Screenings shall be that product from a stone crusher that completely passes a . millimeter sieve and not less than passes a . millimeter sieve .
M .. Slope Paving .
Stone for slope paving shall be sound angular in shape and free from structural defects .
Each stone shall have one reasonably flat face and a thickness perpendicular to the face of not less than millimeters which shall be the least dimension of the stone .
Approximately of the stones shall vary from .
to .
cubic meters each in volume and the remainder of the stones shall each be from .
to .
cubic meters in volume .
M .. Special Slope Paving Under Bridge Quarry Stone .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges III .
Quarry stone shall consist of granite or other similar durable stone .
The exposed surface of the stones shall range from roughly square to rectangular shape with split or quarry face finish and uniform in color .
The stones shall be from millimeters to millimeters long millimeters to millimeters wide and from millimeters to millimeters thick .
M .. Channel Paving .
Stones for Channel Paving and Grouted Channel Paving shall be sound approved quality angular blocks as nearly rectangular or cubical as practicable .
Rounded stones or relatively thin slabs will not be acceptable .
At least of the volume shall consist of stones having a mass of at least kilograms each .
The remainder of the stones shall be so graded that when placed with the larger stones a compact mass will result .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges III .
SECTION M BITUMINOUS MATERIALS M .. General .
All bituminous materials shall conform to the requirements of the specifications as designated hereinafter .
Bitumen delivered to a project or to a mix plant must be accompanied by a proper certificate signed by the producers authorized representative .
Shipments of material not accompanied by a certificate will not be accepted for use in the work until a representative sample has been tested and approved by the Research and Materials Section of the Department .
A .
Unless otherwise stipulated the sampling of bituminous materials shall be in accordance with AASHTO T . The following procedure shall be followed in obtaining samples from pressure distributors or tankers used for the transport of bituminous materials .
Distributors and tankers shall be equipped with approved sampling valves .
The sampling valves on tankers shall be installed in the rear bulkhead approximately of the height from the bottom .
The sampling valves on pressure distributors may be located in the side of the tank somewhere in the middle third of the tank depth. . At least liters of material shall be drained off through the sampling valve and discarded before the sample is taken . .
Sample containers shall be new clean and sealed with a tight fitting cap .
Washing of sample containers with solvents or water will not be permitted .
B .
The sampling of bituminous paving mix shall be in accordance with methods prescribed in the Departments Materials Manual .
M .. Asphalt Cement .
Materials of this type shall conform to AASHTO M Table with the additional requirement for Ductility at .
C. M ..
Cutback Asphalts .
These materials shall be blends of asphalt cements and suitable solvents .
They shall be homogeneous free from water and conform to the requirements of AASHTO M for the rapid curing type and AASHTO M for the medium curing type .
M .. Asphalt Primer .
This material shall be suitable for priming concrete and masonry surfaces prior to the application of waterproofing asphalt .
It shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M . M .. Asphalt Emulsions .
These materials shall be homogeneous and shall show no separation after mixing within thirty days after delivery .
They shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M with the following exception Viscosity determination will not be required for material sampled at point of delivery .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges III .
TABLE Specification Requirements for Asphalt Cement Viscosity Graded at C Viscosity Grade AC AC AC AC Tests Min Min Min Min Viscosity C Pascalsecond Viscosity C mms Penetration C g Sec .
Flash Point COC C Solubility in trichloroethylene . . . . Tests on residue Thin Film Oven Test Loss on Heating . . . . Ductility .
C mmmin mm Ductility C mmmin mm Maximum viscosity C Pascalsecond Ductility test temperature will be specified by the Research and Materials Engineer .
Up to if approved by the Engineer .
M .. Cationic Emulsified Asphalt .
This material shall be a homogeneous asphalt emulsion .
It shall remain homogeneous for a minimum of three months .
It shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M . M ..
Protective Seal Coat Emulsion .
This material shall be a homogeneous emulsion consisting of coal tar pitch dispersed in water by means of a mineral colloid .
Any separation or coagulation of its components shall be capable of being overcome by moderate stirring .
It shall contain no asphaltic materials or chemical emulsifiers .
When tested according to prescribed methods it shall meet the following requirements Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges III .
Department DesignationPSC Minimum Maximum Percent Water AASHTO T Percent NonVolatile Matter ASTM D Sec .
Percent Ash in NonVolatile Matter ASTM D Sec .
Percent Solubility of NonVolatile Matter in CS AASHTO T Resistance to Water ASTM D No blistering Loss of Adhesion or ReEmulsification Resistance to Petroleum Solvents ASTM D with Solvents No penetration and substituted for water no Loss of adhesion M .. Thermoplastic Asphalt Membrane .
Only products preapproved by the Department will be accepted for use .
Composition and physical properties shall conform to the manufacturers specifications for the material .
All accessory materials used in the application of the thermoplastic asphalt membrane will be considered a part of this specification and shall conform to the manufacturers requirements .
Refer to Departments preapproved materials listing obtainable from Research and Materials Section .
M ..
Hot Poured Joint Sealer .
This sealer shall be composed of a mixture of materials which will form a resilient and adhesive compound capable of effectively sealing joints in concrete and shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M . M .. Joint and Crack Sealer AsphaltFiber .
This material shall consist of a blend of asphalt cement AC and polyester fibers .
The asphaltfiber blend shall consist of fiber mass to mass of asphalt .
M .. Preformed Bituminous Joint Filler for Concrete .
This material shall be a nonextruding and resilient bituminous type preformed expansion joint filler .
It shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M . M ..
Hot Applied Bituminous Concrete Crack Sealer .
This specification covers a hot applied crack sealer suitable for use in cement concrete and asphaltic concrete pavement .
It shall conform to the requirements of Federal Specification SSS .
M ..
Coated Glass Fabric .
This material shall be a coated glass fabric composed of inorganic glass fibers smoothly woven into an open mesh cloth .
The coating shall be uniform and compatible with asphalt base or tar base compounds .
The Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges III .
finished material shall be free of visible external defects such as ragged or untrue edges breaks dents or cracks .
It shall conform to the following requirements Coated Glass Fabric Selvage Unless otherwise specified the selvage shall have a width of between millimeters and millimeters inclusive .
Minimum Maximum Width of Roll m mm .
m mm Gross mass per roll kg kg Average net mass per square meter g Coating on fabricated material per square meter mg Uncoated Glass Fabric Minimum Maximum Average dry mass per square meter g Composition of fabric glass fibers Thread count per millimeters of width Warp Filling Where double strength fibers are used for the filling the minimum requirement shall be to .
Breaking Strength ASTM Methods D and D Warp kg minimum Filling kg minimum To prevent the coated glass fabric from slipping out from between the jaws of the tension testing machine insert a thin strip of soft gasket rubber between the fabric and each of the four jaws of the machine before clamping in position .
M .. Asphalt Pipe Coating .
The material shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M . M .. Asphalt AntiStripping Additive .
This specification provides for an additive to asphalt to assist in the coating of wet aggregate and to increase the resistance of the bituminous coating to stripping in the presence of water .
The additive shall be chemically inert to asphalt heat stable and when blended with asphalt shall withstand storage at a temperature of C for extended periods without loss of effectiveness .
Composition Antistripping compound shall be an organic chemical compound free from inorganic mineral salts or inorganic mineral soaps .
It shall contain no ingredient harmful to the bituminous material or to the operator and shall not appreciably alter the specified characteristics of the bituminous material .
Antistripping additive shall be incorporated and thoroughly dispersed in the bituminous material in an amount equal to the percent by mass established by the Department .
This percent is based on the efficiency of the additive as determined by laboratory tests .
Test Requirements Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges III. . Heat Stability Antistripping compound shall be tested for chemical inertness to asphalt heat stability .
The compound shall retain its effectiveness after heating in asphalt according to the prescribed method for hours at C. . Resistance to Stripping Treated bitumen shall be required to coat wet aggregate and to retain at least of the coating after hours static immersion .
There shall be no loss in retained coating after immersion has been extended to one week . .
Concentration of Additive The percent of additive to be incorporated in the bituminous material shall be specified by the Department based on laboratory tests using Rhyolite as a test aggregate .
No modification of the established additive concentration shall be made because of the use of hydrophobic aggregate .
The Department reserves the right to establish a minimum percent of additive required .
M .. Class I Bituminous Concrete .
M .. General .
These mixtures shall be composed of mineral aggregate mineral filler if required bituminous material and reclaimed asphalt pavement RAP .
The use of RAP shall be at the Contractors option unless otherwise provided by the special provisions of the contract .
Plants producing recycled mix shall be equipped so that they can properly proportion blend and mix all components of a recycled mixture so that the end product is in conformance with the designated jobmix formula .
M ..
Composition of the Mixture .
The mineral aggregate filler if required bituminous material asphalt modifier if required and RAP shall be proportioned and mixed to conform with the designated mixture as tabulated in Table A hereinafter .
M .. JobMix Formula .
The composition limits in Table A are master ranges of tolerances of materials in general .
In order to obtain standard texture density and stability the Contractor will furnish to the Engineer a specific jobmix formula for the particular uniform combination of materials and sources of supply to be used on each project .
The jobmix formula for each mixture shall establish a single percentage of aggregate passing each required sieve size a single percentage of bituminous material to be added to the aggregate and for batch plants the number of seconds for dry mixing time and the number of seconds for wet mixing time .
AASHTO T Ross Count with a coating factor of will be used when necessary to evaluate proper mixing time .
The jobmix formula shall also specify a single source or uniform blend of particular sources for fine aggregate a single source for each nominal size of coarse aggregate a single source of supply for mineral filler and sources for asphalt .
The use of RAP will be permitted at the option of the Contractor and provided that the end product is in conformance with the designated jobmix formula .
The proportion of RAP to virgin aggregate shall be limited to a maximum of for drum mix plants and for modified batch plants .
The maximum amount of RAP for surface courses shall be except no RAP will be allowed in the open graded friction course OGFC .
Two or more jobmix formulas may be approved for a particular plant however only material conforming to one jobmix formula will be permitted to be used on any given calendar day .
The jobmix formula shall bind the Contractor to furnish paving mixtures not only within the master ranges but also conforming to the exact formula thus set up for the project within allowable tolerances as follows For Table A Mixes .
mm and larger sieve . . mm and smaller sieves except m .
Passing m sieve .
Asphalt .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges III .
For Table B Mixes .
mm and larger sieves . . mm and smaller sieves except m .
Passing m sieve .
Asphalt .
Table A Percent by Mass Passing Sieve Designation Standard Seives Base Course Binder Course Dense Binder Course Top Course Modified Top Course Dense Mix Surface Treatment mm mm mm mm .
mm .
mm .
mm .
mm .
mm m m m m Bitumen . . . . . .
Percentages shown in table above for aggregate sizes are stated as proportional percentages of total aggregate for the mix .
Unless authorized by the Engineer no JobMix Formula will be approved which specifies More than passing .
millimeter for Top Course and Dense Binder Course .
More than passing .
millimeter for Modified Top Course .
More than passing .
millimeter for Dense Mix .
Less than passing micrometer for Top Course .
Less than bitumen for Top Course .
Should a change of sources of materials be made a new job mix formula shall be established by the Contractor before the new material is used .
When unsatisfactory results or other conditions make it necessary the Engineer may establish a new jobmix formula .
The aggregate will be accepted in stockpile at the plant site .
The bituminous material will be accepted on Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges III .
certification .
If the Contractor elects to furnish bituminous concrete from more than one plant the jobmix formula must be adhered to by all plants .
Table B Specifications for OpenGraded Friction Course OGFC and OpenGraded Friction Course Modified OGFCM Seive Designation OGFC mm .
mm .
mm .
mm .
mm m Bitumen AC . . All relevant provisions of M .. shall apply to OGFC with exceptions as hereinafter noted a Mixing temperatures for OGFC shall be between and C and C. This will require close control over aggregate drying and asphalt storage temperatures so that the resulting mix temperatures will fall within the limits stipulated herein .
b Placing temperature for OGFC shall be between and C and C. As placing temperature is a critical factor in this type of mix hauling time to the project should be limited so as to avoid mix temperature from dropping below the required minimum .
All mixes should be covered during transportation .
c Tack coat Asphalt Emulsion RS when needed applied at the rate of .
liters per square meter .
d Silicone shall be added to the asphalt in the amount of .
grams per cubic meter of asphalt .
e Antistripping additive shall be added if indicated by laboratory tests and only as directed by the Engineer .
f Mix meeting the requirements of this specification shall be placed to a compacted thickness of millimeters to millimeters for OGFC .
Weather Limitations No mix shall be placed on wet or damp surfaces .
When surface and ambient temperatures are C and rising the Contractor shall use mix prepared and placed in accordance with the specified requirements of the mix hereinbefore designated as OGFC .
Irrespective of any temperature requirements no mix conforming to the requirements of these specifications shall be placed after October or before May of any year .
M ..
Mineral Aggregate .
A. Coarse Aggregate .
The coarse mineral aggregate shall be clean crushed rock consisting of the angular fragments obtained by breaking and crushing shattered natural rock free from a detrimental quantity of thin or elongated pieces free from dirt or other objectional materials and shall have a percentage of wear as determined by the Los Angeles Abrasion Test AASHTO T of not more than .
It shall be surface dry and shall have a moisture content of Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges III .
not more than after drying .
The use of crushed gravel stone will not be permitted .
B .
Fine Aggregate .
The fine aggregate shall consist of one of the following a Natural Sand b Stone Sand c A blend of sand and stone screenings the proportions of which shall be approved by the Engineer d A blend of natural sand and stone sand .
Natural sand shall consist of inert hard durable grains of quartz or other hard durable rock free from topsoil or clay surface coatings organic matter or other deleterious materials .
When the primary source of material passing the m sieve is obtained from natural sand these fines must be approved prior to use .
Stone sand shall be a processed material prepared from stone screenings to produce a consistently graded material conforming to specification requirements .
The stone screenings shall be the product of a secondary crusher and shall be free from dirt clay organic matter excess fines or other deleterious material .
The fine aggregate as delivered to the mixer shall meet the following requirements Percent Passing Sieve Designation Minimum Maximum .
mm .
mm m m In the fine aggregate sieve analysis passing .
millimeters the amount between two successive sieves .
mm .
mm m and m shall not exceed of the fine aggregate total .
Plants that experience a large variation in the quality and gradation of their primary fine aggregate sources and have difficulty in consistently providing fine aggregate that conforms to the requirements of this specification shall be equipped with an approved fine aggregate system for processing fine aggregate that will meet the requirements of this specification .
C. Reclaimed Asphalt Pavement RAP Reclaimed Asphalt Pavement RAP shall consist of the material obtained from highways or streets by crushing milling or planing existing pavements .
This material shall be transported to the mix plant yard and processed through an approved crusher so that the resulting material will contain no particles larger than millimeters .
The material shall be stockpiled on a free draining base and kept separate from the other aggregates .
The material contained in the stockpiles shall have a reasonably uniform gradation from fine to coarse and shall not be contaminated by foreign materials .
D. Processed Glass Aggregate PGA The use of Processed Glass Aggregate PGA meeting the requirements of M .. may be added at a maximum addition rate of mass .
This addition will only be allowed in base and binder bituminous concrete mixtures .
PGA in mixes containing reclaimed asphalt pavement RAP will be considered as part of the overall allowable mass of RAP in the mix .
If PGA is used in the mix a separate aggregate bin shall be used and the use of lime as an antistripping agent will be required .
M ..
Mineral Filler .
Mineral filler shall consist of approved Portland Cement limestone dust hydrated lime stone float or stone dust .
Stone dust shall be produced from crushed ledge stone and shall be the product of a secondary crusher so processed as to deliver a product of uniform grading .
Mineral filler shall completely pass a micrometer sieve and at least shall pass a micrometer sieve .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges III .
M .. Bituminous Materials .
A .
The asphalt cement for the mixture shall be the grade designated by the Engineer and shall conform to the requirements of M When required an approved antistripping additive conforming to M .. shall be added to the asphalt cement .
B. Bituminous material for the tack coat on the existing surface where required and specified shall be emulsified asphalt grade RS conforming to M C. For any bituminous mixture containing RAP the Contractor shall submit in addition to the JobMix formula the amount and type of asphalt modifier to be added to the mixture to restore the asphalt properties of the RAP to a level that is reasonably consistent with the requirements of current specifications for new asphalt .
The restored asphalt when recovered by the Abson Method from the recycled mixture shall have a minimum penetration at C of and a maximum absolute viscosity at C of pascal seconds .
Only asphalt cement grades AC AC AC or a blend thereof will be used as modifiers and shall meet the requirements of M M .. Plant Requirements .
Bituminous concrete conforming to these specifications shall be produced either in a batch plant or a drum mix plant .
Mix plants shall comply with the following Requirements for Batch Plants A .
Plant Scales .
Scales for measuring materials into the mixtures shall be springless dial or digital type and shall be of standard make and design .
Scale graduations and markings shall be plainly visible and dials must be so located as to be easily readable from the operators normal workstation by direct sight through repeating dials or digital displays .
Parallax effects shall be reduced to the practical minimum with clearance between indicator index and scale graduations not exceeding .
millimeters .
Dials shall be equipped with a full complement of adjustable index pointers for marking the required mass of each material to be weighed into the batch. . Digital scales will be either electronicmechanical load cell and lever system or fully electronic all load cell .
Digital indicators shall be of standard make and design .
Scale graduations and capacity shall be plainly visible on the faceplate of the indicator if panel mounted .
If the unit is of desktop or wallmount variety a data sticker shall be located on the side of the unit .
Indicators must be located as to be easily readable from the operators normal workstation by direct sight. . Bitumen scales shall be accurate to .
have minimum graduations not greater than .
and must be readable and sensitive to .
or less .
Scales for any box or hopper shall be accurate to .
have minimum graduations not greater than .
and must be readable and sensitive to .
or less .
The preceding percentages for both bitumen and aggregate scales are to be based on the maximum total batch mass of the mixtures .
B .
Truck Scales Truck scales shall be located on the plant property and shall be within a reasonable walking distance for the plant inspector .
Scales shall be accurate to within .. C. Testing of Scales .
a All plant scales including truck scales shall be tested at the expense of the producer by a competent scale technician as follows .
Annual prior to use in Department work. . At intervals of not more than calendar days. . At any time ordered by the Engineer .
b Where appropriate and at the direction of the Engineer an approved cradle or platform for each scale and at least ten standard kilogram test masses shall be provided for testing scales whenever directed by the Engineer .
The use of a set of test masses for two or more plants will be permitted only when they can be made readily available with no more than one hours notice .
D. Automated Batching. . Automatic Proportioning .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges III .
All Batch Type mixing plants furnishing bituminous concrete mixtures for contracts which are financed fully or partially with Federal Funds or State Contracts requiring in excess of metric tons shall be equipped with approved automatic proportioning devices .
Such devices shall include equipment for accurately proportioning batches containing the various components of the mixture by mass in the proper sequence and for controlling the sequence and timing of mixture operations .
Interlocks shall be provided which will hold or delay the automatic batch cycling whenever the batched quantity of any component is not within the specified mass tolerance when any aggregate bin becomes empty or when there is a malfunction in any portion of the control system .
The mass setting and time controls shall be so equipped that they may be locked when directed by the Engineer. . Automatic Recordation .
Recordation equipment shall be provided in all plants producing bituminous concrete under the provisions requiring automatic proportioning .
Each recorder shall include an automatic printer system .
The printer shall be so positioned that the scale dial or the digital display and the printer can be readily observed at one location by the plant inspector and the plant operator .
Use of repeating dials or digital displays or an additional printer to achieve this condition will be permitted .
The printer will print in digital form on a delivery ticket the following data a Date mixed .
b Time of batching .
c Tare mass of aggregate box .
d Tare mass of bitumen bucket .
e Accumulative or net masses as batched for each bin with a batch total for all net ingredients .
f Mass of bitumen .
g Total mass of mix in truck pay metric tonnage .
This printed ticket will be used in lieu of truck scale masses. . Equipment Failure .
If at any time the automatic proportioning or recording system becomes inoperative the plant will be allowed to batch materials manually for a period not in excess of working days .
Manual batching for longer periods will require written permission of the Engineer. . Batching Controls .
a The batching controls shall meet the following delivery tolerances with respect to the various components weighed in each batch Tare mass of aggregate box .
of total batch mass Tare mass of bitumen bucket .
of total batch mass Individual aggregate components .
of total batch mass Combined aggregate components .
of total batch mass Mineral filler .
of total batch mass Asphalt .
of total batch mass Truck loads consisting of more than one batch will be deemed acceptable if the average of the deviations of any of the components of the several batches which comprise the load do not exceed the specified tolerance .
b The total mass of the batch shall not vary more than plus or minus from the theoretical design mass .
c If directed by the Engineer provision shall be made for locking controls against tampering .
E. Testing Facilities .
A weatherproof building or room shall be furnished at the site of the producing plant suitable for the housing and use of equipment necessary to carry on the various tests required and for recording and processing test results .
This building shall be for the exclusive use of the Engineer or hisher representative for testing and recording purposes .
The building or room shall have a least dimension of .
meters and a minimum of square meters .
Windows and doors shall be adequately screened .
Satisfactory lighting and heating shall be provided for a hour day and the facility shall be supplied with water .
The room shall have adequate ventilation and be air conditioned .
A table chairs desk work bench file cabinet electronic calculator and a minimum of two .
kilogram fire extinguishers shall be provided .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges III .
Provision shall be made for the safe performance of extraction test determinations by providing an adequate exhaust fan andor hood system and a suitable means of disposing of used solvent and other waste .
All to be in conformance with current OHSA EPA and DEP standards .
If the Engineer permits the testing facility may be part of another building in which case it shall be entirely partitioned off from the remainder of such building .
Testing equipment conforming to current AASHTO standards and meeting the approval of the Engineer shall be furnished as follows and installed in the building for use in testing the materials and mixtures supplied by the Plant for the work Approved Rotary Extractor or approved Vacuum Extractor minimum gram capacity .
Coarse Aggregate Sieve Shaker power driven with a minimum clear sieve area of .
square meters .
The shaker shall be attached to a firm anchorage .
Each of the following square opening screens for coarse aggregate shaker mm .
mm mm mm .
mm .
mm .
mm and .
mm .
Fine Aggregate Sieve Shaker power driven and independent of coarse aggregate shaker for millimeter minimum diameter sieves .
Each of the following standard millimeter minimum diameter square opening sieves mm mm .
mm .
mm .
mm .
mm .
mm m m m and m with pan and cover .
Sample Splitter with a minimum capacity of .
cubic meters .
It shall be of the clam shell type and the chute width shall be adjustable from a minimum of .
millimeters up to millimeters .
Solution Balance kilogram capacity weighing directly to gram with two weighing beams and a taring beam tare capacity to be kilograms weight beams to read grams by gram divisions and gram by gram divisions .
Additional matching weights one kg two kg and one kg and one kg shall be provided to fulfill the capacity of kilograms .
The platform to be millimeter diameter .
An electronic direct reading top loading kilogram minimum capacity balance with a precision of .
gram may be substituted for the solution balance .
Approved scale with a minimum capacity of grams and a sensitivity of .
grams or an electronic toploading balance with a capacity of grams minimum and reading to .
gram .
Approved dial Thermometers range of C to C. Approved Hot Plates .
Approval of a plant will be contingent upon approval of the aforementioned requirements for Plant Laboratory including the building and appurtenances furnishings facilities including heat light power and water the testing equipment and any other incidentals .
F. Sampling Facilities .
Adequate and convenient sampling facilities shall be provided which allow the Inspector to obtain representative samples from the full width and depth of the discharge area of each aggregate bin .
The sampling tray shall be structurally supported during the sampling operation .
Access to the sampling facilities shall be provided requiring no more difficulty than that to climb a ladder leading to a secure platform with railings .
G. Preparation of Mixtures . .
Preparation of Asphalt Cement .
The temperature of the bituminous materials when placed in the mixer shall be not less than C nor more than C. .
Preparation of Mineral Aggregate .
All aggregates shall be thoroughly dried and heated before entering the mixer .
The temperature of the aggregates shall be controlled so that the temperature of the completed mixture shall be within the range specified below under G. Preparation of Bituminous Concrete Mixtures .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges III . .
Preparation of Bituminous Concrete Mixture .
The mineral aggregate prepared as prescribed above shall be combined and conveyed into the mixer in the proportionate amounts of each aggregate required to meet the jobmix formula .
The required quantity of asphalt cement shall be measured by mass or approved metering device .
The mixture shall be made by first charging the mixer with the required amount of mineral aggregate and mineral filler .
After the materials have been thoroughly mixed the asphalt cement shall be added and the mixing continued for a period of time sufficient to produce a homogenous mixture .
The ingredients shall be heated and combined in such a manner as to produce a mixture which shall be at a temperature when discharged of not less than C nor more than C. .
The temperature of mixture containing RAP as discharged from the modified batch plant shall be within the range of C to C. Moisture content of the mixture at discharge shall be no greater than .
by mass .
All aggregate particles shall be completely and uniformly coated .
The recycled mixture shall not contain any visible chunks of unprocessed RAP .
The recycled mixture shall be capable of being spread and compacted to a density that is not less than of the density obtained from laboratory compaction of a mixture composed of the same materials in like proportions .
Requirements for Drum Mix Plants The basic components of the drum mix plant are Aggregate coldfeed bins Conveyer and aggregate weighing systems Drum mixer Asphalt storage metering system Hotmix conveyer Storage and surge silos Central Control Panel A .
Aggregate ColdFeed Bins .
The number and capacity of the coldfeed aggregate bins shall be sufficient to keep the plant in continuous operation .
There shall be one coldfeed bin for each stockpile of material to be used .
Stockpiles shall be established on clean free draining surfaces and shall be so constructed as to minimize segregation .
The bins shall be designed to prevent overflow of material from one bin to another .
The fine aggregate bin compartments shall be equipped with a vibrator or other antibridging device which is automatically actuated when bridging of the material occurs and which automatically shuts off when continuous material flow is restored .
An interlocking automatic coldfeed shutoff shall be provided so that all production is stopped if flow from any one bin is interrupted for more than five seconds .
B .
Mineral Filler Bin .
The requirements for a mineral filler bin shall be optional .
Mineral filler bin shall be fed from a separate bin provided with a device that controls the feed at adjustable rates accurately and uniformly .
The bin shall be equipped with an interlocking device to shut off all production if the flow of mineral filler is stopped .
It shall also be equipped with an automatic antibridging device .
C. Aggregate Feeder Control .
The plant shall have a mechanical system for feeding the aggregate from each cold bin accurately and uniformly in its proper proportion onto a common collecting belt .
The system shall be so designed and production is automatically stopped if the flow of material from any one of the bins is interrupted for more than five seconds .
Each aggregate and mineral filler bin shall have an adjustable feed rate control .
The accuracy of the aggregate feeder control system shall be such that the total variations for all materials being drawn per interval of time shall not exceed .
of the total mass of bituminous mixture per interval of time .
Where the separate addition of mineral filler is required the variation shall not exceed .
on the same basis as stated above for aggregates .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges III .
For purposes of accurate weight and gradation checks and calibration of the aggregate proportioning system suitable means shall be provided for conveniently obtaining representative samples of the full flow of material from each cold feed and the total cold feed .
A sampling device for diverting the full flow of the combined aggregate into a suitable container shall be provided .
Prior to entering the drum mixer the combined aggregate on the common feeder belt shall pass through a millimeter scalping screen .
D. Aggregate Weighing Systems .
All aggregates including mineral filler if required shall be weighed by a continuous weighing device either as it is proportioned by the individual feeders or after all materials have been deposited on the common belt .
The weighing device for weighing the total material accumulated on the common belt shall be located so that the mass reading is obtained after the material has been passed through the millimeter scalping screen .
Belt scales shall meet the requirements of the National Bureau of Standards Handbook .
When tested the weighing system shall have an accuracy of .. All weighing devices shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
The weighing devices shall be capable of displaying at the control panel the aggregate mass flow in metric tons per hour and shall continuously accumulate the masses of material during the days production .
E. Aggregate Moisture Compensator .
Moisture content of the aggregate shall be determined manually or electronically and a moisture compensation device shall be capable of electronically changing the wet aggregate mass to dry aggregate mass .
F. Reclaimed Asphalt Pavement RAP .
The plant shall be equipped with a separate bin suitably located for introduction into the drum mixer .
The RAP bin shall be equipped with an interlocking device for automatically stopping production if the RAP bin becomes empty or flow is stopped for any reason .
A weighing device shall be located on the RAP conveyor for continuous weighing of the RAP .
Also a moisture compensator shall be included in the RAP delivery system to compensate for the moisture in the RAP .
G. Drum Mixer .
The drum mixing unit shall be approved by the Engineer and shall be a revolving type that continuously agitates and mixes the bituminous material .
It shall have an automatic burner control and be capable of producing a uniform mix within the job specifications .
An automatic temperature recording device that continuously records the mix temperature shall be located in the area of discharge and the data transmitted to the control panel .
H. Bituminous Metering System .
The bituminous material shall be introduced into the drum mixer by a metering system that is capable of accurately and continuously measuring the quantity and temperature of the material being introduced .
The temperature recording device shall be located so as to record the temperature of the bituminous material prior to entry into the mixer .
The metering system shall be capable of introducing the proper amount of material into the mix accurate to .
based on the total mass of the mix .
The bituminous metering system shall be interlocking with both the aggregate and RAP weight control system so that any change in the aggregate or RAP rate of flow will automatically trigger a change in the bituminous material rate of flow so as to maintain the correct proportions .
Also any interruption in the flow of bituminous material to the mixer shall stop all production .
Means shall be provided for conveniently and safely diverting the flow of bituminous material into a suitable container for checking the accuracy of the metering system .
A temperature compensating device shall be installed in the metering system to correct the quantity of bituminous material to .
C. The bituminous material flow shall be continuously displayed at the central control panel in metric tons per hour or as the corresponding percentage of the total mix .
I .
Hot Mix Conveyor .
The mix will discharge onto a hot mix conveyor that carries the mix to a surge silo .
The temperature of the mix when discharged onto the conveyor shall be not less than C nor more than C. Means shall be provided for conveniently and safely obtaining a representative sample of the mix as it is discharged from the mixer or from the Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges III .
hot mix conveyer .
The hotmix conveyer shall be designed so as to prevent any segregation and excessive temperature variation of the mix as it is transported and dumped into the surgesilo .
J .
Surge and Storage Silos .
The plant shall be equipped with sufficient surge and storage silos to accommodate the temporary storage of different mixes and to minimize any production interruptions .
SurgeStorage Silos shall be approved in accordance with the following requirements a All bins shall be designed and equipped so that there will be no segregation of the mix at the time of loading during storage or at time of discharge .
The Engineer reserves the right to reject any material when there is any indication that the material is not in conformance with specifications .
b The holding bins together with all equipment and methods pertaining to their use shall be subject to approval by the Engineer .
The use of coatings on the internal surface of the bins shall not be permitted .
The use of additives to the bituminous concrete mixes will be permitted only with the approval of the Engineer .
c Unless otherwise permitted by the Engineer the mixtures shall not be stored in surge and storage bins longer than the following Type of Bin Maximum Holding Time Unheated and not insulated hours Unheated but insulated may have heated gate hours Insulated and heated hours d Surge silos for the temporary storage of mix during a days production shall always be maintained above the onequarter full level .
K. Proportioning Controls .
All proportioning controls for aggregate mineral filler bitumen and RAP shall be electronically interlocked so that any interruption of more than seconds in the flow of one component will automatically stop all production .
The central control panel shall be equipped with a master control which will increase or decrease the production rate without having to reset the individual controls for each change in the production rate .
a Each aggregate and mineral filler feeder shall have an adjustable rate control .
The controls shall maintain the accuracy of the aggregate feeders to .
of the total mass of the bituminous mix per interval of time and the mineral filler feeder to .
of the mass of the bituminous mix per interval of time .
The flow rates of the aggregate and mineral filler shall be continuously displayed at the control panels in metric tons per hour and continuously accumulated for each days production .
b Provisions shall be made for a moisture compensating device that will electronically correct combined wet aggregate mass to dry aggregate mass .
c The bitumen control shall be capable of presetting the bitumen content directly as a percentage of the total mass of the mix in increments of ..
The bituminous metering system shall be coupled with the aggregate and RAP feeder systems to automatically maintain the required proportions as the aggregate and RAP flow vary .
The bituminous flow rate shall be continuously displayed at the central control panel in metric tons per hour and continuously accumulated .
d At the start of each production season all plant controls necessary to the production of specification mix shall be calibrated .
The method of calibration shall be in accordance with the plant manufacturers instructions and shall be subject to approval by the Engineer .
Calibration points for the delivery of each type of mix used by the Department shall be determined .
e The central control panel shall be equipped with an automatic digital recording device that on a continuing specified interval and on demand records the mass of aggregate from each bin or the accumulated mass of all aggregates on the common belt mineral filler and RAP if used and bitumen .
All printouts shall show time and date and shall be clearly legible .
Copies shall be provided to the Engineer .
L. All plant controls shall be capable of being locked to prevent tampering .
After calibration no changes Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges III .
will be made to the equipment or operating procedures without the approval of the Engineer .
M. Testing Scales .
All plant scales including truck platform scales shall be subject to the same testing requirements as found under this Section M .. C Requirements for Batch Plants Testing of Scales .
N. The plant shall be designed and operated to meet all current Federal and State air quality requirements .
O .
Portable Drum Mix Plants .
Whenever a plant is moved from one location to another it shall be recalibrated in accordance with this Section M .. Kd .
P. Testing Facilities .
Testing facilities shall conform to this Section M .. Plant Requirements for Batch Plants E Testing Facilities .
M ..
Inspection .
The Engineer or hisher authorized representative shall have access at any time to all parts of the plant for .
Inspections of the conditions and operations of the plant . .
Confirmation of the adequacy of the equipment in use. . Verification of the character and proportions of the mixture . .
Determination of temperatures being maintained in the preparation of the mixture . .
Inspection of incidental related procedures .
M ..
Composition and Compaction Acceptance Tests .
Where plant inspection is maintained the material will not be considered acceptable for use unless the specified tests from samples obtained at the production plant indicate conformance to the approved job mix formula .
The applicable tolerances defining reasonably close conformity with the specifications as outlined in Subsection .
shall be the amount of bitumen the percentage by weight passing .
millimeter and micrometer sieves as specified under M .. Table A .
For determination of pavement density the Nuclear Density Method ASTM D andor Bulk Specific Gravity Method AASHTO T shall be used .
Where AASHTO T is used samples for the full depth of the course being laid shall be taken from the mixture incorporated in the work after finishing operations have been completed and the pavement has cooled .
The Contractor shall have suitable coring equipment available in order that the required number of samples millimeter cores may be taken .
At least one such sample shall be taken from each project containing metric tons of mixture .
In projects containing more than metric tons of mixture at least one sample shall be taken for each metric tons except that any additional number of samples shall be taken as may be deemed necessary by the Engineer .
These samples will be taken by the Contractor in the presence of the Engineer on the day following the placement of the course weather permitting .
M .. Bituminous Concrete Curb Types or .
The Bituminous Concrete for curbing shall be Class I conforming to the applicable requirements for Dense Mix See M .. Table A. III .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges SECTION M CEMENT AND CEMENT CONCRETE MATERIALS M .. General .
All cement cement concrete and related materials shall be sampled and tested in accordance with the applicable AASHTO ASTM or other designated methods .
Cement as defined in this specification shall mean cementitous material as specified in the following sections .
M .. Portland Cement .
Portland Cement shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M . M .. Blended Hydraulic Cements .
Blended hydraulic cements shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M .
M .. Fly Ash .
Fly ash shall conform to AASHTO M . M .. Cement Concrete .
Cement concrete shall be composed of specified proportions by the mass of cement aggregates water and approved additives to form a homogeneous composition .
Cement concrete shall be designated by class according to strength cement factor coarse aggregate size entrained air content slump and by the mass for lightweight concrete .
The classes of concrete to be used shall be designated on the plans or in the specifications for the particular work .
The Contractor will furnish to the Engineer for approval a specific job mix formula for the particular uniform combination of materials and sources of supply to be used on each project complete with test results from trial batches .
A new job mix formula shall be supplied any time any source of material has been changed .
Classifications of Concrete Mixes Day Compressive Minimum Cement Content Strength Kilograms per Cubic Meter MPa for Coarse Aggregate mm mm mm Entrained Air .
.. . All concrete shall contain a water reducing admixture .
Fly ash may be substituted for cement up to a maximum of by mass .
III .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges Concrete which will be subjected to conditions of severe exposure will be minimum MPa with air entrained content of . . when so specified .
The use of an approved additive other than air entraining AASHTO M or water reducer AASHTO M Type A shall require written approval of the Engineer and additives shall not affect a change in the minimum cement content .
The minimum cement content can be changed only with the prior written approval of the Engineer .
M .. Cement .
Cement for concrete shall be the kind and type designated on the plans or in the specifications for the particular work .
If no type is specified either Type I IA IP IPA or Type II IIA shall be furnished except that cement for exposed bridge deck concrete or concrete exposed to sea water shall be Type II or IIA .
When high early strength concrete is required it shall be obtained by using Type III or by adding an accelerator meeting AASHTO M . Cement shall not exhibit a flash set or cause an abnormal initial rise of temperature when mixed with water .
It shall maintain its full plasticity and fluidity during the period required for placing the concrete .
The temperature of the cement at the time of mixing shall not exceed C. When tested at the mill no cement shall be shipped to the work until it has passed the day test unless otherwise directed .
At least days from the time of sampling shall be allowed to the completion of the required day test .
Each shipment regardless of quantity shall be accompanied by a certified Mill Test Report three copies of which shall be furnished to the Engineer before the cement may be incorporated in the work .
Cement of a uniform color shall be used in all exposed concrete of any structure .
M ..
Aggregates .
A .
Fine Aggregates .
Sand shall be composed essentially of clean hard strong durable and impermeable particles resistant to wear and frost inert to cement and water reasonably free from structurally weak grains organic matter loam clay silt salts mica or other fine materials that may affect bonding of the cement paste .
Sand shall be taken from a natural deposit .
The sand particles shall be relatively spherical in shape and shall have gritty surfaces .
Sand for cement concrete shall be properly washed to satisfactorily remove deleterious materials and surface coatings and shall be stockpiled after washing for a period as long as necessary to drain off all excess water .
The sand shall conform to the following requirements AASHTO Maximum Percent Test Methodby Mass Clay Lumps and Friable Particles T . Coal and Lignite T . Materials Passing m Sieve T . Organic Impurities T Pass Soundness NaSO Cycles T Sand when tested for mortar making properties as specified above shall produce a compressive strength at any period of time equal to or greater than that developed by mortar of the same proportions and consistency made of the same cement and sand after the sand has been treated in a solution of sodium hydroxide in accordance with AASHTO T . Sand not conforming to requirement specified above for organic impurities shall be rejected unless the day strength tests show the color is due to impurities not detrimental to the strength of the concrete .
The sieve analysis of the sand shall show it to be well graded and conforming to the following III .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges Fine Aggregate Fine Aggregate Sieve Designation Minimum Maximum .
mm .
mm .
mm m m m The fineness modulus of fine aggregate shall be not less than .
and not greater than .. For the purpose of determining the degree of uniformity a fineness modulus determination will be made upon representative samples from any one source .
Fine aggregate from any one source having a variation in fineness modulus greater than .
either way from the representative sample will be rejected .
Samples for tests of fine aggregate will be taken under the direction of the Engineer from approved storage piles at the site of the batch plant or from approved storage piles at the producing pit .
The fineness modulus of fine aggregate shall be determined by adding the cumulative percentages by weight of materials retained on U.S. Standard Sieves .
mm .
mm .
mm m m m and dividing by .
Fine aggregate failing to pass the minimum requirements for material passing the m andor m sieves may be used provided an approved inorganic fine material is added to correct the deficiency in grading .
Sand for cement mortar shall conform to the requirements specified above except that the compressive strength shall not be less than of that developed by mortar of the same proportions and consistency made of the same cement and sand after the sand has been treated in a solution of sodium hydroxide in accordance with AASHTO T . The sieve analysis shall conform to the following requirements Sieve Designation Minimum Maximum .
mm m m m B. Coarse Aggregates .
Coarse aggregate for cement concrete shall consist of crushed rock or screened gravel and shall be composed essentially of clean hard strong and impermeable particles resistant to wear and frost and free from deleterious amounts of organic matter loam clay salts mica and soft thin elongated laminated or disintegrated stone and it shall be inert to water and cement .
Where finishing of the concrete is to be done by hammering or any other method that breaks the surface of the concrete only crushed rock shall be used for coarse aggregate .
The aggregates shall conform to the requirements shown below .
Gravel stone shall be thoroughly washed to remove impurities if surfaces are coated with dust .
A deleterious amount of thin and elongated stones will be considered any amount in excess of of the total mass .
Thin stones shall be considered to be such stone whose average width exceeds four times their average thickness .
Elongated stones shall be considered to be such stone whose average length exceeds four times their average width .
III .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges AASHTO Maximum Percent Test Method by Mass Clay Lumps and Friable Particles T . Chert Less than .
Sp .
Gr .
SSD .
Sum of Clay Lumps Friable Particles and Chert Less than .
Sp .
Gr .
SSD .
Material Finer than m Sieve T . Coal and Lignite T . Percent of Wear Los Angeles Abrasion Test T except for all concrete MPa and above Sodium Sulphate Solution Soundness Cycles T These limitations apply only to aggregates in which chert appears as an impurity .
C. Sieve Analysis .
When tested by U.S. Standard laboratory sieves coarse aggregate for cement concrete shall be blended from stone sizes to meet the graduation requirements for each designation listed below .
The limits shown in the table define master ranges of variation for general application and are minimum and maximum in each case .
To insure uniformity of material used on any one job or project the range of variations may be reduced to of the range upon determination of the character and source of the materials that the Contractor proposes to furnish .
Percent by Mass Passing AASHTO T Designation and Nominal Sieve Size mm Min Max mm Min Max mm Min Max .
mm .
mm .
mm .
mm .
mm .
mm .
mm Stone retained on the largest sieve shall be within an oversize tolerance of .
millimeters .
millimeter aggregate shall be proportioned in two or more sizes separately weighed in the mix .
The combined grading as proportioned in the mix shall meet the grading requirements for millimeter coarse aggregate as determined by actual test .
millimeter aggregate may be proportioned in two sizes or processed to the specified gradation .
For use in mass concrete the Engineer may allow the use in millimeter aggregate of not more than of coarse aggregate passing .
millimeter and retained on a . millimeter sieve provided such aggregate is separately proportioned as an additional size .
III .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges M .. Lightweight Aggregates .
Lightweight aggregates for Structural Concrete shall meet AASHTO M . M .. Water .
Water for use in cement concrete shall be clean clear and free from deleterious amount of oil acid alkali salts and organic matter .
The water shall exhibit no deleterious effect upon the strength setting or soundness of the cement .
It shall conform to the following requirements .
pH .. . Total Solids a Organics .
maximum b Inorganics .
maximum c Sulphate .
maximum Testing of the water shall be in accordance with AASHTO T . M .. Cement Concrete Additives Airentraining admixtures waterreducers retarders etc .
shall conform to the following specifications A. Airentraining admixtures AASHTO M B. Retarders AASHTO M C. Water reducers AASHTO M M .. Proportioning .
Concrete shall be proportioned with the specified minimum cement content for each class and shall be mixed to the required consistency as determined by standard slump test AASHTO T . A. Proportioning by Mass .
Cement and aggregates shall be proportioned by mass in an approved manner .
Scales shall be calibrated and sealed by the proper authority within the preceding year or following any reassembly or as the Engineer may direct .
B .
Scope of Control for Proportioning .
The responsibility of the Department is confined to the inspection of the following four factors controlling the mix .
Minimum Cement Content and Minimum Strength .
The cement proportion is subject to adjustment and approval by the Engineer in order to insure compliance with minimum strength requirements .
Standard field test specimens AASHTO T shall be taken on the job and the Contractor shall be required to add additional cement as directed by the Engineer if test specimens strength fails to meet the requirements of ASTM C Section .
No claims shall be allowed for extra cement or extra concrete due to variations in materials proportioning dimensions shrinkage waste and similar causes .
The Contractor is advised to anticipate a normal loss in yield of or due to the foregoing causes .
The volume of plastic concrete in a given batch shall be determined from the total mass of the batch divided by the actual mass per cubic meter of the concrete .
The total mass of the batch shall be calculated as the sum of the masses of all materials including water .
The mass per cubic meter shall be determined in accordance with the Method of Test for Weight per Cubic Meter Yield and Air Content Gravimetric of Concrete AASHTO T . III .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges .
Consistency .
The Contractor shall uniformly regulate the consistency of the mix to the slump directed by the Engineer .
The Engineer may reject all batches not conforming to this requirement and the Contractor shall receive no additional compensation .
The general requirements in regard to consistency are as follows Mass Concrete mm slump Exposed Bridge Deck Concrete mm slump Reinforced Concrete mm slump Very Constricted Placement Conditions mm slump Pump Concrete mm slump Tremie Concrete mm slump When the specified slump is less than millimeters the tolerance shall be plus or minus millimeters .
When the specified slump is millimeters or greater the tolerance shall be plus or minus millimeters .
The Engineer will specify the lowest slump with which it is practical to properly place and consolidate the mix within the forms. . Workability .
The Engineer may vary the proportion of fine aggregate in order to regulate the workability or density of the mix making an equivalent change in the course aggregate to keep the yield constant. . Air Content .
The air content of the concrete by volume shall be as shown in the table above when tested in accordance with AASHTO T . A tolerance of plus or minus in the above percentages will be allowed .
C. Automatic Proportioning Plants .
All plants shall be equipped with an approved automatic weighing cycling and monitoring system installed as part of the batching equipment .
Each plant shall include equipment for accurate proportioning batches containing the various components by mass or by volume for admixtures and water in the proper sequence and for controlling the sequence and timing of mixing operation .
The automatic proportioning system shall be capable of consistently delivering each constituent within the tolerances indicated in M Interlocks shall be provided which will hold or delay the automatic batch cycling whenever the batched quantity of any component is not within the specific weight tolerance when any aggregate bin becomes empty or when there is a malfunction in any portion of the control system .
The mass setting and time controls shall be so equipped that they may be locked when directed by the Engineer .
The weighing equipment shall be so arranged that the batch plant operator can conveniently observe all scales from hisher operation station .
The controls shall be set so that .
The batcher inlet gates can not be opened while the discharge gates are open . .
The batcher discharge gates can not be opened a Until the full batch masses are registered on the scales b While the hopper is being filled c If batch masses are over or under the delivery tolerances specified on M . A new batch can not be weighed until the hopper is entirely empty of the previous batch and all scales have returned to zero .
Discharge chutes shall be so arranged that they are not suspended from any part of the weighing system and so that no materials will lodge therein or be lost on discharge .
Each weighing unit shall include a springless dial which shall indicate the scale load at all stages of the weighing operation from zero to full capacity .
If at any time the automatic proportioning system becomes inoperative the plant will be allowed to batch materials manually for a period not in excess of working days .
Manual batching for longer periods will require written permission of the Engineer .
All plant scales shall be tested at the expense of the producer by a competent scale technician as follows III .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges .
Annually prior to use in Department work. . At any time ordered by the Engineer .
D. Admixture Dispensing Systems .
Plants shall be equipped with a separate dispensing system necessary to incorporate each of the required admixtures into the concrete .
At least two admixture dispensing systems shall be required for plants supplying structural concrete .
E. Recording the Batching .
All concrete batching plans equipped with automatic proportion systems shall have digital recording instruments approved by the Engineer which shall be so located as to be readily accessible and readable to the operator from hisher normal work station .
The recording instruments shall be designed to record the quantities of each aggregate component cement fly ash when used water and the presence of admixture for each batch of concrete produced .
All records of batches shall show the batch number the day the month the year and time of day to the nearest minute for each batch and they shall be imprinted on the record so that each batch may be permanently identified .
The Department shall be provided with a clear and legible copy of all batch records .
Cement fly ash and aggregate component weight quantities shall be recorded separately .
Water may be removed by mass or volume .
Masses andor volumes shall be recorded as indicated on the batching scale or meter within an accuracy of scale or meter gradation .
The minimum recorder resolution shall be equivalent to or less than minimum gradation on the scale or meter unless otherwise approved by the Engineer .
When the automation system is capable of producing other than standard size batches full half or quarter cubic meter increments the recoordination requirements shall be in accordance with written directives from the Engineer .
Each plant site shall be equipped with an approved instrument capable of automatically applying a timedate stamp to each delivery ticket as the delivery vehicle departs from the plant site .
M ..
Measuring Materials .
A .
Cement shall be measured by mass or in bags of kilograms each .
When fly ash is specified in the mix design it may be weighed cumulatively with cement .
Cement should be weighed before fly ash .
When cement is measured by mass it shall be weighed on a scale separate from those used for other materials and in a hopper entirely free and independent of the hoppers used for weighing the aggregates .
All beam type scales for weighing cement shall be equipped with a tare beam .
When cement is measured in bags no fraction of a bag shall be used unless weighed .
The cement as weighed shall be within of required mass .
B .
Aggregates shall be measured by mass .
Batch masses shall be based on dry materials and shall be the required masses of dry materials plus the total mass of moisture both absorbed and surface contained in the aggregate .
The individual aggregates as weighed shall be within of the required mass .
C. Mixing water shall consist of water added to batch ice added to batch water occurring as surface water on the aggregates and water introduced in the form of admixtures .
Water shall be measured by volume or by mass .
The device for the measurement of the water shall be readily adjustable and shall be capable of being set to deliver the required amount and cut off the flow automatically when this amount has been discharged .
Under all operating conditions the device shall have an accuracy within of the quantity of water required for the batch .
The device shall be so arranged that measurements will not be affected by variable pressures in the water supply line .
Measuring tanks shall be of adequate capacity to furnish the maximum mixing water required and shall be equipped with outside taps and valves to provide for checking their calibration unless other means are provided for readily and accurately determining the amount of water in the tank .
All wash water must be removed from truck mixers or agitators .
All water measuring systems shall be capable of discharging total quantity of measured water into the mixer drum in a time not greater than onethird of the specified mixing time .
D. Dry admixtures shall be measured by mass and paste or liquid admixtures by mass or volume within a limit of accuracy of .
When admixtures are used in small quantities in proportion to the cement as in the case of airentraining admixtures mechanical dispensing equipment shall be used .
III .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges M .. Plant and Equipment .
The plant and equipment shall be subject to approval by the Engineer to insure satisfactory prosecution of the work without delay .
A. Batching Plant. . Bins with adequate separate compartments for fine aggregates and for each required size of coarse aggregate shall be provided in the batching plant .
Each compartment shall be designed to discharge efficiently and freely into the weighing hopper .
Means of control shall be provided so that as the quantity desired in the weighing hopper is being approached the material may be added slowly and shut off with precision .
Weighing hoppers shall be constructed so as to eliminate accumulation of tare materials and to discharge fully . .
Fly ash shall be stored at the batch plant in a separate storage or holding bin and shall be protected from rain and moisture. . Scales for weighing aggregates and cement shall be of either the springlessdial type or the load cell type and shall indicate the load at all stages of the weighing operation from zero to full capacity .
They shall conform to the applicable sections of the current edition of the National Bureau of Standards Handbook Specification Tolerances and other Measuring Devices except as may be otherwise specified .
They shall be accurate within one half of under operating conditions .
Ten kilogram masses shall be available at the plant at all times for checking accuracy .
All exposed fulcrums clevises and similar working parts shall be kept clean .
When beamtype scales are used provisions shall be made for indicating to the operator that the required load in the weighing hopper is being approached the device shall indicate within the last kilograms of load and within kilograms of overload .
All weighing and indicating devices shall be in full view of the operator while charging the hopper and heshe shall have convenient access to all controls . .
The materials including admixtures shall be proportioned by automatic proportioning devices approved by the Engineer .
The automatic proportioning equipment shall be installed in an area enclosed for protection against dust and inclement weather .
B .
Testing Facilities .
A weatherproof building or room shall be furnished at the site of the producing plants suitable for the housing and use of equipment necessary to carry on the various tests required and for recording and processing test results .
This building shall be for the exclusive use of the Engineer or hisher representative for testing and recording purposes .
The building or room shall have a least dimension of .
meters and a minimum of square meters .
Windows and doors shall be adequately screened and satisfactory lighting and heating shall be provided for a hour day and be supplied with water .
The room shall have adequate ventilation and be air conditioned in the warm months to provide a minimum of .
C. A table chairs desk work bench file cabinet electronic calculator and a minimum of two .
kilogram fire extinguishers shall be provided .
If the Engineer permits the testing facility may be part of another building in which case it shall be entirely partitioned off from the remainder of such building .
Testing equipment conforming to current AASHTO standards and meeting the approval of the Engineer shall be furnished as follows and installed in the building for use in testing the materials and admixtures supplied by the Plant for the work Fine Aggregate Sieve Shaker power driven for millimeter minimum diameter sieves .
Each of the following standard millimeter minimum diameter square opening sieves .
mm .
mm .
mm .
mm m m and m with pan and cover .
Sample Splitter with a minimum capacity of .
cubic meter .
It shall be of the clam shell type and the chute width shall be adjustable from a minimum of .
millimeters to millimeters .
Solution Balance kilogram capacity weighing directly to gram with two weighing beams and a taring beam tare capacity to be kilograms weight beams to read grams by gram divisions and gram by gram divisions .
Additional matching weights one kg two kg one kg and one kg shall be provided to fulfill capacity of kilograms .
The platform to be millimeters diameter .
An electronic direct reading top loading kilogram minimum capacity balance with a precision of .
gram may be substituted for the solution balance .
III .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges Approved Scale with a minimum capacity of grams and with a sensitivity of .
grams .
An electronic toploading balance with a capacity of grams minimum and reading to .
gram may be used in place of the scale .
Approved Dial Thermometer range of C to C. Approved Hot Plate .
Approval of a plant will be contingent upon approval of the aforementioned requirements for Plant Laboratory including the building and appurtenances furnishings facilities including heat light power and water the testing equipment and any other incidentals .
M .. Mixers and Agitators .
A. Mixers may be stationary mixers or truck mixers .
Agitators may be truck mixers or truck agitators .
Each mixer and agitator shall have attached thereto in a prominent place by the manufacturer a metal plate or plates on which is plainly marked the various uses for which the equipment is designed the volume of the drum the capacity of the drum or container in terms of the volume of mixed concrete and the speed of rotation of the mixing drum or blades .
Stationary mixers shall be equipped with an acceptable timing device that will not permit the batch to be discharged until the specified mixing time has elapsed .
Truck mixers shall be equipped with counters by which the numbers of revolutions of the drum or blades may be readily verified .
The counters shall be read at the time of starting and ending of mixing at mixing speeds .
B .
The truck mixer when loaded with concrete shall not contain more than of the gross volume of the drum .
The mixer shall be capable of combining the ingredients of the concrete into a thoroughly mixed and uniform mass and of discharging the concrete with a satisfactory degree of uniformity .
C. The stationary mixer when loaded at the manufacturers guaranteed mixing capacity and the concrete mixed for the time prescribed shall be capable of combining the ingredients of the concrete into a thoroughly mixed and uniform mass and discharging the concrete with satisfactory uniformity .
D. The agitator when loaded not to exceed of gross drum volume shall be capable of maintaining the mixed concrete in a thoroughly mixed and uniform mass and of discharging the concrete with a satisfactory degree of uniformity .
M .. Mixing and Delivery .
A. Readymixed concrete shall be mixed and delivered to the point designated by the Engineer by means of one of the following combinations of operations. . Mixed completely in a stationary mixer and the mixed concrete transported to the point of delivery in a truck agitator or in a truck mixer operating at agitator speed or in nonagitating equipment when approved by the Engineer. . Mixed completely in a truckmixer at the point of delivery under the supervision of the Resident Engineer or hisher designated assistant one of whom shall certify on a delivery slip that heshe observed the complete mixing of the concrete .
B .
Truck mixers and truck agitators shall be operated within a capacity not to exceed or respectively of the gross volume of the drum and at a speed of rotation for mixing or agitating as designated by the manufacturer of the equipment .
A truck mixer or truck agitator used for transporting concrete that has been completely mixed in a stationary mixer shall be operated within the limits of capacity and speed of rotation designated by the manufacturer for agitating except that the agitator capacity in no event exceeds of the gross drum volume .
C. When a stationary mixer is used for the complete mixing of the concrete the mixing time for mixers having a capacity of .
cubic meters or less shall be not less than seconds .
For mixers of more than .
cubic meters capacity the mixing time shall be determined by the Engineer .
The time is valid provided mixer efficiency tests prove the concrete is satisfactory for uniformity and strength .
Mixing time shall be measured from the time all cement and aggregates are in the drum .
The batch shall be so charged into the mixer that some water will enter in advance of cement and aggregates and all water shall be in the drum by the end of the first onefourth of the specified III .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges mixing time .
D. When a truck mixer is used for complete mixing each batch of concrete shall be mixed for not less than nor more than revolutions of the drum or blades at the rate of rotation designated by the manufacturer of the equipment on the metal plate on the mixer as mixing speed .
Additional mixing if any shall be at the speed designated by the manufacturer of the equipment as agitating speed .
All materials including adding water shall be in the mixer drum before actuating the revolution counter for determination of number of revolutions of mixing .
E. When a truck mixer or truck agitator is used for transporting centralmixed concrete or when all ingredients including water have been added to the truck mixer at the batching plant the drum shall be constantly rotated at the agitating speed designated by the manufacturer of the equipment both during transport and while on the project prior to discharge except during the period required for mixing .
F. When a truck mixer or truck agitator is used for transporting concrete the concrete shall be delivered to the site of the work and discharge shall be completed within minutes after the addition of the cement to the aggregates .
Each batch of concrete delivered at the job site shall be accompanied by a time slip issued at the batching plant bearing the time of charging of the mixer drum with cement and aggregates .
In hot weather or under conditions contributing to quick stiffening of the concrete or when the temperature of the concrete is C or above the time between the introduction of the cement to the aggregates and discharge shall not exceed hour .
When a truck mixer is used for the complete mixing of the concrete the mixing operation shall begin within minutes after the cement has been added to the aggregate .
When it is determined that more than minutes will be required to batch and completely discharge the load an alternate method of delivery and mixing will be permitted .
The truck mixer will be charged at the batching plant with reasonably dry aggregates and cement but no mixing water .
The required amount of mixing water shall be carefully introduced into the truck mixer at the job site and the batch of concrete mixed as outlined above .
Under such conditions one hour shall be allowed for the discharge of the load computed from the time the mixing water has been added to the batch and the mixing begun .
The concrete when discharged from truck mixer sand truck agitators shall be of the consistency and workability required for the job .
The rate of discharge of the plastic concrete from the mixer drum shall be controlled by the speed of rotation of the drum in the discharge direction with the discharge gate fully open .
If additional mixing water is required to maintain the specified slump and is added with permission of the Engineer a minimum of revolutions of the truck mixer drum at mixing speed shall be required before discharge of any concrete .
All wash water shall be removed from truck mixers and truck agitators prior to charging with a fresh load .
G. When approved by the Engineer centralmixed concrete which is designed for the purpose may be transported in suitable nonagitating equipment .
I .
When nonagitating equipment is used for transportation of concrete a Bodies of equipment shall be smooth watertight metal containers equipped with gates that will permit control of the discharge of the concrete .
Covers meeting the approval of the Engineer shall be provided for protection against the weather .
b The concrete shall be delivered to the site of the work in a thoroughly mixed and uniform mass and discharged with a satisfactory degree of uniformity .
Slump tests of representative samples taken during the discharge shall not differ by more than millimeters .
Discharge shall be completed within minutes after introduction of the mixing water to the cement and aggregates .
II .
Concrete delivered in outdoor temperatures lower than C shall arrive at the work having a temperature not less than C nor greater than C. M ..
Storage and Handling of Materials .
All materials shall be stored and handled in an approved manner .
A .
Cement .
Cement shall be fully protected against moisture and any cement damaged by exposure shall not be used .
III .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges Cement shall be emptied directly from the shipping packages into the skip of the mixer except when bulk cement is used .
The cement discharge chute at the aggremeter shall be so arranged that there will be no possibility of loss of cement in passing through it .
B .
Aggregates .
Aggregates in stockpiles shall be placed on firm welldrained ground .
The piles shall be of such shape and size that materials may be handled and stored without becoming dirty or mixed with deleterious substances .
Aggregates from different sources or different grading shall be kept in separate stockpiles .
Coarse aggregate will be handled and stored to produce minimum segregation of sizes .
Fine aggregate will be handled in such a way as to prevent the loss of fines .
Aggregate shall be induced into the aggremeter in an approved manner complying with required gradation .
Storage and handling of aggregates shall be done in a manner to ensure a uniform moisture content satisfactory for proper control of the consistency of the mix .
Frozen aggregates shall not be used .
Aggregates shall be taken continuously from one source in filling the compartments of the batcher bin and no change of source of any of the aggregates shall be permitted without the consent of the Engineer .
The Department reserves the right to prohibit the use of aggregates from any plant pit quarry or deposit where the character of the material method of operation or rate of production is inadequate .
When aggregate is proportioned in the batching plants and transported by trucks to the paving mixer the compartments in the trucks shall be of sufficient size to prevent spilling from one compartment to another either in transit or when emptying the load into the skip of mixer .
M ..
Cold Weather Concrete .
Concrete mixed or placed when the air temperature is below C will be considered cold weather concrete and will require special treatment .
In general the special treatment is indicated below .
When concrete operations are permitted when the air in the shade and away from artificial heat is C or lower temperature the mixing water andor aggregates may be heated prior to cement being added by approved methods so that the temperature of the aggregates and water mixture is not less than C nor more than C. The temperature of the concrete shall not be less than C nor more than C at the time of placing it in the forms .
The heating shall be done in a manner to preclude the occurrence of overheated areas which might result in damage to the materials .
Any material containing frost or lumps of hardened material shall not be used .
M .. Test Specimens .
A .
Samples of concrete shall be obtained in accordance with the Standard Method of Sampling Fresh Concrete AASHTO T in the case of individual samples secured to determine uniformity of consistency for approval of the mixer or agitator .
In securing individual samples to determine uniformity of consistency AASHTO T shall be followed but the requirements shall be so modified as to permit obtaining and testing of each of three samples one at approximately the beginning one at approximately the midpoint and one at approximately the end of discharge .
B .
For the purpose of making tests to determine the flexural or compressive strength of concrete the Engineer reserves the right to cast such test beams or cylinders as heshe deems necessary .
The Contractor shall furnish concrete and such assistance as the Engineer may require .
The specimens shall be protected and cured on the project by the Contractor without additional compensation under the direction of the Engineer .
After hours specimens taken to insure compliance with minimum strength requirement shall be removed from the mold and imbedded in moist sand or cured by other methods approved by Departments Research and Materials Section for five days with temperatures ranging from C to C by the Contractor without additional compensation under the direction of the Engineer .
When the sequence of the construction operation is dependent upon the development of strength in concrete previously placed the specimens taken for this purpose shall be further cured after hours as required in Section of AASHTO T by the Contractor without additional compensation under the direction of the Engineer .
C. Consistency tests shall be made when designated by the Engineer .
Determination of air content shall be made as designated by the Engineer if airentraining cement or an airentraining admixture is used .
If the measured III .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges consistency or aircontent falls outside the limits specified check list shall be made .
In the event of a second failure the Engineer may refuse to permit the use of the load of concrete represented .
D. Methods of testing readymixed concrete shall be in accordance with the following methods of the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials .
Sampling Fresh Concrete AASHTO T . .
Weight Per Cubic Foot Yield and Air Content Gravimetric of Concrete AASHTO T . . Flexural Strength of Concrete Using Simple Beam with Third Point Loading AASHTO T . . Compressive Strength of Molded Concrete Cylinders AASHTO T . . Making and Curing Concrete Compression and Flexure Test Specimens in the Field AASHTO T . . Slump Test for Portland Cement Concrete AASHTO T . . Air Content of Freshly Mixed Concrete by the Pressure Method AASHTO T . . Air Content of Freshly Mixed Concrete by the Volumetric Method AASHTO T . M .. Precast Units .
Precast concrete units shall be manufactured of airentrained MPa mm kg cement concrete true to line plane and dimensions in accordance with the following special requirements A .
Plant Requirements .
The units shall be manufactured in an approved area or enclosed building under the Engineers control and inspection with guaranteed provision to meet the requirements for curing and protecting the concrete as specified .
The concrete shall be proportioned as specified in M .. and mixed in accordance with M No delay or shutdown of over minutes duration in continuous filling of individual forms will be allowed .
The units shall be cast true to line and dimensions free from checking cracking voids surface honey combing and without requiring additional rubbing or patching .
B .
Forms .
As specified below metal or wood forms of tight rigid construction true to shape and with smooth finish shall be used .
Concrete forms may be used if approved by the Engineer .
The forms shall be oiled in any approved manner .
Reuse of old worn or misshapen form will not be allowed .
Bounds Wooden or woodenfaced Metal or metalfaced Catch Basins Manholes Metal or metalfaced Cribbing Metal or metalfaced Curb Wooden or woodenfaced Curb corners Wooden or woodenfaced Edging Wooden or woodenfaced Railings Wooden or woodenfaced Posts Wooden or woodenfaced Metal or metalfaced Box Culverts Metal Light Foundations Metal Median Barrier Metal Retaining Walls Metal Noise Barrier Panels Metal Pull Boxes Metal Handholes Metal C. Vibration .
Vibrators shall be provided and used as specified in .C and as directed by the Engineer .
Prolonged vibration shall be avoided in order to prevent surface finish susceptible to crazing .
Units showing surface checking or crazing will be rejected .
III .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges D. Protection and Curing .
The units shall be cured either by steam or water for a sufficient length of time for the concrete to obtain the minimum compressive strength . .
Steam Curing .
Two to four hours after the concrete has been placed and attained the initial set the first application of steam shall be made .
Forms shall be removed after the units have been steam cured for hours .
The steam shall be at relative humidity to provide moisture for proper hydration of cement .
The steam shall be directly applied onto the concrete .
During application of steam the ambient temperature shall increase at the rate not to exceed C per hour until a minimum temperature of C is reached .
When discontinuing the steam application the ambient temperature shall be decreased at the rate of C per hour until a temperature of C above the atmospheric temperature has been attained .
The concrete shall not be exposed to temperatures below freezing for a minimum of days after casting. . Water Curing .
The units may be water cured with water saturated material or other acceptable or approved methods that will keep the units moist for a period of days .
Under no condition will the use of curing compounds be permitted .
Concrete delivered in outside temperatures lower than C shall arrive at work having a temperature not less than C nor greater than C. Water and aggregates shall be heated if necessary but the water shall not be heated above C The use of direct heating torch in mixer shall not be approved . .
Protective Coating .
A protective coating approved by the Engineer shall be used on Curb Curb Corners Edging Railings and Posts .
After the concrete is at least days old and thoroughly dry the surface shall be cleaned to remove all oil grime and loose particles which would prevent the protective compound from penetrating the concrete .
Immediately before the application of the compound an air blast shall be directed over the surface to be treated so that all dust will be removed and then treated as follows The rate and number of applications for each unit shall be in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
After curing a minimum of days the outside surface of the tapered or cone section of precast cement concrete catch basins shall be dried cleaned and given a protective coating of Koppers Bitumastic Super Service Black or equal .
E. Finish and Color .
Edging curb corners precast fence rails and similar units shall be rub finished in the following manner After the concrete has properly hardened the exposed surfaces shall be rubbed with a No .
carborundum stone or an abrasive of approved equal in a manner to fully remove cement enamel finish and expose a durable sand grain finish satisfactory to the Engineer .
No cement shall be used in the rubbing process .
The color and finish of these units shall be uniform and shall conform to those of adjacent work in their final position .
F. Testing and Sampling .
Representative test specimens of the concrete shall be taken by the Engineer .
No precast units will be shipped to a project until the test specimens cured as required in M .. show a compressive strength of megaPascals .
G. Inspection .
All precast units shall be subject to inspection at the point of manufacture and on the project and any units showing defects or damage before the completion of the project shall be removed and replaced at the expense of the Contractor .
H. Quality Control .
The Contractor shall provide quality control in the form of personnel equipment and laboratory and office space . .
Personnel There shall be sufficient personnel trained and licensed to perform the tests listed under M .. Part D. III .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges .
Equipment Air Content Meter Type A or B AASHTO T Air Content Meter Volumetric Method AASHTO T Slump Cone AASHTO T Cylinder Molds AASHTO T Concrete Testing Machine AASHTO T Screening Sieve AASHTO T T Curing Box AASHTO T And other necessary items such as ovens scales hot plates pans etc .
to perform tests .
Portable Temperature Recorders .
Laboratory The laboratory will be a room of sufficient size to house all equipment and to adequately perform all these tests .
The room shall have either a separate moisture storage room or curing box for concrete cylinders and it shall be thermostatically controlled to maintain C. The laboratory room shall be heated and air conditioned to maintain C. It shall include a deck and file cabinet for proper record keeping and have good lighting and ventilation .
This room shall be kept for testing and quality control and not used for any other purpose .
Additional space in the form of a desk and file cabinet shall be provided for the exclusive use of the Engineer .
No exception from these requirements will be allowed without the expressed written permission of the Engineer .
M .. Cement Mortar .
Mortar shall be composed of one part Portland cement and two parts of sand by volume with sufficient water to form a workable mixture .
Cement sand and water shall conform to M .. M .. A and M .. respectively .
M .. Prestressed Concrete Beams .
This work consists of fabricating pretensioned bonded prestressed concrete deck beams and I beams in accordance with the plans and these specifications .
The Contractor shall order all materials and services for this work immediately after execution of the Contract .
The work under this Section shall conform to the relevant requirements of the current AASHTO Standard Specifications for Highway Bridges and shall be supplemented by the relevant provisions of The Manual for Quality Control for Plants and Production of Precast and Prestressed Concrete Products Prestressed Concrete Institute Publication Number MNL except as noted herein .
The angle at the ends of the beam shall be determined from the skew angle of the bridge which is shown on the construction plans .
This angle will also determine the placing of the sleeves for the transverse cables .
All exterior deck beams shall be cast to show the year in the center of the beam in the center of the coping unless otherwise specified in the Special Provisions or shown on the plans .
The numerals shall be millimeters high of a style and type furnished by the Engineer .
The Contractor shall properly identify each beam giving the bridge number and the type of beam Type A B or C. M ..
Drawings .
Detailed working or shop drawings will be required in accordance with the pertinent provisions of Subsection ..
The shop drawings shall show the number and type of beams location and spacing of strands and tensioning load to be applied per strand span length from centerline to centerline of anchor rods total length of beams skew angle and locations type and size of sleeves and inserts location type and size of handling hooks steel III .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges reinforcement and all other information required for proper fabrication and handling of the beams .
When prestressed concrete beams are used to support screed rails for mechanical finishing of bridge decks the Contractor shall submit for approval hisher method of incorporating this support into the prestressed concrete beam before fabrication of the beam has begun .
After the shop drawings have been approved the Contractor shall give the Inspection Agency a minimum two weeks notice prior to the commencement of fabrication .
M .. Quality Control .
The Contractor shall be responsible for any failure to cast the beams to the correct dimensions or for any other omissions or inaccuracies in hisher work .
If the Engineer determines that proper corrections can not be made the beams will be rejected and replaced with new beams at the Contractors expense .
Satisfactory proof shall be given to the Department that the fabricator of the prestressed concrete beams is capable of and has the organization and plant for performing the work involved in fabricating the beams .
The quality of all materials the process of manufacture and the finished sections shall be subject to inspection and approval by the Engineer .
Such inspection may be made at the place of manufacture or on the work site after delivery or at both places .
Sections rejected after delivery shall be marked for identification and shall be removed from the site at once .
The Department shall be notified three days prior to the shipment from the fabrication shop so that a representative may be present during the loading operations .
All sections which have been damaged after delivery will be rejected or if already installed shall be repaired or removed and replaced entirely at the Contractors expense as may be directed by the Engineer .
All sections shall be inspected for general appearance dimensions and soundness .
The surface shall be dense close textured and free of blisters cracks roughness and exposure of reinforcement .
Minor imperfections may be repaired subject to the approval of the Engineer after demonstration by the manufacturer that strong and permanent repairs result .
Repairs shall be carefully inspected before final approval .
Cement mortar used for repairs shall have a minimum compressive strength of MPa at the end of days and MPa at the end of days when tested in millimeter cubes stored in the standard manner .
Epoxy mortar may be utilized for repairs subject to the approval of the Engineer .
The Contractor shall provide quality control in the form of personnel equipment and laboratory and office space in accordance with section M .. H. MATERIALS M ..
Concrete .
Concrete for the bonded prestressed concrete beams shall be made in accordance with the pertinent provisions of M .. supplemented by the following Prestressed concrete beams shall be made in a plant with approved facilities and equipment for prestressing and ready for immediate production .
Special plant supervision and control will be required to meet the precision standards for quality and workmanship .
The beams shall be cast with Type I or II Portland cement or Type III highearly strength cement may be used at the Contractors option and expense .
The air content of the concrete by volume shall be with a tolerance of plus or minus .
M ..
Aggregates .
The aggregate shall be fully drained free from excess entrapped water in voids to a uniform moisture content of plus or minus in the fine aggregate and in the coarse aggregate .
The standard organic color test of the sand shall be minus plate .
The aggregate shall meet the requirements of M Crushed stone or gravel with a maximum Los Angeles abrasion of shall be used .
III .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges M .. Steel .
Reinforcing Steel shall conform to the requirements of M .. and shall be epoxy coated in accordance with M Structural steel for prestressed concrete beams including anchor plates shall conform to AASHTO M Grade unless otherwise shown on the plans and the relevant provisions of Section M. Other steel not actually attached to the beams such as bed plates pipe supports bolts nuts and washers is not included under Prestressed Concrete Beams .
M .. Pretensioning Strands .
Pretensioning Strands shall be uncoated sevenwire lowrelaxation Grade strands conforming to the requirements of AASHTO M . Strand diameter shall be millimeters unless otherwise specified on the plans .
The approval of the Engineer is required if the Contractor desires to use strands of larger diameter .
Where required strands shall be debonded for the length specified by a wrapped plastic sheath taped to the strand .
Other methods of debonding strands such as greasing chemical retarders and taping alone will not be allowed .
CONSTRUCTION METHODS M .. Forms .
The side forms shall be of metal of approved design and construction to meet rigid conformance to line dimension design workmanship and finish .
Any defects or damage of more than minor nature due to form work stripping or handling shall be cause for rejections .
Forms shall be so designed that they will not restrict the longitudinal movement of the casting when the prestressing force is transferred to the casting .
Tubes for forming the voids in the concrete deck beams shall be fabricated of material sufficiently strong and resistant to water to carry the wet concrete which is to be packed around the tubes without collapsing .
The tubes shall be capped at both ends to exclude concrete from entering the tubes .
The tubes shall be securely anchored so that no movement will occur during placing and consolidation of the concrete .
M ..
Placing Tension Strands .
Prestressing strands shall be accurately placed in position and tensioned before the concrete is placed .
Care shall be exercised to keep the strands clean of form oil and other substances harmful to the bond .
Each strand shall be tensioned to the percentage of the Manufacturers rated ultimate strength as specified in the AASHTO Standard Specifications for Highway Bridges for the type of strand used and the tension held until the concrete has attained the minimum required strength for prestressing .
The strands shall be tensioned in the casting bed by holding the tension with end anchorages until the concrete is cast and hardened and then releasing the tension gradually by an approved method .
Each strand shall be finally burned or cut off at a depth of millimeters into the end of the beam and the recessed area around the strand shall be filled with cement mortar as designated in Subsection M When two or more strands are tensioned simultaneously means as approved by the Engineer shall be provided to obtain equal tension in each strand as may be practicable .
Jacks for tensioning shall be of approved design and shall be equipped with gauges for determining the tensioning load .
The accuracy of the gauge shall be checked when and as directed by placing a recently calibrated dynamometer in the line .
A further check of the tension shall be made by measuring the actual elongation against the elongation figured from the modulus of elasticity of the element .
Suitable allowance shall be made in the tensioning for anchorage efficiency as determined by test .
III .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges M .. Draped Pretensioned Strands .
Draped pretensioned strands may be tensioned partially by jacking at the end of the bed and partially by uplifting or depressing strands or they may be tensioned entirely by jacking with the strands being held in their draped positions by means of rollers or pins or other approved methods during the jacking operation .
Whatever means is used low friction devices must be used at all points of change in slope of strand trajectory at the time of tensioning .
The tension for draped strands applied by jacking is done in essentially the same manner and must conform to the same requirements as the tensioning for straight strand unless otherwise noted .
If draped strands are tensioned in their draped position they should be supported by lubricated rollers with bronze bushings or roller bearings at all holdup points and low friction free turning rollers at all holddown points .
A recommended procedure for tensioning draped strands in the deflected trajectory by single strand jacking is as follows .
Applying initial tensioning load to strand. . Mark the strand for elongation measurement . .
Apply the full tension load as determined by the jack gauge not by elongation. . Measure elongation and determine the remaining elongation required for full tension based on computed elongation. . Jack the strand from the other end to remaining required elongation and note the load measured by the jack gauge .
The actual gauge reading will probably be in excess of the theoretical gauge reading but should not exceed it by more than .
Single strand tensioning of strands in the draped position by jacking the strands from only one end is permissible provided the required strand elongation is obtained without the jack gauge pressures exceeding the theoretical by more than .
When strands are deflected after partial tensioning the strands must be raised or depressed exactly the correct distances and they should be deflected simultaneously at all points or in an approved specific sequence .
Disregard of these requirements could result in incorrect strand tension and put stress distribution along the strand .
The lengths of the strands to be used in calculating elongations should be the actual length of the strand along its trajectory between the fixed anchorage and the reference point at the jacking end of the strand .
It is imperative that the actual dimensions of the bed layout and locations of holdup and holddown points agree with the dimensions shown on the approved working drawings .
Uplift and holddown devices must be attached in such a manner as to maintain the specified centerto center spacing of strands in both the vertical and the horizontal directions .
Provisions should be made for a minimum of millimeters of concrete cover on all metal parts of the hold down devices remaining within the beams .
Use of approved fiber sleeves for the holddown bolts is satisfactory .
M ..
Mix Design .
Unless otherwise specified on the Plans the concrete mix shall be designed to produce a minimum day strength of MPa .
The jobmix design shall be submitted by the fabricator and approved by the Engineer .
No job mix design will be approved with a cement content less than kilograms .
The use of additives will be at the option of the fabricator with approval of the Engineer .
M .. Slump .
The Engineer shall specify the consistency of the mix to have a minimum slump so as to place the stiffest mix practical without excessive vibration free from segregation and voids .
The Contractor shall control the slump as directed uniformly within a tolerance specified in M III .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges M .. Mixing Placing and Curing Concrete .
The concrete shall be proportioned as specified in M .. and mixed in accordance with M No delay or shutdown of over minutes duration in continuous filling of individual forms will be allowed .
The forms shall be cleaned and properly oiled and the mix shall be carefully placed without excess vibration to avoid segregation or displacement of reinforcing or forms .
The surface shall be cured during the initial setting period to avoid shrinkage cracking .
The beams shall be cast true to line and dimensions free from checking cracking voids and surface honeycomb without requiring additional rubbing or patching .
The top surface of pretensioned butted deck beams and box beams shall be screeded to a smooth surface except where concrete is to be placed over the top surface in which case the surface shall be rough .
The top surface of all prestressed I beams bulb tees and spread deck and box beams shall be rough .
Recesses shall be provided where the handling hooks enter the concrete surface of the beams .
The recesses shall be millimeters greater in diameter of the bar or strand and millimeters deep .
For purpose of definition the following is provided Rough Raked to a minimum millimeters amplitude in any direction intended for concrete to concrete secondary casting .
Smooth A float finish with maximum amplitude of millimeters at ridges intended for application of membrane waterproofing .
Sleeves and galvanized steel or cast inserts shall be placed in the beams as shown on the plans .
They shall be carefully located and securely fastened to the forms to prevent displacement .
Sleeves or inserts not properly placed may be cause for rejection of the beams .
Curing .
The beams shall be cured at a minimum temperature of C and minimum humidity of for the minimum curing period necessary to produce the minimum cylinder strength as specified on the plans transferring prestress .
A longer period of curing shall be required if curing test specimens fail to meet the minimum compressive strength .
Steam curing may be permitted under the Engineers direction and approval as specified in M .. D. M .. Test Requirements .
Unless another concrete strength is specified on the Plans standard comparison test specimens of concrete shall meet a minimum strength requirement of MPa as follows Concrete made with Type I or II Cement Days Type III Cement Days Three representative test cylinders shall be made for each days pour and they shall be cured under standard job conditions AASHTO T . Failure of any test specimen to meet of minimum strength or failure of average to meet the full minimum strength requirement shall be cause for rejection of all beams poured that day .
M ..
Transferring Tension to Concrete .
In pretensioning after the concrete has developed the required strength the tension in the strands shall be transferred to the concrete gradually .
This may be done by a system of jacking or by burning or cutting the strands .
If the latter method is used the strands shall be cut by burning and the number of strands cut at a time shall be such that the stress in the remaining strands will not reach the ultimatestrength of the strands after due allowance has been made for the friction in the bed .
They shall be cut or burned between each pair of beams in the casting bed so that all of the tension in these strands is transferred to the concrete before other strands are cut or burned .
A symmetrical pattern shall be followed in releasing the tension by this method .
In order for release of the III .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges strands to occur gradually they should not be quickly cut but should be heated until the metal gradually loses its strength .
Draped pretensioned strands should be detensioned in accordance with the following A .
Unless the total load of the precast concrete member is as much as twice the total of the forces required to hold the strands in the low position within the member or unless the members are loaded or restrained in an approved manner to resist the uplifting forces on the member at the holddown points the following sequence should be followed for detensioning .
Release the tensions in the draped strands at the ends of the members by heating each strand until it fails .
The draped strands should be heated to failure at each uplifted point in accordance with an approved sequence as shown on the working drawings. . All holddown devices for the draped strands should be released and the holddown bolts within the members removed . .
If any straight pretensioned strands are located within the members they should be detensioned after the draped strands have been detensioned .
Straight strands shall be detensioned by releasing the tension in these strands gradually and uniformly .
B .
When the total load of the precast concrete member is more than twice the total of the forces required to hold the deflected strand in the low position within the member the following sequence may be used at the fabricators option for detensioning the prestressed strands .
Holddown devices for the deflected strands may be released and the holddown bolts within the members removed. . Deflected strands and straight strands may be detensioned by releasing the tension in the strands gradually and uniformly .
When the total load of the member is less than twice the total of the holddown forces loads or approved vertical restraint may be applied to the member in order to counteract the uplifting forces at the holddown points when holddown devices are released .
The load or approved vertical restraint added to the member should be placed directly over the holddown points for the deflected strands .
When the total of the load of the member plus the added loads or restraint is more than twice the holddown forces the stranddetensioning method of releasing holddown devices before strand tension may be followed .
It is very important that the procedures for transfer of prestressing forces to members with deflected pretensioned strands are followed .
Disregarding the procedures for transferring the forces to the members will probably result in unacceptable members .
M .. Mortar for Prestressed Concrete Deck Beams .
The mortar shall conform to the following specification General .
The purpose of this specification is to describe a component polymermodified cementitious fast setting free flow mortar for filling keyways between adjacent box beams .
Materials .
The polymermodified cementitious system shall consist of a factory preproportioned component system whose components conform to the following requirements a Component A shall be a liquid polymer emulsion of an acrylic copolymer base and additives .
This acrylic copolymer shall have the following properties pH . .
Minimum film forming temperature Approx .
C Tear strength Approx .
MPa MPa Elongation of break Particle size range Less than .
micrometer III .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges b Component B shall be a blend of a selected Portland Cement specially graded aggregates organic accelerator and admixtures for controlling setting time water reducers for workability and a corrosion inhibiter .
c The component ratio AB shall be .
by mass .
The system shall not contain chlorides nitrates added gypsum added lime or high alumna cements .
The system shall be noncombustible either before or after cure .
Typical Properties of Mixed Components a Application Time Working Time min .
after components have been mixed b Finishing Time min .
after combining components c Color Concrete Gray d Flow Test Typical Properties of Cured System a Abrasion Resistance times greater than Control b Bond Strength Pulloff method concrete substrate failure .
c Modulus of Elasticity MPa d Surface Scaling Deicing salt freezethaw No deterioration after cycles e Compressive Strength hours RH kPa minimum f Compressive Strength days RH .
MPa minimum g Flexural Strength days RH .
MPa minimum h System shall conform to EPAUSPHS Standards for surface contact with potable water .
i The system shall not produce a vapor barrier .
j The system shall be thoroughly compatible with concrete .
M .. Cement Concrete Brick .
Cement concrete brick shall be machine made solid segments conforming to the requirements of ASTM C except that the minimum average compressive strength for five representative bricks shall be MPa .
The minimum compressive strength for one individual brick shall be .
MPa .
Dimensional requirements shall be the same as for Clay Brick M M .. Cement Concrete Blocks .
Cement concrete blocks shall be machine made solid segments conforming to the requirements for Concrete Masonry Units for Construction of Catch Basins and Manholes ASTM C supplemented by the following requirements The blocks shall be millimeters in width for basins and manholes of .
meters or less in depth millimeters in width below a depth of .
meters when used in structures having a depth greater than .
meters .
The permissible dimensional variation for nominal size shall be in accordance with ASTM C . The inside and outside surfaces of the blocks shall be carved to the necessary radius and so designed that the interior surfaces of the structures shall be cylindrical except the top batter courses which shall be designed to reduce uniformly the inside section of the structure to the required top size and shape .
The blocks used in the top courses shall be designed to produce a surface millimeters in width upon which to seat the frame and the curb inlet when one is used .
Blocks shall be so designed that only full length units are required to lay any one course .
Blocks shall be sampled and tested in accordance with ASTM C . The minimum average compressive strength for representative blocks shall be MPa .
The minimum compressive strength for one individual block shall be .
MPa .
III .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges M .. Clay Brick .
Clay brick shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M with the following exceptions The size of brick furnished shall be millimeters long x millimeters wide x millimeters deep .
All dimensions shall be nominal .
The average of the absorption of representative samples shall not exceed and the individual absorption of any one sample shall not exceed .
The average compressive strength of representative samples shall not be less than MPa and the compressive strength of any one sample shall not be less than .
MPa .
M .. Precast Concrete Block for Slope Paving .
Precast blocks shall be solid segments conforming to requirements for Concrete Masonry Units for Construction of Catch Basins and Manholes ASTM C supplemented by the following requirements The thickness shall be millimeters .
The width shall be millimeters and the length millimeters .
Blocks shall be sampled and tested in accordance with ASTM C . Dimensional tolerances shall be in accordance with ASTM C . M .. Sidewalk Brick .
Sidewalk brick shall conform to the requirements of ASTM C except that the absorption shall be maximum when subjected to hours of submersion in boiling water .
M .. EpoxyResin Base Bonding System for Concrete .
This specification covers twocomponent epoxyresin bonding systems for application to Portland cement concrete .
The material shall meet ASTM C . The Type Grade and Class shall be specified for each individual application .
Types Type I For use in bonding hardened concrete and to other materials to hardened concrete .
Type II For use in bonding fresh mixed concrete to hardened concrete .
Type III For use in bonding skidresistant materials to hardened concrete and as a binder in epoxy mortars or epoxy concretes .
Grades Grade Low viscosity Grade Medium viscosity Grade Nonsagging consistency Classes Class A For use below C Class B For use between C and C Class C For use above C M .. Latex Modified Mortar and Concrete Overlayments .
DESCRIPTION This work shall consist of furnishing and constructing a one course protective wearing surface of latex Portland cement mortar or concrete on the prepared surface of concrete bridge decks .
III .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges MATERIALS The materials used in producing latex modified mortar or concrete shall meet the applicable requirements of Section M of the Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges and as described herein .
A. Portland cement shall be nonair entraining cement of recent manufacture free of lumps and conform to the requirements of AASHTO M Type I or Type II .
B .
Aggregates shall meet the requirements of M .. A .
Maximum nominal size of coarse aggregate shall not be larger than .
millimeters and in no case greater than one half the thickness of section to be placed .
C. Water shall meet the requirements of M D. Latex Emulsion AdmixtureFormulated latex admixture shall be a nonhazardous film forming polymeric emulsion in water to which all stabilizers have been added at the point of manufacture and shall be homogeneous and uniform in composition .
The latex shall be a styrene butadiene latex emulsion that has been approved for use in latex modified concretesmortars by the FHWA using procedures covering by FHWARD .
The latex supplier shall provide certification that each lot of material meets the requirements of the certification program in FHWARD .
Note Airentraining admixtures will not be used .
Mix Design Latex Modified Latex Modified Mortar Concrete Average Thickness millimeters Cement kilogramscubic meter Latex Emulsion Admixture literskilogram . . Water literskilogram . . Air content of plastic mix AASHTO T . Slump millimeters Mass ratio of cement fine coarse aggregates dry basis agg .
spg .
. . ..
Strength days megaPascals minimum minimum The net water added shall be adjusted to control the slump within the prescribed limits and to produce a watercement ratio of The slump shall be measured to minutes after discharge from the mixer .
During this waiting period it shall be deposited on the deck and not be disturbed .
Care shall be exercised that traffic vibrations do not affect the measurement .
The dry mass ratios are approximate and should produce accurate yield and good workability but due to gradation changes andor variable specific gravity may be adjusted within limits by the Engineer .
A maximum adjustment of may be made in aggregate mass .
EQUIPMENT All equipment for the deck preparation mixing placing and finishing of latex modified mortar or concrete shall be approved by the Engineer prior to start of any work .
A .
Surface preparation equipment shall be of the following types .
Blast cleaning equipment capable of removing hardened curing compound laitance dust layer or any other contaminates detrimental to achieving bond and also capable of removing rust from reinforcing bars and removing small chips of concrete partially loosened by a scarifying or chipping operation. . Sawing equipment capable of sawing concrete to the specified depth .
III .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges .
Poweroperated mechanical scarifier capable of removing not less than millimeters from old surface. . Power driven hand tools for removal of unsound concrete subject to the following restrictions a Pneumatic hammers heavier than nominal kilogram class shall not be used unless approved by the Engineer .
No hammers heavier than kilograms shall be used in any case .
b Tripleheaded tampers fitted with star drills shall not be less than millimeters diameter in the tamper sockets .
B. Proportioning and mixing equipment shall be selfcontained mobile continuous mixing subject to the following .
The mixer shall be selfpropelled and be capable of carrying sufficient unmixed dry bulk cement aggregates latex modifier and water to produce on the site not less than .
cubic meters of concrete . .
The mixer shall be capable of positive measurement of cement being introduced into mix .
A recording meter visible at all times and equipped with a ticket printout shall indicate this quantity. . Mixers shall be calibrated to accurately proportion the specified mix at cubic meter intervals .
Certification of the calibration by approved testing authority will be accepted as evidence of this accuracy if the yield is shown to be true within a tolerance of .
according to the following test With the cement meter set on zero and all controls set for the desired mix activate the mixer discharging mixed material into a one quarter cubic meter container meter x meter x millimeters and when the container is levelstruck full making provision for settling the material into all corners the cement meter must show a discharge of kilograms of cement for modified concrete kilogramscubic meter . .
The mixer shall provide positive control of the flow of water and polymeric emulsion into the mixing chamber .
Water flow shall be indicated by flow meter and be readily adjustable to provide minor variations in aggregate moisture . .
The mixer shall be capable of being calibrated to automatically proportion and blend all components of the indicated composition on a continuous or intermittent basis as required by the finishing operation .
It shall discharge mixed material through a conventional chute directly in front of the finishing machine . .
The mixer shall be capable of spraying water over the entire placement width as it moves ahead to insure that the surface to be overlaid is damp prior to receiving the modified material .
C. Mixing and Delivery Control Cement and aggregates shall be proportioned measured and batched by a volumetric mass equivalent method .
In operation the entire measuring and batching mechanism must produce the specified proportions of each ingredient .
Tolerance in proportioning the various ingredients shall be as follows Cement mass to Aggregates mass Water mass or volume Latex mass or volume The tolerances are based on a massvolume relationship established during the calibration or by the measuring devices .
During mixing the drive shaft speed as indicated by the tachometer shall be maintained at operation speed rpms .
The auger mixer angle shall be set in the range determined by the manufacturer .
The interval between the continuous placing of succeeding batches shall not exceed minutes .
D. Placing and Finishing Equipment shall include hand tools for placement and brushingin freshly mixed latex modified material and for distributing it to approximately the correct level for striking off with the screed .
An approved finishing machine complying with the following requirements shall be used for finishing the work The finishing machine shall be selfpropelled and capable of forward and reverse movement under positive control .
Provisions shall be made for raising all screeds to clear the screeded surface for traveling in reverse .
A rotating cylinder type selfpropelled finishing machine with one or more rotating rollers augers and vibratory pans may be used .
Any modifications shall be subject to approval by the Engineer .
Travel rails for the machine shall be millimeter x millimeter perforated steel bar stock III .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges millimeter pipe rail or approved equal .
One or more suitable portable lightweight or wheeled work bridges shall be required and used behind the finishing operation for touchup work surface texturing and curing cover pavement .
CONSTRUCTION METHODS A .
Preparing the surface. . For new construction Newly constructed concrete bridge decks shall be cured a minimum of days before placement of the latex modified concrete wearing surface .
Within hours prior to applying the latex modified concrete overlayment the concrete surface to be covered shall be thoroughly blast cleaned .
This operation shall remove all hardened curing compound andor laitance layer and shall expose the concrete aggregate .
The edge of previously placed lanes shall be similarly treated to promote bond .
The surface shall be thoroughly cleared of all debris created by this operation and then pressure flushed with clean water .
Immediately prior to placement of the latex cement composition the clean surface shall be thoroughly wetted for a period of not less than one hour .
Any standing water shall be blown clear before the placement is made. . For Repair or Deck Restoration Prior to applying the latex modified concrete overlayment the concrete surface to be covered shall be machine scarified to the depth shown on the plans .
In areas where scarifying can not reach in areas of deep spalling and where steel reinforcement is exposed deteriorated concrete will be removed to sound material by chipping and by use of hand tools .
Fortyeight hours of good curing shall have elapsed prior to scarifying or chipping on adjacent concrete within meters of latex modified concrete .
Area from which unsound concrete and epoxy patches have been removed shall be kept free of slurry produced by wet sawing or wet scarifying by planning the work so that this slurry will drain away from the complete areas of preparation .
All such slurry shall be removed from prepared areas before resurfacing .
Before placement begins and within hours the entire surface shall be thoroughly cleaned by blasting .
The edge of previously placed lanes of overlayment shall be blasted to remove the trowel cut surfacing and promote bond .
If necessary to remove rust oil and other foreign materials detrimental to achieving bond detergent cleaning followed by sandblasting and air blast cleaning will be required .
Immediately prior to placement of latex modified concrete the clean surface shall be thoroughly wetted for a period of not less than one hour .
Any standing water in depressions holes or areas of concrete removal shall be blown out with compressed air .
All corroded reinforcing bars shall be thoroughly cleaned by blasting .
Those bars that have lost or more of their original diameter shall be supplemented by new bars spliced in place .
In splicing new bars they shall be lapped sufficiently to develop the full strength of the bar and if necessary additional chipping will be required to provide for this lap .
Dual bars of equivalent or greater section may be used .
Where the bond between existing concrete and reinforcing steel has been destroyed or where more than half the diameter of the steel is exposed the concrete adjacent to the bar shall be removed to a depth that will permit modified concrete to bond to the entire periphery of the bar exposed .
A minimum of millimeters clearance shall be required except where lower bar mats makes this impractical .
Care shall be exercised to prevent cutting stretching or damaging any exposed reinforcing steel .
Any exposed old copper waterstop shall be removed to the limits designated by the Engineer .
B. Proportioning and Mixing of Latex Modified Concrete The operations of proportioning and mixing latex cement materials shall comply with the following requirements Mixers shall be clean and the ingredients accurately proportioned .
Latex Modified Concrete shall be mixed at the site in accordance with the specified requirements for the equipment used .
The latex modified concrete as discharged from the mixer shall be uniform in composition and consistency .
Mixing capability shall be such that finishing operations can proceed at a steady pace with final finishing completed before the formation of the plastic surface film .
III .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges C. Placing and Finishing .
Existing expansion joints and dams shall be raised prior to placing overlayment .
A bulkhead shall be installed to the required grade and profile prior to placing latex cement material .
Joint filler and STYROFOAM trademark of Dow Chemical Company or equal brand plastic foam may be used but casting full across the joint and later sawing will not be allowed .
Travel rails shall be placed and fastened in position to insure finishing at the new surface to the required profile .
Anchorage for supporting rails shall provide horizontal and vertical stability .
All surfaces shall be completely cleaned as approved by the Engineer prior to placing mixtures .
The latex cement mix shall be brushed onto the wetted prepared surface .
Care shall be exercised to insure that all vertical as well as horizontal surfaces receive a thorough even coating and that the rate of the progress is limited so that the brushed material does not become dry before it is covered with additional material as required for the final grade .
Material used for brushing which has had the mortar used up shall be disposed .
The mixture shall be placed and struckoff to approximately millimeters above final grade .
It shall then be consolidated and finished at final grade with the vibrating devices .
Spud vibration will be required at edges and adjacent to joint bulkheads .
Hand finishing with a float may be required along the edge of the pour .
Edge tooling is required at joints except next to metal expansion dams curbs and previously placed lanes .
When a tight uniform surface has been achieved it shall be textured to provide a relatively skid resistant surface .
Texturing shall be done by use of wire rake before the plastic film forms on the surface .
The wire rake shall have flexible tines approximately millimeters on center and will be subject to the approval of the Engineer .
Screed rails andor construction bulkheads shall be separated from the newly placed material by passing a pointing trowel along their inside face .
Metal expansion dams shall not be separated from the overlayment .
Care shall be exercised to insure that this trowel cut is made for the entire depth and length of rails after the mixture has stiffened sufficiently .
The surface shall be promptly covered with a single layer of clean wet burlap as soon as the surface will support it without deformation .
Immediately following covering with wet burlap a layer or polyethylene film minimum micrometers shall be placed on the wet burlap and the surface cured for hours .
The curing material shall then be removed for an additional hours air cure .
Wet burlappolyethylene sheets may be substituted for the polyethylene film with the approval of the Engineer but shall not replace the initial wet burlap .
Limitation of Operations No vehicular traffic shall be permitted on the latex cement composition until at least days after placement .
No latex cement composition shall be placed at temperatures lower than C. They may be placed at C and rising .
At temperatures below C the Engineer will require a longer curing period and compliance with applicable sections of the Standard Specifications for curing bridge deck concrete during cold weather .
At temperatures above C the Engineer may require placement to be made at night or early morning hours if in hisher opinion a satisfactory placement is not being achieved .
A construction dam or bulkhead shall be installed in case of major delay in the placement operation exceeding one hour in duration .
During minor delays of one hour or less the end of the placement may be protected from drying with several layers of wet burlap .
Adequate precautions shall be taken to protect freshly placed material from sudden or unexpected rain .
All placing operations shall stop when it starts to rain .
The Engineer may order removal of any material damaged by rainfall .
Application of Live Loads Truck mixers and other heavy equipment shall not be permitted on the latex modified concrete overlay nor the traveling public until authorized by the Engineer .
Such authorization may only be given after the prescribed curing period has taken place after the last concrete has been placed and provided the concrete in the deck has attained a minimum strength of MPa .
Specimens shall be cured in the same manner as the deck .
III .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges M ..
Controlled Density Fill .
Controlled Density Fill CDF material is a flowable self consolidating rigid setting low density material that can substitute for compacted gravel for backfills fills and structural fills .
There are two main categories of CDFs excavatable and nonexcavatable with a subcategory of flowable and very flowable .
It shall be a mixture of portland cement flyash if very flowable sand and water designed to provide strengths within the range specified .
The categories of CDFs are Type Very Flowable NonExcavatable Type E Very Flowable Excavatable Type Flowable NonExcavatable Type E Flowable Excavatable The Very Flowable mixes Type and E shall contain a minimum of kilograms of Class F Fly Ash or high air plus and will be self leveling .
Excavatable mixes Type E and E shall be hand tool excavatable .
Type mixes are intended for permanent installations such as structural fills under structures .
It has very flowable characteristics needed for distances and small areas .
This type of mix should not be used as a bedding material .
It is used to fill small hardtoreach areas .
Type E mixes are excavatable material designed to have very flowable characteristics needed for filling small or far areas that later may need to be removed .
Type mixes are used in areas where size and distance do not need the very flowable characteristic .
It is intended for permanent installations such as thick fills under structures .
Type E mixes are excavatable mixes where size and distance of the installation do not require the flowable characteristics of a Type E mix .
CDF is to be batched at a ready mix plant and is to used at a high or very high slump of approximately millimeters to millimeters .
It shall be flowable require no vibration and after it has been placed can for Types E and E be excavatable by hand tools andor small machines .
The ingredients shall comply with the following Portland Cement AASHTO M Fly Ash AASHTO M Class F Sand M .. Air entraining admixtures M ..
Note .
In lieu of the slump test a millimeter long millimeter diameter tube may be filled to the top and then slowly raised .
The diameter of the resulting pancake may be measured and the range of the diameter shall be millimeters to millimeters .
Note .
The maximum strength for structural flowable fills may be expressed in increments of MPas and will depend on the Engineers requirements .
Note .
High air plus may be used instead of fly ash with an adjustment in sand content .
The following Type E mix design is for information only the actual mix designs submitted by the ready mix operator in accordance with standard Department practice must be confirmed by trial batches .
Cement kilograms Fly Ash kilograms Sand kilograms Water liters The following Type mix design is for information only the actual mix designs submitted by the ready mix III .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges operator in accordance with standard Department practice must be confirmed by trial batches .
Cement kilograms Fly Ash kilograms Sand kilograms Water liters Various types of controlled density fill must meet the requirements set forth in the table below Controlled Density Fill Type Type E E Compressive Strength days kPa kPa Compressive Strength days kPa max .
kPa max .
Slump mm mm May be changed by design engineer to fit particular job requirements .
III .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges SECTION M PIPE CULVERT SECTIONS AND CONDUIT M ..
Pipe Culvert Sections and Conduit .
These shall consist of individual sections of the kinds and sizes shown on the plans and as directed .
They shall conform to the requirements of the applicable following subsections .
All pipes shall be subject to inspection at the point of manufacture as well as the site of the work .
The purpose of the inspection shall be to cull and reject pipes which independent of the physical tests fail to conform to the specification in the particulars of dimension workmanship finish blisters cracks or fractures .
M .. Clay Pipe .
Clay Pipe for use in the construction of culverts drains and sewers shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M for Extra Strength Clay Pipe except that the minimum average strength per meter by the threeedge bearing method for millimeters and less diameter pipe shall be kiloNewtons .
M .. Cement Concrete Pipe .
Cement Concrete Pipe shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M Class .
The hydrostatic test will only be required for concrete pipe to be used in sewer construction .
Unless otherwise provided all cement concrete pipe shall be of the bell and spigot type .
M .. Reinforced Concrete Pipe .
Reinforced concrete pipe shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M for Standard Strength Reinforced Concrete Culvert Pipe for Class III Pipe unless otherwise designated on the plans except that the steel area for millimeter pipe shall be square millimeters per meter and circular reinforcement only shall be used in circular pipes .
All pipe millimeters in diameter or smaller shall be of the bellandspigot type .
Pipes larger than millimeters in diameter shall be tongue and groove or bell and spigot .
M .. Reinforced Concrete Pipe Flared Ends .
Flared End Sections shall be fabricated to comply with the current construction standard for this item .
The method of fabrication and materials used shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M Class III except that the three edge bearing tests shall not be required .
The flare shall be of the same thickness and materials as the barrel and have steel reinforcement equaling or exceeding the amount shown on the table for AASHTO M Class III except that a double row of steel will not be required .
M ..
Corrugated Metal Pipe .
This pipe shall consist of metallic coated galvanized or aluminized corrugated metal pipe and couplings .
Galvanized pipe and couplings shall be completely coated inside and out with an asphalt cement .
Aluminized pipe need not be asphalt coated .
Aluminized and galvanized pipe components shall not be used together in a pipe run .
Unless otherwise shown on the plans andor called for in the Proposal the thickness of the metal may be any one of those allowed for the size of pipe in the AASHTO designation below A .
The pipe shall conform to AASHTO M . Pipe millimeters or less in diameter shall be constructed of sheets not lighter than .
millimeters in thickness .
B .
The asphalt coating for the galvanized pipe shall conform to AASHTO M Type C coating .
The asphalt coating for galvanized coupling bands shall conform to Type A coating .
III .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges C. If Strutting of the Pipe is required it will be done as follows .
The pipe shall be elongated by the manufacturer after fabrication by reducing the horizontal diameter three percent and increasing the vertical diameter three percent and held in the elongated shape by means of rods all in accordance with this specification . .
The rods shall be millimeter diameter threaded millimeters at both ends with washer and nuts .
The length of the rods shall be the diameter of the pipe plus millimeters .
The rods shall be placed on the horizontal axis of the pipe on millimeter spacing and located at the halfway point between the circumferential riveting. . A soft wood block millimeters x millimeters x millimeters long shall be placed over the rods at each end to provide contact against the outside of the pipe .
The long dimension of the blocks shall be parallel with the horizontal axis of the pipe in order to prevent distortion of the pipe when the nuts are tightened . .
The three percent elongation shall be obtained by tightening on the rods uniformly from end to end of the pipe obtaining approximately one quarter of the required elongation each time through the length of the pipe . .
The rods shall be left in the pipe until the fill is completed and well compacted unless for some unusual condition their removal is ordered by the Engineer . .
The rods shall be removed by the Contractor by cutting from the inside adjacent to the pipe .
The three percent of ellipse shall be subject to manufacturing tolerances .
D. When elongation of the pipe is specified but strutting is not required the elongation may be accomplished by the fabricator prior to delivery in the following manner The pipe shall be elongated by the manufacturer after fabrication by reducing the horizontal diameter five percent and increasing the vertical diameter five percent by mechanical pressure sufficient to produce a permanent distortion in the pipe .
The elongation shall be maintained by drilling of holes in the ends of sections of pipe and placing horizontal wires .
After the pipe sections have been placed and coupling bands installed and prior to placing of backfill the wires shall be removed .
M .. Perforated Corrugated Metal Pipe .
This pipe shall consist of perforated metallic coated galvanized or aluminized corrugated metal pipe and couplings .
Galvanized pipe and couplings shall be completely coated inside and out with an asphalt cement .
Aluminized pipe need not be asphalt coated .
Aluminized and galvanized pipe components shall not be used together in a pipe run .
A .
The pipe shall conform to AASHTO M except that under .
End finish reinforcing the ends of the pipe will not be required .
B .
The asphalt coating for the galvanized pipe shall conform to AASHTO M Type C coating .
The entire pipe shall be coated to a minimum thickness of .
millimeter .
M ..
Corrugated Aluminum Metal Pipe .
This pipe shall consist of corrugated aluminum alloy pipe and couplings .
The fabrication of pipe coupling and thickness of sheets used shall conform with the relevant requirements of AASHTO M . M .. Perforated Corrugated Aluminum Metal Pipe .
This pipe shall consist of perforated corrugated aluminum alloy pipe and couplings .
The fabrication of pipe coupling and thickness of sheets used shall conform with the relevant requirements of AASHTO M . M .. Metal End Sections .
Metal End Sections shall be fabricated to conform with the current construction standard for this item .
The method of fabrication and materials used shall conform to the applicable requirements of AASHTO M . After fabrication of end sections the entire unit shall be coated with coats of material conforming to Subsection M III .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges M ..
Plastic PVC Pipe .
Plastic PVC Pipe shall meet ASTM D Standard Specification for Poly Vinyl Chloride PVC and Chlorinated Poly Vinyl Chloride CPVC Plastic Pipe Schedule and .
The pipe shall be PVC Type I Schedule .
Fittings such as adapters couplings etc .
shall be the same material as the pipe .
Joints shall be made in accordance with ASTM D Recommended Practice for Making SolventCemented Joints with Polyvinyl Chloride PVC Pipe and Fittings .
Cements shall meet ASTM D . M .. Polymeric Precoated Corrugated Metal Pipe .
Polymeric precoated corrugated metal pipe shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M Type B with the thinner polymeric coating a minimum of .
millimeters .
M .. SlotPerforated Corrugated Plastic Pipe .
This pipe or tubing shall consist of slotperforated corrugated polyethylene tubing couplings and fittings .
Materials dimensions physical properties and fabrication shall be in conformance with AASHTO M . M ..
Corrugated Plastic Pipe .
This pipe or tubing shall consist of corrugated polyethylene tubing couplings and fittings .
Materials dimensions physical properties and fabrication shall be in accordance with AASHTO M . Tubing used for drainage pipe shall have a smooth interior and shall have an inside diameter of or millimeters .
Corrugated plastic polyethylene pipe shall not be used as flared ends or in other applications where the pipe will be exposed to vandalism and ultraviolet radiation .
M .. Asphalt Coated Corrugated Metal Pipe Arches .
Asphalt coated corrugated metal pipe arches shall consist of corrugated metal pipes which have been reformed to multicentered pipe having arch shaped tops with a slight outwardly curved integral bottom .
The pipe shall be fabricated from standard length culvert sheet and factory riveted to form a continuous length pipe arch .
Asphalt coated corrugated metal pipe arches including coupling bands shall conform to the requirement of AASHTO M or AASHTO M for corrugated metal pipe meeting the requirements for base metal rivets sampling testing brands corrugations end finish mass bands and workmanship .
FABRICATION A. Dimensions .
Dimensions tolerances and areas shall be in accordance with AASHTO M unless otherwise noted on the plans andor called for in the proposal .
The lapped longitudinal seams shall be factory riveted and shall be placed in the top arch and be staggered so as to alternate on each side of the center of the top of the arch by approximately of the periphery .
B. Asphalt Coating .
The insert of the pipe arch shall be coated with asphalt conforming to AASHTO M Type C coating so as to form a smooth pavement to widths of of the circumference of the pipe arch .
These widths are determined by of the circumference of equivalent diameters .
It shall be applied in such a manner that the corrugations are completely filled and that except where the upper edges intersect the corrugations the pavement has a minimum thickness of millimeters above the crests of the corrugations .
The remainder of the inside of the pipe arch and the entire outside shall be uniformly coated with asphalt cement to a minimum thickness of .
millimeters .
The III .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges thickness shall be measured on the crests of the corrugations .
All coupling bands shall be coated to the same requirements as the pipe arch except the pavement shall be omitted .
C. Bituminous Materials .
The asphalt cement used for coating shall conform to the requirements in M ..
Section B. M ..
Structural Plate for Pipe and Pipe Arches .
All materials including base metal analysis galvanizing bolts nuts corrugations gauge determination and acceptance of plates forming and punching holes bearing shapes fabrication and incidental items shall conform to AASHTO M and the following A .
The gauge of plates shall be as specified on the Plans .
B. Bituminous Coating for Metal Surfaces .
The bituminous coating shall be a coal tar blend conforming to the requirements of M M .. Asphalt Coated Smooth Steel Liner Helically Corrugated Shell Metal Pipe .
This pipe shall conform to AASHTO M ..
Type A pipe .
The coating shall conform to AASHTO Designation M Type A. M ..
Cast Iron for Water Systems .
Cast iron pipe shall be centrifugally spun bellandspigot type conforming to the requirements of ASA Standard A. AWWAC or A. AWWAC for Cast Iron Pipe Centrifugally Cast in Metal Molds or SandLined Molds for Water or Other Liquids and shall be of the class called for on the plans or in the Special Provisions .
When no class is specified on the plans or in the Special Provisions Class pipe shall be used .
Cast iron fittings shall conform with ASA Standard A. or AWWA Standard C Class D. When cement lining is called for the pipe and fittings shall be cement lined in accordance with the requirements of ASA Specification A. AWWAC for Cement Mortar Lining .
When bituminous coating is specified it shall conform to the requirements stipulated in Standards A. or A .. A. Hydrants .
Hydrants shall conform to the requirements of AWWA Standard C andor to the type used by the particular municipality involved as specified in the Special Provisions .
B .
Gate Valves .
Gate valves shall conform to the requirements of AWWA Standard C andor to the type used by the particular municipality involved as specified in the Special Provisions .
M .. Ductile Iron Pipe and Fittings .
Ductile Iron Pipe shall conform to the requirements of ANSI A. AWWA C American Standard for Ductile Iron Pipe Centrifugally Cast in Metal Molds or SandLined Molds for Water or Other Liquids and shall be of the class called for on the plans or in the Special Provisions .
Ductile iron fittings shall conform with ANSI A. AWWA C latest revision American Standard .
When cement lining is called for the pipe and fittings shall be cement lined in accordance with the requirements of ANSI A. AWWA Cl latest revision for Cement Mortar Lining for Ductile Iron Pipe and Fittings .
When bituminous coating is specified it shall conform to the requirements of ANSI A. AWWA C latest revision .
A. Hydrants .
Hydrants shall conform to the requirements of AWWA Standard C andor to the type used by the particular municipality involved as specified in the Special Provisions .
B .
Gate Valves .
III .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges Gate valves shall conform to the requirements of AWWA Standard C andor to the type used by the particular municipality involved as specified in the Special Provisions .
M .. Acrylonitrile Butadiene Styrene ABS Pipe .
This type of pipe shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M . M .. Copper Tubing .
Copper Tubing shall conform to the requirements of ASTM B Type k annealed .
M .. Electrical ConduitRigid Nonmetallic Type NM .
The walls of the conduit shall have a smooth interior surface free from all substances which may injure any wire or cable covering such as is used on rubber covered or thermoplastic insulated wire or cable .
The bore of the conduit shall be circular in cross section and straight and true so as to pass freely a mandrel meter long and millimeters less in diameter than the nominal inner diameter of the conduit .
The bore of bends elbows and other fittings shall pass freely a ball millimeters less in diameter than the nominal inner diameter of the conduit .
Couplings elbows bends adapters reducers increasers and bell ends shall be of the same material as the conduit .
Couplings made of material other than that of which the conduit is made shall be compatible with the conduit and made of an approved tough nonmetallic material suitable for the service .
The minimum acceptable radii dimensions for elbows and bends shall conform to the requirements of the National Electric Code .
Joints shall be machined to an accurate taper on both ends to permit a tight joint when assembled with suitable couplings or fittings .
One tapered joint coupling shall be supplied with each length of conduit and each elbow or bend .
At least of the conduit in any lot shall be furnished in standard length sections of conduit less than .
meters will not be accepted .
A tolerance of plus or minus millimeters is permissible in the conduit lengths specified .
Plastic conduit and fittings shall conform to Federal Specification WC for Class II Conduit and Fittings NonMetallic Rigid Plastic .
Included under FSSWC us UL and ULB .
M .. Electrical ConduitRigid Metallic Type RM .
Steel conduit steel plastic coated conduit aluminum conduit special alloy conduit and fittings shall conform to the following Class Type A Underwriters Laboratories Inc. UL Standard Rigid Metal Electrical Conduit .
Class Type A UL Standard Intermediate Metal Conduit .
Class and Types B C and D UL Standard B Fittings for Conduit and Outlet Boxes .
United States of America Standard USAS C .. An Underwriters Laboratory Inc. labeling shall appear on each length of conduit as well as on elbows bends sweeps and nipples to identify such as approved .
M .. Electrical ConduitFlexible Metallic Type FM .
Flexible Metal Conduit shall conform to UL .
LiquidTight Flexible Metal Conduit shall conform to UL .
M ..
Pull and Junction Boxes Metallic .
Metallic pull and junction boxes made of cast iron welded sheet steel or cast aluminum shall conform to Underwriters Laboratories Inc .
Publication UL Outlet Boxes Fittings .
III .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges SECTION M ROADSIDE DEVELOPMENT MATERIALS M .. General .
This section shall contain materials used for soil conditioning seeding general planting and care of plants .
M .. Limestone .
Limestone shall consist of pulverized limestone obtained by grinding either calcareous or dolomitic limestone so that of the material will pass a micrometer sieve and at least will pass a micrometer sieve .
The limestone shall have a neutralizing value satisfactory to the Engineer and shall be only such as will have been marketed in accordance with those provisions of General Laws as amended which relate to commercial fertilizers .
M ..
Fertilizer .
Fertilizer shall be furnished in containers plainly marked with the chemical analysis of the product .
Fertilizer for grass seeding shall have the following composition by mass .
Nitrogen N Minimum Available Phosphoric Acid PO Minimum Water Soluble Potash KO Minimum Fertilizer for general planting shall be commercial grade .
No fertilizer shall be used which has not been marketed in accordance with the provisions of General Laws as amended relating to fertilizers .
M ..
Bone Meal .
Bone meal shall be fineground steamcooked packing house bones with a minimum analysis of phosphoric acid and .
of nitrogen by mass .
M ..
Seed .
Grass seed shall be of the previous years crop and in no case shall the weed seed content exceed by mass .
The grass seed shall conform to the requirements of the following tables Germination Purity Proportion Minimum Minimum For Grassplots Islands Creeping Red Fescue Kentucky Blue Domestic Rye Red Top Ladino Clover III .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges For Slopes Shoulders Creeping Red Fescue Kentucky Domestic Rye Red Top Ladino Clover The seed shall be furnished and delivered premixed in the proportions specified above .
All seed shall comply with State and Federal seed laws .
The seed mixture specified for slopes and shoulders consists of a tough hardy type for use on slopes graded at the rate of vertical to horizontal and steeper slopes and on shoulders adjacent to the roadway pavement or as otherwise directed .
The mixture for grass plots is of a finer type which will produce finer turf .
A manufacturers Certificate of Compliance to the specifications shall be submitted by the manufacturers with each shipment of each type of seed .
These certificates shall include the guaranteed percentages of purity weed content and germination of the seed and also the net mass and date of shipment .
No seed may be sown until the Contractor has submitted the certificates .
M ..
Erosion Seed .
This seed shall consist of a mixture of the previous years crop and shall contain the following mixture by weight with purity Germination Seed by Mass Minimum Winter Rye minimum Red Fescue Creeping minimum Perennial Rye Grass minimum Red Clover minimum Other Crop Grass .
maximum Noxious Weed Seed .
maximum Inert Matter .
maximum A manufacturers certificate of compliance will be required as specified in Subsection M .. above .
M .. Mulch .
Materials to be used in mulching shall conform to the following requirements M .. Hay Mulch .
Hay Mulch shall consist of mowed and properly cured grass clover or other acceptable plants .
No salt hay shall be used .
M ..
Straw Mulch .
Straw Mulch shall consist of stalks or stems of grain after threshing .
III .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges M .. Wood Chip Mulch .
Wood chip mulch shall consist of wood chips produced by cutting branches limbs of trees brush or shrubs with chippers or from the chipping of stumps free of topsoil stones etc .
The chippers shall be approved for use by the Engineer .
Wood chip mulch must be free from long stringy material defined as millimeters in length maximum and preferably shall be from live growth except that or less by volume of the wood chip mulch may consist of slabwood chipped to an acceptable size by chippers equipped with a millimeter knife set and thoroughly mixed with the live material .
The percentage of slabwood in the mixture shall be determined by the Engineer .
Wood Chip Mulch containing an excess of fine particles in the judgment of the Engineer will not be acceptable for use on the Project .
Wood Chip Mulch may be produced on the project from acceptable cuttings .
M .. Wood Fibre Mulch .
Wood Fibre Mulch shall consist of wood fibre produced from clean whole uncooked wood formed into resilient bundles having a high degree of internal friction and shall be dry when delivered on the project .
M ..
Aged Pine Bark Mulch .
This mulch shall consist of the outer bark of pine trees and a minimum of hardwood bark .
Bark shall be processed by removal from the limbs and trunks of trees in the production of lumber and woodchips for paper mills .
This bark or a combination of the bark from various trees must be thoroughly mixed and be allowed to cook and become properly aged in a stock pile for a minimum period of six months .
The bark must be partially decomposed and dark brown in color free of chunks and pieces of wood thicker than millimeters .
Mulch must be free from long stringy material .
Aged Pine Bark Mulch containing an excess of fine particles in the judgment of the Engineer will not be acceptable for use on the Project .
M .. Sod .
Collected Natural Growth Sods shall be millimeter x millimeter collected sods or more millimeters in thickness with the kind of plant specified in the item predominating .
Natural growth sods shall have or more woody stems of native plants with natural soil clinging to the roots such as may be obtained near the edge of the woods or along hedgerows .
Native plants may consist of sheep laurel lowbush blueberry sweetfern and evergreen seedlings collected from northern areas of the United States .
Mountain Laurel Sods shall have natural growth clumps of Laurel approximately millimeters in height and millimeters in spread .
The sod shall be approximately millimeters in diameter and millimeters in depth .
Larger plants in healthy condition will be acceptable .
Field Sod Shall consist of satisfactory pasture field sods .
The sods shall have a healthy root system at least millimeters in thickness .
Measurement for thickness shall exclude top growth and thatch .
All sods shall be free from noxious weeds and coarse burned or bare spots .
All broken dried or otherwise damaged sods shall be rejected as unsatisfactory .
Lawn Sod Shall be composed of the grass mixture as recommended by the New England Sod Producers Association and shall be specified as III .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges Percent by mass No .
For sunny turf areas Kentucky Bluegrass one or more of these varieties Kentucky Bluegrass Merion Red Fescue Fylking Pennstar Windsor Baron No .
For shady turf areas Kentucky Bluegrass Red Fescue Red Fescue Highlight Jamestown or Poa trivials Pennlawn No .
For multiuse turf areas Tall Fescue Kentucky Kentucky Bluegrass Perennial Ryegrass Manhattan Lawn sods shall have been nursery grown on cultivated agricultural land specifically for sod purposes .
The sods shall be free of objectionable grassy and broad leaf weeds .
Sods shall be considered free of such weeds if less than such plants are found per square meters of area .
The sod shall be machine cut at a uniform minimum thickness of millimeters at the time of cutting .
Measurement for thickness shall exclude top growth and thatch .
Individual pieces of sod shall be cut to the suppliers standard width and length .
Maximum allowable deviation from standard widths and lengths shall be .
Broken pads and torn or uneven ends will not be acceptable .
M .. General Planting .
Materials to be used in this work shall conform with the following requirements Nomenclature All scientific and common plant names of the items specified shall conform with the current edition of Hortus Third compiled by the staff of the L.H .
Bailey Hortorium Cornell University .
These standards shall determine all requirements of acceptable shrub and seedling nursery stock .
All plants delivered shall be true to name and legibly tagged .
Caliper or spread shall govern over height specifications .
The Contractor must obtain written permission from the Engineer for any substitutions for the types and sizes specified .
Delivery and Protection All plants shall be packed so as to arrive at the delivery point in good growing condition .
Delivery of plants and seedlings shall be made to the site only according to the Contractors ability to handle and properly care for them .
Sources of Material A. Nursery Stock shall be grown at nurseries in the Northern area of the United States for a minimum of two years and shall conform with the requirements of Subsection M .. below .
B .
Collected Plants shall be carefully dug from approved locations and retain a root system or ball at least larger than that specified for Nursery Stock .
M .. Nursery Stock .
All nursery stock shall conform to the current edition of the American Standards for Nursery Stock as sponsored by the American Association of Nurserymen Inc. III .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges All plants shall be fully representative of their normal species or varieties unless otherwise specified .
All plants must have a good healthy wellformed upper growth a fibrous compact root system and must be free from disease injurious insects mechanical wounds either fresh or healed broken branches decay or any other defect and shall be legibly tagged with their names .
All plant materials shall be dug with reasonable care and skill immediately prior to shipment .
Coniferous Evergreens shall be dug before spring candling of new growth .
Special precautions shall be taken to avoid any unnecessary injury to or removal of fibrous roots .
Each species or variety shall be handled and packed in the approved manner for that particular plant having regard to the soil and climatic conditions at the time and place of digging transit and delivery and to the time that will be consumed in transit .
All precautions that are customary in good trade practice shall be taken to ensure the arrival of the plants at the site of the project in good condition for successful growth .
All plants which are to be balled and burlapped previous to shipment are designated B B. Balled and burlapped plants shall be lifted so as to retain as many fibrous roots as possible .
The burlap shall be untreated gramssquare meter burlap and firmly held in place by a stout cord or wire .
Nails shall not be used except in the case of broadleafed evergreens or other similar plants .
All plants that are balled and burlapped shall come from soil which will hold a firm ball and the solidity of the ball shall be carefully preserved .
The roots of barerooted material shall be carefully protected with wet straw moss or other suitable material which will ensure the arrival of the plants at the site of the work in good condition .
Deciduous Trees The sizes of these trees shall be as called for on the plans and measurements shall be made by calipering at a point millimeters above the collar .
a Nonflowering trees shall have been transplanted times the last transplanting within years .
They shall have a single straight leader not cut back .
They shall have a symmetrical development of strong healthy branches beginning .
meters to meters from the ground and below this point the trunk shall be clean for street trees although park trees will be permitted to branch lower .
b Flowering trees shall have been transplanted twice the last transplanting within years .
The trunk shall be clean and straight up to the first branch which shall be about meter from the ground .
Grafted and budded trees may branch lower and be pruned off millimeters from the ground where directed .
Flowering trees shall be balled and burlapped and kept moist for delivery .
Deciduous Shrubs Deciduous shrubs shall be fully representative of their species and variety .
They shall have been transplanted twice the last transplanting within years .
They shall have to branches coming from the roots shall have a wellbranched root system and shall be of good size for the height and specified .
Evergreen Trees Evergreen trees shall have been transplanted times the last transplanting within years .
They shall have a good colored top growth and shall be balled and burlapped and kept moist for delivery .
Evergreen trees shall conform to AAN specifications specified spread shall govern over height requirements .
Evergreen Shrubs Evergreen shrubs shall have been transplanted twice and shall have a heavy darkgreen foliage .
They shall be of the size indicated on the plans and except where noted each clump shall have not less than stems .
Plants shall be balled and burlapped and kept moist for delivery .
Vines and Trailers Vines and ground cover in this group shall be year No .
stock unless otherwise indicated on the plans .
Herbaceous Perennials Herbaceous plants in this group shall be year stocks and clumps shall have not less than buds eyes or crowns .
Seedlings Seedlings shall have well developed root systems and shall be acclimated and suitable in all respects for field planting .
All conifers must have dormant buds and secondary needles .
Evergreen seedlings shall be two year transplants bare rooted .
Lining out stock seedlings shall be two year seedlings .
III .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges Root cuttings shall be established in peat pots millimeters deep by millimeters wide at the open end and tapered to millimeters wide at the closed end inside measure .
M .. Tree Paint .
The paint furnished under this specification shall be suitable for application by brushing on sawed cut or bruised surfaces of living trees for the purpose of disinfection and protection of these surfaces .
The raw materials from which this paint is manufactured shall be as follows .
Asphalt Shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M Grade A. . Creosote Shall be a distillate of coalgas tar or cokeoven tar conforming to AASHTO M . .
Fibrous Magnesium Silicate Pigment Not less than passing through a micrometer screen by mass .
Composition Asphalt Creosote Fibrous Magnesium Silicate Volatile Thinner The proportions of the various ingredients shall be chosen within the above limits to yield paint of medium brushing consistency .
M .. Materials for Guying and Staking .
For Type I a and b Staking The stakes shall be unpainted spruce or other suitable wood free from large knots dimensioned millimeters x millimeters x . meters .
Binding straps shall be .
millimeters diameter galvanized steel wire .
Stake fastenings shall be penny galvanized nails .
For Type II Guying The guy wire shall consist of .
millimeter diameter doublegalvanized steel wire .
The anchor stake shall be made from locust cedar or other suitable hard wood and shall be at least millimeters in length and millimeters x millimeters in cross section .
Protective hose required to cover the wires used for Type I and II staking and guying shall be approved commercial millimeters High Pressure reinforced hose and a minimum length of millimeters .
M .. Wrapping Material .
Wrapping Material for tree trunks shall be millimeter to millimeter wide strips of burlap paper or plastic manufactured for this purpose .
Fastening for the wrapping material shall be either adhesive weather resistant tape or a minimum of ply jute twine .
M .. Water for Irrigation .
Water used for irrigation of plant materials shall be free from any substance injurious to vegetation such as oil acids alkalis and salts .
III .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges SECTION M PAINTS AND PROTECTIVE COATINGS M .. General Requirements for Paints and Protective Coatings .
A .
General .
All paint shall conform to the following general requirements. . Materials .
The raw materials used in the following specifications for paints and protective coatings shall conform to the specification designed by ASTM Federal serial number or AASHTO unless specified otherwise in the individual specification .
Subsequent amendments to the specifications quoted shall apply to all raw materials and finished products .
No or equal substitution for any specified material shall be made without written consent of the Engineer. . Proportions .
Paint proportions and percentages given in the following specification are expressed by mass unless stated otherwise . .
Condition in the Container .
Paint and protective coatings shall be homogenous free of contaminant and of a consistency suitable for use in the capacity for which it is specified .
The finished product shall be well ground and the pigment shall be properly dispersed and suspended in the vehicle according to the requirements of the paint or protective coating .
The dispersion shall be of such nature that the pigment does not settle badly does not cake or thicken in the container and does not become granular jelled or curdled .
Any settlement of pigment in the paint or protective coating shall be a thoroughly wetted soft mushy mass permitting the complete and easy vertical penetration of a paddle .
Settled pigment shall be easily dispersed with a minimum resistance to the sidewise manual motion of the paddle across the bottom of the container to form a smooth uniform product of the proper consistency .
The manufacturer shall include in the paint the necessary additives for control of sagging pigment settling leveling and other qualities of a satisfactory working material .
The paint shall possess satisfactory properties in all respects which affect its application and curing. . Packaging .
The finished paint or protective coating shall be furnished in new liter round nontapered containers no thinner than .
millimeter unless otherwise specified .
The containers shall have the lug type crimp lids with ring seals and be equipped with ears and bails .
The containers shall meet U.S. Department of Transportation Hazardous Materials Shipping Regulations .
The container must be lined if necessary so as to prevent attack by the paint .
The lining must not come off the can as skins .
The following information shall be labeled on each can in a clear legible manner a Name of Manufacturer b Place of Manufacture c Manufacturers Batch Number d MHD Specification Number e Date of Manufacture Precautions concerning the handling and the application of the paint or protective coating shall be shown on the label .
B .
Sampling and Testing. . Sampling .
At least one sample not less than one liter shall be taken for each batch or less of each kind of paint to be used .
Samples must be taken in clean dry airtight widemouth metal cans and the sample must fill the can to within millimeters from the top .
Each sample forwarded to the Research and Materials Section shall be accompanied by the name of the manufacturer the batch number the specification number and the quantity of paint represented .
Before the Contractor will be permitted to use any paint the material proposed to be used shall have been sampled tested and approved .
III .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges The manufacturer as may be required by the Engineer shall permit access to an inspection of hisher paint and all operations involved in the manufacture of these materials shall permit sampling of raw materials and shall furnish such reasonable facilities as the Engineer may require for such inspection . .
Testing .
Testing of paints will be done at the Research and Materials Section in accordance with the latest methods of Federal Test Method Standard Number ASTM and Methods in use by the Research and Materials Section .
In addition the Department reserves the right to make use of any information or methods of testing to determine the quality of paint and paint materials .
The manufacturer may obtain dry color chips from the Research and Materials Section in order to obtain the proper sample color if heshe so desires or heshe may submit a wet sample of the paint which heshe proposes to furnish .
If the color of the wet sample is approved paints matching the wet sample will as regards to color be accepted .
The Contractor shall assume all costs arising from the use of patented materials equipment devices or processes used or incorporated in the work and agrees to indemnify and save harmless the Commonwealth of Massachusetts and its duly authorized representative from all suits at law or action of every nature for or on account of the use of any patented materials equipment device or processes .
A listing of the paints is below .
Any copies of individual specifications or a complete set of the specifications may be obtained from the Research and Materials Section D Street South Boston Massachusetts .
M. Pavement Markings .
M .. White Thermoplastic Reflectorized Pavement Markings M .. Yellow Thermoplastic Reflectorized Pavement Markings M .. Glass Beads M .. Black NonReflective Lane Tape M .. White and Yellow Temporary Reflective Lane Tape M .. Preformed Permanent Plastic Pavement Markings or Legends M .. Thermoplastic Pavement Marking Compound Alkyd M .. Green Pavement Coatings M .. Fast Drying White WaterBorne Traffic Paint M .. Fast Drying Yellow WaterBorne Traffic Paint M. Structural Paint .
M .. Zinc Rich Primer Organic Vehicle Type M .. Inorganic Zinc Rich Primer M .. Epoxy Ester Based Zinc Rich Primer M. Enamels .
M .. Sign and Equipment Enamel M. Miscellaneous Coatings .
M .. Coal Tar Protective Coatings M .. Primer Paint Exterior Undercoat for Wood Ready Mixed White and Tints M ..
Paint Ready Mixed International Orange M ..
Paint Exterior Black Ready Mixed M .. Primer Coating Zinc DustZinc Oxide for galvanized surfaces M .. Enamel Undercoat Interior Tints and White III .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges M ..
Paint Outside DullBlack Formula M .. Primer Pretreatment Formula for Metals M ..
Paint High Zinc Dust Content Galvanizing Repair M. Epoxy Protective Coating .
M .. Epoxy Polyamide Concrete Coating M .. One Coat High Build Epoxy Mastic Coating M .. Epoxy Polyamide Primer Paint non lead M .. Brown Epoxy Polyamide Top Coat non lead M .. Green Epoxy Polyamide Top Coat non lead M .. One Coat Hi Build Mastic Coating M .. Coal Tar Epoxy Polyamide Paint M .. SelfPriming Epoxy Coating Or those coatings listed in the Departments Qualified Product Listing .
M .. Galvanized Coatings .
All galvanized coatings shall conform to the following general requirements ASTM A Safeguarding Against Embrittlement of HotDip Galvanized Structural Steel Products and Procedure for Detecting Embrittlement .
ASTM A Safeguarding Against Warpage and Distortion during HotDip Galvanizing of Steel Assemblies .
ASTM A Providing HighQuality Zinc Coatings HotDip .
AASHTO M Zinc HotGalvanized Coatings on Products Fabricated from Rolled Pressed and Forged Steel Shapes Plates Bars and Strip .
AASHTO M Zinc Coating HotDip on Iron and Steel Hardware .
The zinc used shall conform to AASHTO M and shall be at least equal to the grade designated as Prime Western .
A range of .
to .
nickel by mass shall be added to the galvanized bath .
AASHTO M Coating of Zinc mechanically deposited on iron or steel .
III .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges SECTION M METALS AND RELATED MATERIALS M .. General .
Steel for reinforcing shall be free from imperfections dirt loose scale paint oil or other foreign substance that might tend to prevent bonding with concrete .
Rust that occurs in scales or that pits the steel will be considered an imperfection .
Surface rust will not be considered an imperfection but the surface shall be brushed to remove loose material .
All welding and welding material shall conform to the requirements of the AASHTOAWS Bridge Welding Code ANSIAASHTOAWS D. unless otherwise specified .
Steel castings shall be true to pattern in form and dimensions without sharp unfilleted angles or corners and shall be free from pouring faults sponginess cracks blow holes and other defects in positions affecting their strength and value for the service intended .
Iron castings shall be true to pattern in form dimensions free from pouring faults sponginess cracks blow holes and other defects in positions affecting their strength and value for the service intended .
The casting shall be boldly filleted at angles and the arises shall be sharp and perfect .
The surfaces shall have a workmanlike finish .
Aluminum castings shall be of uniform quality and condition free from cracks blow holes porous places hard spots or shrinkage defects which affect the suitability of the castings for their intended use .
Sampling and Testing .
Samples for testing shall be taken in accordance with the applicable ASTM andor AASHTO specification for the material unless otherwise specified .
Testing will be done in accordance with latest standard procedures of ASTM andor AASHTO .
M ..
Reinforcing Bars .
Reinforcing bars shall consist of deformed bars unless otherwise specified .
The bars shall be rolled from new billet steel conforming to the requirements of AASHTO M Grade .
Deformed steel will not be required for spiral reinforcing columns .
M ..
Cold Drawn Steel Wire .
This material shall conform to AASHTO M . M .. Welded Steel Wire Fabric .
This material shall conform to AASHTO M . M .. Steel Bar Mats .
This material shall conform to AASHTO M . M ..
Tie Bars and Bolts .
Tie bars for longitudinal joints shall be either deformed bars of new billet steel AASHTO M M Grade or approved tie bolts as shown on the plans which shall conform in all respects to the standard requirements specified for strength and design .
III .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges M .. Anchor Bolts Nuts and Washers .
Bolts nuts and washers used for anchoring bridge railing base plates to concrete shall be fabricated from steel conforming to the requirements of ASTM A .
No rotation capacity testing shall be required .
Bolts nuts and washers used for anchoring bridge bearings to concrete shall conform to the requirements of ASTM A or ASTM A . Bolts nuts and washers used for anchoring signal lighting and sign structures shall conform to the requirements of one of the following AASHTO M Grade with a minimum yield strength of MPa .
ASTM A Type II with a minimum yield strength of MPa .
AASHTO M Grade with a minimum yield strength of MPa .
AASHTO M with a minimum yield strength of MPa tensile strength of MPa to MPa and maximum elongation of in millimeters .
Nuts and washers for the above shall be suited to the approved bolts .
High tension bolts where specified shall conform to AASHTO M . A galvanized hexagon nut leveling nut and flat washer shall be furnished with each bolt .
All bolts nuts and washers shall be galvanized in accordance with AASHTO M . M .. Anchor Rods Prestressed Beams .
Anchor rods shall be steel conforming to AASHTO M Grade and shall be hot dipped galvanized in accordance with AASHTO M . The galvanizing bath shall contain nickel .
to .
by mass .
M .. Epoxy Coated Reinforcing Bars .
Epoxy coated reinforcing bars shall be bars conforming to M .. and shall be epoxy coated in accordance with AASHTO M . M .. Galvanized Reinforcing Bars Galvanized reinforcing bars shall be bars conforming to M .. and shall be galvanized in accordance with ASTM A M. M ..
Drill Steel Rods .
This material shall conform to the requirements of ANSIW .
M .. Iron Castings .
These materials shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M Class No .
unless otherwise specified .
Test bars required shall be Test Bar B . millimeters in diameter .
M .. Steel Castings .
Type A grates shall be cast to the dimensions shown on the plans and composed of cast steel conforming to the requirements of AASHTO M Grade full anneal .
Castings shall be shot blasted prior to painting .
Painting shall consist of a coating system approved by the Departments Research and Materials Section .
III .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges M .. Stud Shear Connectors. . General Requirements .
A. Shear connector studs shall be of a design suitable for end welding to steel beams and girders with automatically timed stud welding equipment .
The type size or diameter and length of stud shall be as specified by the plans specifications or special provisions as approved by the Engineer with the following allowable tolerances and dimensions .
Standard Dimensions Millimeters Diameter of Length of Diameter of Thickness of Shank Welded Stud Head Head .
. . . . . . min .
. . . . . . . . min. . millimeter length is standard .
Other lengths may be obtained by special order .
Length is from outside of head to face of base metal after welding is completed .
B .
An arc shield ferrule of heatresistant ceramic or other suitable material shall be furnished with each stud .
The material shall not be detrimental to the welds or cause excessive slag and shall have sufficient strength so as not to crumble or break due to thermal or structural shock before the weld is completed .
C. Flux for welding shall be furnished with each stud either attached to the end of the stud or combined with the arc shield for automatic application in the welding operation .
D. Studs shall not be painted or galvanized .
E. Only qualified studs shall be used .
A stud to be qualified shall have passed the tests prescribed under Part Shear Connector Stud Weldability Qualification Procedure .
The arc shield used in production shall be the same as used in the qualification tests .
F. Before placing orders for studs the Contractor shall submit to the Engineer for approval the following information on the studs to be purchased .
The name of the manufacturer. . A detailed description of the stud and arc shield to be furnished. . A certification from the manufacturer that the stud is qualified as specified in .E hereinbefore. . A copy of the qualification test report as certified by the testing laboratory .
G. The studs after welding shall be free from any defect or substance which would interfere with their function as shear connectors .
Material Requirements .
A. Shear connector studs shall conform to the requirements of the Specification for Cold Finished Carbon Steel Bars and Shafting AASHTO M colddrawn bar Grades or wither semikilled or killed .
If fluxretaining caps are used the steel for the caps shall be of a low carbon grade suitable for welding and shall comply with ASTM A .
B. Tensile properties as determined by tests of the bar stock after drawing or of finished studs shall conform to the following requirements Tensile Strength MPa minimum Yield Strength MPa minimum Elongation in millimeters minimum Reduction of Area minimum As determined by a . offset method .
III .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges C. Tensile properties shall be determined in accordance with the applicable sections of ASTM A Mechanical Testing of Steel Products .
Tensile tests of finished studs shall be made on studs welded to test plates .
If fractures occur outside of the middle half of the gage length the test shall be repeated .
D. Finished studs shall be of uniform quality and condition free from injurious laps fins seams cracks twists bends or other injurious defects .
Finish shall be as produced by cold drawing cold rolling or machining .
E. The manufacturer shall certify that the studs as delivered are in accordance with the material requirements of this Section .
Certified copies of inplant quality control test reports shall be furnished to the Engineer. . Shear Connector Stud Weldability Qualification Procedure .
A .
Purpose .
The purpose of this procedure is to prescribe weldability tests which will qualify a shear connector stud for welding under shop or field conditions .
The tests may be performed by a university independent laboratory or other testing agency .
The agency performing the tests shall submit to the manufacturer of the stud a certified report giving procedures and results for all tests including the information listed under .H hereinafter .
B .
Duration of Qualification .
A type and size of stud with arc shield once qualified is considered qualified until the manufacturer makes any change in the base of the stud the flux or the arc shield which effect the welding characteristics .
C. Preparation of Specimens .
Test specimens shall be prepared by welding representative studs to the center of square specimen plates to millimeters thick of structural steel AASHTO M . At the option of the manufacturer studs may be welded to a large plate and the specimen plates cut to a size suitable for test equipment used .
Studs shall be welded with power source welding gun and control equipment as recommended by the manufacturer .
Welding voltage current and time see D below shall be measured by suitable instrumentation and recorded for each specimen .
Lift and plunge shall be at the optimum setting as recommended by the manufacturer .
D. Number of Test Specimens. . Thirty test specimens shall be welded consecutively with optimum current and time .
Optimum current and time shall be the midpoint of the range normally recommended by the manufacturer for production welding. . Thirty test specimens shall be welded consecutively with time held constant at optimum but with current below optimum. . Thirty test specimens shall be welded consecutively with time held constant at optimum but with current above optimum .
E. Qualification Tests. . Tensile Tests Ten of the specimens welded in accordance with D. ten in accordance with D. and ten in accordance with D. shall be subjected to a tensile test in a fixture approved by the Departments Research and Materials Section .
A stud shall be considered as qualified if all test specimens have a tensile strength above the minimum specified in .B hereinbefore. . Bend Tests Twenty of the specimens welded in accordance with D. twenty in accordance with D. and twenty in accordance with D. shall be placed in the bend testing device approved by Departments Research and Materials Section and bent alternately in opposite directions until failure occurs .
A stud shall be considered as qualified if on all test specimens fracture occurs in the shank of the stud and not in the weld .
F. Retests .
If a weld failure occurs in any of the tensile or bend tests groups that group may be retested .
If weld failure repeats the stud shall fail to quality .
G. Qualification .
For a manufacturers studs and arc shields to be qualified each group of thirty studs shall by test or retest meet the requirements prescribed in E. and E. above .
H. Report of Tests .
The laboratory report shall include the following a Drawings which show shapes and dimensions with tolerances of studs arc shields and flux .
III .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges b A complete description of materials used in the studs and arc shields including the quantity and analysis of the flux .
c A certification that the studs and arc shields described in the report are qualified in accordance with .G herein .
M .. Steel Pins .
Pins more than millimeters in diameter shall be manufactured from carbon steel conforming to AASHTO M Classes B C and D. Pins millimeters or less in diameter shall conform to AASHTO M Classes B C and D or AASHTO M Grades thru inclusive .
M .. High Tensile Strength Bolts .
Bolts nuts and washers shall conform to the appropriate AASHTO Materials Specification M M M and M as amended herein .
Material .
Hardness for bolts with diameter to millimeters inclusive shall be Brinell HBminimum of HB maximum of or Rockwell HRCminimum of HRCmaximum of .
Plain ungalvanized nuts shall be grades C D or C with a minimum Rockwell hardness of HRB or Brinell hardness HB or heat treated grades H DH or DH .
Galvanized nuts shall be heat treated grades H DH or DH .
For galvanized fasteners the nuts shall be tapped oversize the minimum amount required for the fastener assembly .
The amount of overtap in the nut shall be such that the nut will assemble freely on the bolt in the coated condition and shall meet the mechanical requirements of AASHTO M and the rotationalcapacity tests herein .
The overtapping requirements shown in AASHTO M Section .
shall be considered the maximum values instead of the minimum as currently shown .
Galvanized nuts shall be lubricated with a lubricant containing a dye of any color that contrasts with the color of the galvanizing .
Black fasteners must be oily to the touch when installed .
Weathered or rusted fasteners shall be cleaned and relubricated prior to installation .
Testing .
The tests need not be witnessed by a representative of the Massachusetts Highway Department however the manufacturer or distributor that performs the tests shall certify that the results recorded are accurate .
Documentation shall be in accordance with Subsection .
E. Bolts .
Proof load tests in accordance with ASTM F Method are required .
The minimum frequency of the tests shall be as specified in AASHTO M Section Wedge tests on full size bolts ASTM F Section .
are required .
If the bolts are to be galvanized the tests shall be performed after galvanizing .
Minimum frequency of the tests shall be as specified in AASHTO M Section If galvanized bolts are supplied the thickness of the zinc coating shall be measured .
Measurements shall be taken on the wrench flats or the top of the bolt head .
Nuts .
Proof load tests ASTM F Section .
are required .
Minimum frequency of tests shall be as specified in AASHTO M Section .
or AASHTO M Section If nuts are to be galvanized the tests shall be performed after galvanizing overtapping and lubricating .
If galvanized nuts are supplied the thickness of the zinc coating shall be measured .
Measurements shall be taken on the wrench flats .
Washers .
If galvanized washers are supplied hardness testing shall be performed after galvanizing .
Coating shall be removed prior to taking hardness measurements .
The thickness of the zinc coating shall be measured .
Assemblies .
III .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges Rotationalcapacity tests are required and shall be performed on all black or galvanized after galvanizing bolt nut and washer assemblies by the manufacturer or distributor prior to shipping .
Washers are required as part of the test even though they may not be required as part of the installation .
Test Methods for Normal Length Long and Short Bolts .
Rotational capacity tests shall not be performed on metric bolts pending completion of the Federal Highway Administrations research .
M ..
Structural Steel .
Unless otherwise specified all structural steel shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M Grades or W. Orientation of the test bars for the Charpy VNotch CVN test specimens shall be longitudinal to the direction of final rolling .
CVN impact testing temperatures shall be in accordance with those specified for Zone .
All fabrication shall comply with the provisions of the AASHTOAWS Bridge Welding Code ANSIAASHTOAWS D .. M .. Steel Piles .
Steel piles shall consist of structural steel shapes of the section shown on the plans .
The steel shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M . Copper bearing steel will not be required .
M .. Steel Shells CastinPlace Piles .
This specification covers steel shell type piles where the steel shell is not considered to act as a permanent load carrying member .
Steel shells shall be of sufficient strength and rigidity to permit driving and to prevent distortion caused by soil pressures or the driving of adjacent piles until filled with concrete .
The shells shall be also sufficiently watertight to exclude water during the placing of concrete .
Any pile with a wall thickness greater than millimeters will not be considered a shell for a CastinPlace Pile .
Steel shells for castinplace concrete piles shall have a uniform taper or a combination of uniform sections of increasing diameter or a combination of uniform sections of equal length that increase progressively not more than twice the thickness of the shell at each change in diameter or a uniform section throughout but only one type shall be used for the contract .
The tip shall be of steel fully welded to tightly close the bottom of the pile to make a watertight closure .
Care must be exercised to avoid the use of more than one short section at the butt end when necessary to extend the pile length .
If steel shells consisting of a succession of cylindrical sections of increasing diameter are used all sections shall be of equal length and increasing in diameter by not more than millimeters between adjoining sections from the section at the tip to the section at the butt of the pile .
The minimum tip diameter shall be millimeters .
The minimum butt diameter at the point of cutoff shall be millimeters when the specified loading is kiloNewtons or less or shall be millimeters when the specified loading is over kiloNewtons and less than kiloNewtons .
Steel reinforcement shall conform to the requirements of M .. and shall be as detailed on the plans .
M .. Steel Baffles and Drainage Troughs .
Steel used for the manufacture of baffles and drainage troughs shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M with the additional requirement that the steel shall exhibit a corrosion resistance at least times that of AASHTO M Steel .
III .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges M .. Steel Sheeting .
Steel sheeting shall be an approved standard section either new or used weighing not less than kilograms per square meter of wall .
Steel sheeting which is to be left in place shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M . M .. Steel Pipe Piles .
This specification covers cylindrical steel pipe of uniform cross section and diameter throughout its length and in which the cylindrical pipe acts as a permanent loadcarrying member .
The steel pipe shall be new and shall conform to the requirements of ASTM A Grade except where it is in conflict with other parts of the specifications .
In such cases these Specifications shall govern .
Pipe having seams of spirallap welded construction will not be permitted under this specification .
The outside diameter and wall thickness of the pipe shall be as shown on the plans .
All piles shall be driven as a closed end pipe and filled with concrete conforming to M .. for MPa mm kg cement concrete .
A steel plate having the same outside diameter as the pipe and a thickness as shown on the plans shall be welded to the bottom of the pipe with a full penetration weld using an approved backing ring which shall develop the full strength of the pipe in compression and bending .
The bottom end of the pipe shall be beveled in accordance with the ASTM A specification and the top end of the pipe shall not be beveled .
Steel reinforcement shall conform to the requirements of M .. and shall be as detailed on the plans .
M .. PrecastPrestressed Piles .
Piles shall be standard millimeter square precastprestressed concrete piles designed and manufactured in accordance with the joint AASHTO and PCI Committee recommendations latest revision .
Piles shall support design loads and moments shown on the Plans .
No piles shall be delivered to the site until at least three days after casting and until concrete strength is at least MPa as determined by compression tests on millimeter or millimeter diameter standard concrete cylinders .
M .. Pressure Injected Footing Piles .
Concrete Materials mixing and testing of concrete shall conform to requirements of Section M Cement and Cement Concrete Materials of these Specifications for MPa concrete using millimeters as the nominal maximum size of coarse aggregate .
Zeroslump concrete shall be developed by reducing water in the regularmix concrete to quantities that cause slump to approach zero as measured at the point of discharge into the casing .
Steel Reinforcement Steel reinforcement shall be made of new billet steel complying with AASHTO M Grade or as shown on the drawings .
Permanent Casings Permanent casing where required shall be of steel with strength and rigidity sufficient to prevent distortion caused by driving adjacent piles or collapse due to soil or hydrostatic pressure and to maintain shape .
Casings shall be free from dents and deformations and shall be water tight to assure placing concrete in the dry .
M .. Steel Beam Highway Guard Type SS .
The materials for this work shall conform to the following requirements III .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges A .
Fabrication .
All metal work shall be fabricated in the shop .
No punching cutting or welding shall be done in the field .
Holes for special details in exceptional cases may be made in the field when approved by the Engineer but such holes shall be drilled .
Field punching may be permitted if approved by the Engineer after it has been demonstrated that such punching will not result in damage to the surrounding metal .
Fabrication shall include all operations such as shearing cutting punching forming drilling milling bending welding and riveting .
Components of bolted assemblies shall be galvanized separately before assembly .
When it is necessary to straighten any sections after galvanizing such work shall be performed without damage to the zinc coating .
Galvanized surfaces that are abraded or damaged at any time after application of the zinc coating shall be repaired by thoroughly wire brushing the damaged areas and removing all loose and cracked coating after which the cleaned areas shall be painted with two coats of paint high zinc dust content conforming to the requirements of M B .
Posts. . Steel Posts .
Steel posts and channel members for anchor posts shall be fabricated from new structural steel sections conforming to the dimensions and design shown on the plans .
All posts including end anchor posts and anchor posts for use at drives shall be steel H sections .
All holes drilled in the galvanized post sections shall be cleaned and painted before bolts are installed with two coats of paint high zinc dust content conforming to M Structural steel shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M except that copper bearing steel will not be required .
Galvanizing shall meet the requirements of AASHTO M . Each member shall be stamped with AASHTO designation and the grams of galvanizing per square meter of surface area .
Posts may be of the conventional Hot Rolled Structural Shape or of the Welded Type as approved by the Department. . Wood Posts .
The Posts and Offset Blocks shall be rough sawn unplained with nominal dimensions as indicated on the plans and with tolerances of millimeters in length and millimeters in width and thickness .
All holes in the Posts and Offset Blocks shall be drilled prior to the application of the preservative .
The timber used for Wood Posts and Offset Blocks shall be of the same species .
The Stress Grade shall be .
megaPascals or more extreme fiber in bending .
Testing for Stress Grade shall be in accordance with the Northeastern Lumber Manufacturers Association Inc. Northern Hardwood and Pine Manufacturers Association Inc. Southern Pipe Inspection Bureau West Coast Lumber Inspection Bureau or the Western Wood Products Association Standard Grading Rules .
If another Timber Association is proposed it must receive the approval of the Department before it will be considered or accepted .
Prior to treatment all Posts and Offset Blocks shall be seasoned conditioned and completely machined in accordance with AWPA Standard M. Posts and Offset Blocks shall be treated with either chromated copper arsenate CCA or ammoniacal copper arsenate ACA .
Treatment shall be full length under pressure by the emptycell or fullcell process in accordance with AWPA Standards C and C. The preservatives minimum retention thereof and applicable AWPA standards are listed in the following table Preservative Retention AWPA kgm of Post Standards ACA .
P CCA Type A . P CCA Type B . P CCA Type C . P When water borne preservatives are used temperature requirements as stipulated in Section .
of AWPA Standard C shall be closely regulated .
Species of wood that are difficult to penetrate shall be incised in III .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges accordance with Section .
of AWPA Standard C. No unnecessary cutting of treated posts will be allowed after treatment .
All posts and blocks with surfaces damaged by cutting drilling or any other cause shall be field treated with a hot preservative solution in accordance with AWPA Standard M. Preservatives used for this purpose shall be the same as those used for the basic treatment and shall conform to the same specifications .
Certificates of compliance and certificates of inspection for each lot of Wood Posts and Offset Blocks must be presented before any Posts are installed .
The certificates bearing the approved inspection agencies verification must specify the species .
The certificates of inspection and compliance do not signify mandatory acceptance of the entire lot .
The Engineer still has the option of rejecting Posts or Offset Blocks included in any particular lot that heshe may consider substandard because of unsound knots and shakes excessive checking or other defects that may be detrimental to the structural integrity of the posts or offset blocks .
The fabricator shall retain a Department approved Agency to inspect and certify the treated Posts and Blocks in accordance with these specifications and AWPA Standard M. All treated Posts shall be marked in accordance with AWPA Standards M and M. The mark is to include the identifying lot number .
The Post shall also be stamped with the Inspectors identification .
The mark is to be placed on an upper side of the Post and located so that it is not obstructed by the offset blocks rails or any other appurtenances .
The Inspectors stamp shall be legibly hammerstamped on the head of the post in accordance with AWP Standard M and the above .
C. Rail Element and Terminal Sections .
The steel rail element and terminal sections shall conform to AASHTO M Class A base metal thickness .
millimeters Type with the following additions The length of the railing shall be according to the plans and not over .
meters .
Each end of the steel rail for every stretch of guard shall be fitted with a terminal section as shown on the plans .
The terminal section shall have the same splice detail as the rail .
The projecting heads of all connection and splice bolts shall be rounded and shallow so that no appreciable projection will obstruct a vehicle sliding along the rail .
Where railing is to be constructed on curves which have a radius of meters or less the rail elements shall be fabricated to the proper radius with the road side of the rail either concave or convex as required .
D. Bolts Nuts and Washers .
All bolts nuts and washers used in assembling and erecting the rail shall conform to the requirements of ASTM A and shall be of the size shown on the plans .
They shall be designed to develop the required joint strength .
Galvanizing shall be by the hotdip process to conform to the requirements of AASHTO M . M .. Chain Link Fences and Gates Chain link fences and gates shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M Chain Link Fence .
Fence height gage and details shall be specified in the contract documents .
Fabric Type I II III or IV .
The fabric shall be woven in a mesh size of millimeters .
Metallic coated steel posts rails or gate frames shall be Grade or .
Type fabric shall be Class D and Type tension wire shall be Class .
M .. Woven Wire Fence A. Woven Wire Fencing .
Woven wire fencing may be either galvanized steel wire fencing or aluminum coated steel wire fencing .
Galvanized steel wire fencing shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M Class Design Number .
Aluminum coated steel wire fencing shall conform to the requirements of ASTM A .
Design numbers .
B. Barbed Wire .
Barbed wire may be either galvanized steel barbed wire or aluminum coated steel barbed wire consisting of strands of gage wire with point barbs of gage wire spaced millimeters apart .
Galvanized barbed wire shall conform to the Specifications for zinccoated galvanized steel barbed wire III .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges AASHTO M Class with a minimum coating of gramssquare meter of wire surface .
Aluminum coated steel barbed wire shall conform to the Specifications for galvanized steel barbed wire except the wire shall be aluminum coated .
The wire shall have not less than grams coating of aluminum alloy per square meter of uncoated surface .
The weight of the aluminum alloy coating shall be determined in accordance with AASHTO T . C. Brace Wires .
Brace wires shall be galvanized or aluminum alloy coated gage steel wire conforming to the Specifications for galvanized steel or aluminum alloy coated fencing .
D. Metal Posts .
Metal posts shall be the shapes and dimensions shown on the plans .
Line posts shall include a firmly attached taper anchor plate having an area of not less than square millimeters .
The anchor plate shall be fabricated form not less than gage thickness steel .
Steel pipe for metal posts shall be steel pipe Type A Type B or Type C in accordance with Article ..
Structural shapes for posts shall be fabricated from steel conforming to the requirements of AASHTO M . Grades A or B .
All structural shapes shall be galvanized in accordance with AASHTO M using zinc of any grade conforming to the requirements of AASHTO M . The zinc coating shall be not less than gramssquare meter of surface .
Square hollow structural tubing shall conform to the requirements of ASTM A Grade B or ASTM A .
The tubing shall be galvanized inside and outside in accordance with AASHTO M using zinc of any grade conforming to the requirements of AASHTO M . The coating shall be not less than gramssquare meter of surface .
E. Metal Braces .
Metal braces shall have the shapes and dimensions shown on the plans .
They shall conform to the Specifications for metal posts .
either steel pipe or structural shapes and shall be galvanized as specified for the metal posts .
F. Gate Frames .
Gate frames shall consist of galvanized steel pipe having the dimensions shown on the plans and conforming to the specifications for steel pipe line posts .
G. Miscellaneous Materials .
Miscellaneous materials such as but not limited to wire clips or other metal devices for fastening the barbed wire and fencing to the posts shall be of good commercial quality and galvanized wire .
H. Post Tops .
Steel pipe and steel tubing posts shall be furnished with steel or malleable iron or wrought iron post tops of approved type and shall be galvanized in accordance with AASHTO M . M .. Steel Pipe Rail or Fence .
Materials for this work shall conform to the following requirements A. Rails and Posts .
Steel pipe for rails and posts shall conform to requirements of ASTM A Grade B. Galvanized pipe ordered under this specification shall be coated with zinc inside and outside by the hotdip process .
The mass of zinc coating shall be not less than grams per square meter of surface area .
B. Fittings .
All fittings shall be steel conforming to ASTM A .
They shall be galvanized in accordance with AASHTO M . C. Lead Wool .
Lead wool for caulking shall be of standard manufacture and shall be approved for such use by the Engineer .
D. Bitumen .
Bitumen for use with pipe sleeves shall be approved for that use by the Engineer .
M .. Aluminum Pipe Rail or Fence .
Materials for this work shall conform to the following requirements A .
General .
All materials shall be new and free from any surface coatings of paint or other materials .
All castings shall be sound free from blowholes or other imperfections and have smooth surfaces .
III .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges B .
Steel anchor bolts nuts and washers shall conform to M C. Stainless Steel screws shall conform to ASTM A Grade B. D. Rails posts and bases shall conform to ASTM B Alloy T or Alloy T. E. Splices and clamp bars shall conform to ASTM B Alloy T. F. Rivets shall conform to ASTM B Alloy T. G. Aluminum washers shall conform to ASTM B Alloy Alclad T. H. End plugs shall conform to ASTM B Alloy SAF or SG AF .
I .
Aluminum Screen Frame shall conform to ASTM B Alloy T. J .
Aluminum Screen Fabric shall conform to ASTM B Alloy T. M ..
Bronze SelfLubricating Bearing Plates .
The selflubricating bronze plates shall conform to one of the following materials as called for on the design drawings A. Leaded Tin Bronze conforming to the requirements of AASHTO M Alloy D modified to the extent that .
to .
lead will be required .
B. Tin Bronze conforming to the requirements of AASHTO M UNSC .
Finishes and Tolerances .
The surfaces of the bronze and steel plates which bear upon each other shall have a surface roughness not exceeding .
micrometers when measured in accordance with American Standards Association B. for surface roughness waviness and lay .
The lay of the tool marks shall be in the direction of expansion or contraction of the bridge .
The flat surfaces of the bronze and steel plates which bear upon each other shall be flat within .
millimeters per millimeter of length and width .
Bronze Bearing plates having radial convex surfaces shall have a negative tolerance of micrometers maximum and a positive tolerance of micrometers on the specified radius .
Concave radial surfaces of steel bearing plates shall have a positive tolerance of micrometers maximum and a negative tolerance of micrometers on the specified radius .
Lubricated Recesses .
The recesses for the containment of the solid lubricant in the bronze bearing plates shall consist of annular rings or drilled holes with a minimum vertical wall depth of .
millimeters .
The recesses shall be arranged in a geometric pattern in such a manner that each successive row shall overlap in the direction of motion .
The entire area of all bearing surfaces which have provision for motion shall be lubricated by means of these lubricant filled recesses .
The total area of these recesses shall comprise not less than nor more than of the total bearing area of the plate .
Lubricant .
The lubricant for filling the recesses shall be of the solid type and shall consist of graphite and metallic lubricants with a lubricating binder .
The lubricant shall be compressed into the lubrication recesses by hydraulic pressure of at least five times the design unit loading as shown on the contract drawings to form a dense nonplastic insert which shall project not less than .
millimeter above the surface of the bronze bearing plate .
Testing .
A selflubricating bronze test plate measuring not less than millimeters long by millimeters wide shall be prepared and shall conform to one of the above materials and all other requirements of the specifications .
An assembly consisting of the fixed selflubricating test plate and a movable steel plate shall be subjected to the design vertical unit loading specified in the contract drawing .
The steel plate shall then be subjected to not less than cycles of horizontal movement at a speed not to exceed cycles per minute .
Each cycle shall consist of a forward and return movement of not more than millimeters in each direction .
The recorded horizontal force divided by the recorded vertical force shall be established as the coefficient of friction between the sliding surfaces .
The coefficient of friction determined by the foregoing method shall not exceed ..
If the tests indicate a coefficient of friction greater than .
the entire lot of solid lubricant shall be rejected .
III .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges Where no inspection of materials is arranged for by the Party of the First Part and before such materials are incorporated into the work the manufacturer of the bronze bearings will be required to certify that the bronze bearing material with lubricant when tested as hereinbefore described shall not have a coefficient of friction greater than .. Batches of solid lubricant that successfully meet the friction coefficient requirements shall be properly identified by the manufacturer with a lot number and date marked Approved for use on Commonwealth of Massachusetts projects .
Preparation of Mating Steel Plates .
The sliding surfaces of the mating steel plates shall be coated just prior to installation with a liquid lubricant recommended and furnished in sealed containers by the manufacturer of the bronze bearing plates .
Material Certifications .
Certified copies of the chemical analysis and physical properties of the bronze used in manufacturing of the bearing plates shall be supplied for each project .
Certifications shall be identified with the heat numbers of the bronze solid lubricant lot numbers and a statement that the solid lubricant used in the manufacture of the bronze bearing plates has successfully passed the test requirements of this specification .
M .. Bridge Railings Aluminum Types AL AL .
Materials used in the fabrication of aluminum bridge railings shall conform to the following requirements A .
General .
All materials shall be new and free of paint or other materials .
All castings shall be sound free from blowholes or other imperfections and have smooth surfaces .
B .
Steel anchor bolts nuts and washers shall conform to M C. Stainless Steel screws shall conform to ASTM A Grade B. D. Rails posts and bases shall conform to ASTM B Alloy T. E. Splices and clamp bars shall conform to ASTM B Alloy T. F. Rivets shall conform to ASTM B Alloy T. G. Aluminum washers shall conform to ASTM B Alloy Alclad T. H. End plugs shall conform to ASTM B Alloy .F .
I. Tubular Pickets shall conform to ASTM B Alloy T. M .. Bridge Railing Steel Type SPL .
Materials used in the fabrication of the steel bridge rail shall conform to the following requirements A .
General .
All structural steel shall be new and shall be blast cleaned prior to fabrication in accordance with Section .C .
The fabricator shall be approved by the Engineer in compliance with the requirements of Section .A .
B .
Steel anchor bolts nuts and washers shall conform to M Anchor plate shall conform to AASHTO M . C. Steel posts and base plates shall conform to AASHTO M Grade .
D. Steel rail and tubular pickets shall conform to ASTM A Grade C. E. Rail splice tube plates and picket carrier angles shall conform to AASHTO M Grade .
F. Threaded Welded Studs .
Stainless steel threaded welded studs conforming to ASTM A which have been annealed after cold working shall be used to attach the rail tubes to the posts .
Threaded welded studs conforming to ASTM A shall be used to attach the tubular pickets to the carrier angles the picket panel assembly to the rails .
All threaded studs shall be supplied with nuts washers and lock washers .
Stud welding shall conform to the current edition of the ANSIAASHTOAWS D. Bridge Welding Code .
The ferrules used in stud welding shall be kept clean and dry and shall be stored at a temperature of C. G. Rubbercotton duck bearing pad shall conform to M III .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges M .. Metal BinType Retaining Wall .
Metal sheets used in fabricating the retaining wall shall be of U.S. Standard Gauge thickness as specified on the plans but no unit shall be formed from sheets thinner than .
millimeters .
The base metal and spelter coating shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M . All bolts and nuts used in the erection of the wall shall be galvanized .
Bolts shall have a diameter of millimeters and a minimum length of millimeters measured from the underside of the bolt head .
M .. Load Transfer Assembly .
A .
Load transfer assemblies for transverse joints shall consist of slipbars and a metal device so designed as to hold the slipbars exactly and firmly in their correct positions during concreting operations .
The complete assembly shall conform to the requirements and dimensions as shown on the plans or as approved by the Engineer .
B .
The slipbars shall be fabricated from either plain new billet steel of the grade designated or plain rail steel .
They shall be free from burring or other deformations restricting slippage in the concrete .
C. One half the length of each slipdowel bar of load transfer units shall be rendered bondless with a coat of either a graphite lubricant or a wax base grease . .
The graphite lubricant shall consist of flake graphite mixed with a vehicle having quick drying characteristics .
The graphite paste shall be thoroughly mixed and have the following composition percentage by mass .
Minimum Maximum Pigment Flake Graphite Graphite Carbon Passing m Passing m Vehicle Vehicle shall consist of fixed oils remainder to be volatile thinners and driers .
To prepare lubricant for application approximately .
to .
kilograms of the graphite paste shall be placed in a suitable container and by mass of a suitable solvent mixture shall be added thereto .
The resulting lubricant shall be thoroughly mixed . .
The wax base grease shall be applied hot at temperatures of C to C. It shall conform to the following requirements a Consistency cone penetration at C b Melting point C minimum c Stability No separation at C to C for hour d Abrasives Free from abrasives e Volatile matter by mass max .
when heated at C . C for hr f Drying Shall not dry in days g Corrosion There shall be no evidence of corrosion on steel .
h Acidity pH minimum i Adhesion Shall not slip sag or drip at C j Removability Shall be readily removable with a cleaning solvent M .. Strand Chuck .
The chuck shall be of a design suitable for securely gripping high tensile strand steel without deformation or slippage .
It shall be manufactured from a corrosion resistant steel alloy capable of withstanding repeated use and III .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges overload conditions in excess of the ultimate tensile strength of the strand without fatigue or failure .
The surface body of the chuck shall be treated to increase corrosion resistance .
M .. Electrical Wire Cable .
This specification covers all electrical wire and cable for traffic control devices signals highway lighting signs and supports .
Unless otherwise specified all wire and cable herein are for copper conductors rated for volts all traffic signal cable conductors shall not be less than No .
AWG solid or stranded and all conductors for mast arm wiring shall be not less than No .
AWG stranded .
M ..
Type Traffic Signal Cable Installed above ground or in Duct .
Traffic signal cable shall be thermoplastic and conform to requirements of IMSA Specification .
M ..
Type Traffic Signal Cable Installed above ground or in Duct .
Traffic signal cable shall be thermoplastic and conform to requirements of IMSA Specification .
M .. Traffic Signal Cable Installed above ground .
Traffic signal cable shall be thermoplastic and conform to requirements of IMSA Specification or .
M ..
Type Traffic Signal Cable Installed above ground .
Traffic signal cable shall be thermoplastic and conform to requirements of IMSA Specification or .
M ..
Type Traffic Signal Cable Direct Burial .
Traffic signal cable shall be thermoplastic and conform to requirements of IMSA Specification or .
M ..
Type Traffic Signal Wire TFF or TEW .
Traffic signal head wire shall be color coded No .
AWG or larger conforming to requirements of UL Standard UL Flexible Cord and Fixture Wire for TFF or TEW listed wire .
M ..
Type General Purpose Wire RHH RHW or XHHW .
General Purpose Wire shall conform to requirements of UL Standard UL RubberInsulated Wires and Cable .
M ..
Type Direct Burial Wire USE .
Direct burial wire shall be insulated as specified for Type and conform to requirements of UL Standard UL ServiceEntrance Cables for USE listed cable .
M ..
Type Special Purpose Wire TWTHWUF .
Special purpose wire shall be TW or THW conforming to requirements of UL Standard UL ThermoplasticInsulated Wires or UF conforming to the requirements of UL Standard UL Nonmetallic Sheathed and Underground Feeder Cables as specified .
III .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges M ..
Type Grounding and Bonding Wire Solid or Standard Insulated or Bare .
Ground and bonding wire shall be copper conforming to requirements of ASTM B for soft or annealed copper wire ASTM B for stranded copper wire .
Where wire is provided with an individual covering the covering shall be finished a continuous green color or a continuous green color with one or more yellow stripes .
M .. Shielded Loop Detector LeadIn Cable .
Two conductor No .
AWG tinned copper stranded x conductors polyethylene insulated .
millimeters thick conductors cabled aluminumpolyester shield shielding No .
AWG stranded tinned copper drain wire .
Chrome vinyl outer jacket .
millimeters thick nominal cable outside diameter .
millimeters and conform to the requirements of IMSA Specification .
M ..
Type MultiConductor Heavy Duty Portable Power Cord .
This material shall conform to the requirements of Underwriters Laboratories Standard UL Flexible Cord and Fixture Wire for Type Volt flexible cord .
M ..
Type Loop Detector Wire THHN with Tube .
Loop detector wire shall be PVC insulated nylon jacketed loose encased in a PVC or PE tube and conform to requirements of IMSA Specification .
M ..
Ground Rod .
Ground Rods shall be nominal millimeter diameter measured diameter shall not be less than millimeters by a minimum of .
meter long copper bonded to steel rod with bolt type clamps conforming to the requirements of UL .
M .. Signal Posts .
Signal posts shall be millimeter standard seamless steel pipe conforming to ASTM A Grade A or B. Interiors shall be coated as specified in Underwriters Laboratories UL for enameled conduit or aluminum conduit conforming to M .. C. M .. Octagonal Bases .
Octagonal Bases shall be cast iron conforming to AASHTO M or cast aluminum alloy SGA ASTM B B . M .. Pedestal Bases .
Pedestal Bases shall be made of not less than .
millimeter steel and galvanized after fabrication to meet the requirements of AASHTO M or cast aluminum alloy SGA ASTM B B . M .. Aluminum Signal Posts Bases .
Aluminum signal posts shall be tapered seamless tube aluminum alloy ASTM B B B having a minimum wall thickness of .
millimeters .
The posts shall taper from approximately millimeters at the base to millimeters at the top .
The post shall have a satin brush finish .
The transformer base shall be of cast aluminum alloy SGA ASTM B B and shall be provided with means for grounding III .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges and a waterproof door for wiring purposes .
The post shall be wrapped for protection during handling and shipping .
The base shall be capable of being mounted on a concrete foundation with a millimeter bolt circle .
M .. Mast Arms .
Mast arms shall be made of aluminum or steel as specified .
A .
Aluminum .
Shaft Aluminum alloy ASTM B B B . . Base flange Aluminum alloy SGA ASTM B B . . Transformer base Aluminum alloy SGA ASTM B B . .
Arm Aluminum alloy ASTM B B B . . Shaft cap Aluminum alloy SGA or SA ASTM B B or aluminum alloy ASTM B . . Hardware Stainless steel. . Anchor bolt covers Aluminum alloy SGA SGB or SA ASTM B B B or aluminum alloy ASTM B .
B .
Steel .
Shaft ASTM A Grade A or ASTM A Grade or AASHTO M Grade . . Base flange ASTM A or ASTM A Class A or AASHTO M Grade or AASHTO M . . Transformer base SAE or AASHTO M . .
Arm ASTM A Grade A or ASTM A Grade or ASTM A Grade B or AASHTO M . . Shaft cap ASTM A Class A. . Hardware Stainless steel or ASTM A or AASHTO M . A and M hardware shall be galvanized in accordance with AASHTO M . . Anchor bolt covers ASTM A or ASTM A Class A or AASHTO M Grade or AASHTO M . . Galvanizing AASHTO M or M as applicable .
When a steel other than those listed above is proposed for use the weldability of the steel and the welding procedure shall be established by the requirements prescribed by the Engineer prior to review of the material for approval .
M .. Steel Supports .
Tapered components shall be fabricated from steel conforming to ASTM A Grade A or ASTM A Grade or AASHTO M Grade .
Seamless steel pipe shall conform to ASTM A .
Hot formed welded and seamless carbon steel square rectangular and special shape structural tubing shall conform to ASTM A . Coldformed welded and seamless carbon steel round square rectangular and special shape structural tubing shall conform to ASTM A Grade C. All other standard structural shapes shall conform to AASHTO M . Gussets flanges baseplates wing plates and connecting end plates shall be of steel plate conforming to AASHTO M . For baseplates that are more than millimeters in thickness AASHTO M Grade may be used .
Anchor bolts shall conform to Subsection M All flange bolts complete with hexagon nuts and washers shall be of high strength steel conforming to ASTM A Grade B or AASHTO M . The bolts and attached nuts shall be hotdip galvanized conforming to AASHTO M . III .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges Truss and cantilever beam connections shall be furnished with the necessary beam support clamps .
The ends of beams shall have a special mounting clevis and closure plate fabricated from steel plate as an assembly .
A matching clampon shall be furnished for each post .
All structural steel used for fabricating sign support structures shall be galvanized in accordance with AASHTO M . Steel hardware shall be galvanized in accordance with AASHTO M . All damaged or scraped galvanized steel shall be spot primed with primer meeting the requirements of Subsection M When a steel other than those listed above is proposed for use the weldability of the steel and the welding procedure shall be established by requirements prescribed by the Engineer prior to review of the material for approval .
The diameter of the vertical main members of all sign supports shall not exceed millimeters .
The wall thickness of all members of the sign supports shall be a minimum of millimeters for steel .
M .. Aluminum Sign Panels .
Aluminum sign panels shall be fabricated from ASTM B Alloy T or alloy H millimeters thick .
M .. Modular Guidance Systems .
Modular Guidance Systems shall consist of those systems which are on the current approved products list maintained by the Departments Research and Materials Section .
M .. AntiGlare Systems AntiGlare Systems shall consist of modular sections consistent in length with standard length of concrete median barrier .
Glare blocking shall be accomplished by vertical blades or panels attached to a horizontal base to create the modular units .
The antiglare system shall be of a type listed on the approved products list maintained by the Research Materials Section D Street South Boston Massachusetts .
M .. StayinPlace Bridge Deck Forms .
StayinPlace Bridge Deck Forms and supports shall be fabricated from steel conforming to ASTM A Grades A through E having a coating class of G according to ASTM A . III .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges SECTION M MISCELLANEOUS MATERIALS M .. General .
All materials in this category shall be sampled and tested in accordance with the standard methods applicable to that particular material .
M .. Calcium Chloride .
Calcium Chloride shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M Type I or Type II .
M ..
Sodium Chloride .
Sodium Chloride to be used for road purposes shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M except that the grading shall conform to the following Sieve Percent Passing .
mm .
mm maximum .
mm maximum m maximum M .. Herbicides .
These specifications cover chemicals used to destroy andor control the growth of plants both indiscriminately nonselective herbicides and selectively selective herbicides .
Only those herbicides currently approved by the State Pesticide Board and the Department may be used .
M .. Insecticides .
These specifications cover chemicals to be used in the control of insects which are harmful to trees and desirable growth .
Only those insecticides currently approved by the State Pesticide Board and the Department may be used .
M .. Curb and Edging .
All granite curb and edging shall be basically light gray in color free from seams and other structural imperfections or flaws which would impair its structural integrity and of a smooth splitting appearance .
Natural color variation characteristic of the deposit from which the curbing is obtained will be permitted .
Whenever curbing is sawed all surfaces that are to be exposed shall be thoroughly cleaned and any iron rust or iron particles removed by sand blasting or other approved methods satisfactory to the Engineer and any saw mark in excess of millimeters shall be removed .
M ..
Granite Curb .
The stones for the several types of granite curb shall be cut to the dimensions and curvature hereinafter stated III .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges Minimum Width Minimum Type Length at Top Depth Width at Bottom m mm mm mm VA for length VA for length VA for length VA for length VA . See Plans for length VB .
for length Except for the three following conditions ten percent of the length of each type of VA curb installed on the project may consist of stones no more than millimeters shorter than the length specified in either table. . Stones used in making closures may be as much as one third shorter than specified in either table except that for VA the closure piece shall have a minimum length of .
meters. . Stones used in making closures on bridge decks at paraffin joints may have one piece no less than .
meters between any two paraffin joints or between one paraffin joint and the end of the run of curbing. . On curves with radii greater than meters but less than meters type VA stones may be .
meters to not more than meters in length .
Type VA stones to be set on a radius of meters or less shall be cut to the required curvature unless otherwise directed and except for making closures shall be of minimum lengths as follows Radius Minimum Length m m to . . to less than .
Less than . .
Type VB stones to be set on a radius of meters or less shall be cut to the required curvature unless otherwise directed .
All VB stones shall have a minimum length of meter regardless of curvature .
The ends of all curved stones shall be cut on radial lines .
Finish The finish and surface dimensions for the several types of curb shall conform to the following requirements A .
Type VA Curb .
This type of curbstone shall have a top surface free from wind shall be peen hammered or sawed to an approximately true plane and shall have no projections or depressions greater than millimeters .
The front and back arris lines shall be pitched straight and true and there shall be no projection on the back surface for millimeters down from the top which would exceed a batter of vertical horizontal when measured in the inplace position except on VA the back surface shall have no projection or depression greater than millimeters .
The front face shall be at right angles to the planes of the top and ends and shall be smooth quarry split free from drill holes and with no projection of more than millimeters and no depression of more than millimeters measured from the vertical plane of the face through the arris or pitch line for a distance down from the top of millimeters for types VA and VA millimeters for VA and VA and the full depth of VA. For the remaining distance there shall be no projection or depression greater than millimeters measured in the same manner .
The ends of all stones shall be square with the planes of the top and face so that when the stones are placed end to end as closely as possible no space shall show in the joint at the top and face of more than III .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges millimeters for the full width of the top and for millimeters down on the face for Type VA and VA millimeters for VA and VA and the full depth of VA after which the end may break back not over millimeters from the plane of the joint .
The arris formed by the intersection of the plane of the joint with the planes of the top and exposed faces shall have no variation from the plane of the top and exposed faces greater than millimeters .
B .
Type VB Curb .
This type of curbstone shall have a top surface free from wind shall be pointed peen hammered or sawed to an approximately true plane and shall have no projections or depressions greater than millimeters .
The front and back arris lines shall be pitched straight and true .
The front face shall be at right angles to the plane of the top and shall be smooth quarry split free from drill holes and with no projection of more than millimeters and no depression greater than millimeters measured from the vertical plane of the face through the arris or pitch lines for the full depth of the face .
The ends of all stones shall be square with the planes of the top and face so that when stones are placed end to end as closely as possible no space shall show in the joint in the top and face of more than millimeters for the full width of the top and millimeters down on the face after which the ends may break back not more than millimeters from the plane of the joint .
On pieces less than .
meters in length the ends shall not break back more than millimeters .
The arris formed by the intersection of the plane of the joint with the planes of the top and exposed faces shall have no variation from the plane of the top and exposed faces greater than millimeters .
M ..
Granite Edgestone .
The stones for the several types of edging shall be cut to the dimensions given in the following table Type SA Type SB Type SC Minimum Length m . . .
Maximum Length m Thickness mm to to to Width of Face mm to to When the edging is used on a curve of meter radius or less the length shall be as directed by the Engineer except that where the edging is to be set on a radius of meters the maximum length shall be millimeters .
Finish .
Type SA Edging .
The exposed face shall be smooth quarry split to an approximately true plane having no projections or depressions which will cause over millimeters to show between a millimeters straightedge and the face when the straightedge is placed as closely as possible on any part of the face .
If projections on the face are more than that specified they shall be dressed off .
The top and bottom lines of the face shall be pitched off to a straight line and shall not show over millimeters between stone and straightedge when straightedge is placed along the entire length of the top and bottom lines and when viewed from a direction at right angles to the plane of the face and for the top line only not over millimeters when viewed from a direction in the plane of the face .
The ends shall be square to the length at the face and so cut that when placed end to end as closely as possible no space shall show in the joint at the face of over millimeters except that where the edging is to be used on a curve having a radius of meters or less the ends of the stones shall be so cut as to provide a finished joint at the face of not more than millimeters .
The arris formed by the intersection of the plane of the face with the plane of the end joint shall not vary from the plane of the face or the plane of the joint more than millimeters .
Drill holes may show on the exposed face but only along the bottom edge .
The sides shall not be broken under the square more than millimeters and the side adjacent to the grass shall not project over millimeters .
III .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges Type SB Edging .
The exposed face shall be smooth quarry split to an approximately true plane having no projections or depressions which will cause over millimeters to show between a millimeter straightedge and the face when the straightedge is placed as closely as possible on any part of the face .
If projections on the face are more than that specified they shall be dressed off .
The top and bottom lines of the face shall be pitched off to a straight line and shall not show over millimeters between stone and straightedge when straightedge is placed along the entire length of the top and bottom lines and when viewed from a direction at the right angles to the plane of the face and for the top line only not over millimeters when viewed from a direction in the plane of the face .
The ends shall be square to the length at the face and so cut that when placed end to end as closely as possible no space shall show in the joint at the face of over millimeters except that where the edging is to be used on a curve having a radius of meters or less the ends of the stones shall be so cut as to provide a finished joint at the face section of not more than millimeters .
The arris formed by the intersection of the plane of the face with the plane of the end joint shall not vary from the plane of the face more than millimeters .
Drill holes not more than millimeters in length and millimeters in depth will be permitted .
The sides shall not be broken under the square more than millimeters and the side adjacent to the grass shall not project over millimeters .
Type SC Edging .
The exposed face shall be smooth quarry split to an approximately true plane having no projections or depressions which will cause over millimeters to show between a millimeter straightedge and the face when the straightedge is placed as closely as possible on any part of the face .
If projections on the face are more than that specified they shall be dressed off .
The top and bottom lines of the face shall be pitched off to a straight line and shall not show over millimeters between stone and straightedge when straightedge is placed along the entire length of top and bottom lines and when viewed from a direction at right angles to the plane of the face and for the top line only not over millimeters when viewed from a direction in the plane of the face .
The ends shall be square to the length at the face and so cut that when placed end to end as closely as possible no space shall show in the joint at the face of over millimeters except that where the edging is to be used on a curve having a radius of meters or less the ends of the stones shall be so cut as to provide a finished joint at the face of not more than millimeters .
The arris formed by the intersection of the plane of the face with the plane of the end joint shall not vary from the plane of the face more than millimeters .
Drill holes not more than millimeters in length and millimeters in depth will be permitted .
The sides shall not be broken under the square more than millimeters and the side adjacent to the grass shall not project over millimeters .
M .. Field Stone Masonry .
Stone for field stone masonry shall consist of sound durable blasted or field stone free from seams cracks and other structural defects and of an approved and satisfactory quality and shape .
The stone shall have straight edges without reentrant angles .
The faces shall be flat but not necessarily rectangular in shape .
Individual stone shall have when set in the wall no face dimension less than millimeters .
Stretchers shall have a depth in the wall at least times the rise and a length on the face at least twice the rise .
Headers shall have a length on the face at least equal to the rise .
Headers shall hold in the heart of the wall the same size as shown on the face and shall extend at least millimeters more than the stretchers into the backing .
When Field Stone Masonry in Cement Mortar is specified mortar shall conform to the requirements of Subsection M M ..
Granite Curb Inlets .
The granite for curb inlet shall conform to M It shall have a horizontal bed and the top shall be free from wind .
The stone shall be sawn or peen hammered on top and the front and back edges shall be pitched true to line .
The back face for a distance of millimeters down from the top shall have no projection greater than III .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges millimeters .
The front face shall be straight split free from drill holes and it shall have no projections greater than millimeters or depression greater than millimeters for a distance of millimeters down from the top and for the remaining distance there shall be no depression or projection greater than millimeters .
The ends shall be squared with the top for the depth of the face finish and so cut that the curb inlet can be set with joints of not more than millimeters .
The granite curb inlet shall be meters in length plus or minus millimeters from to millimeters in depth millimeters wide at the top and at least millimeters wide at the bottom .
Curb inlets to be set on a radius of meters or less shall be cut to the curve required unless otherwise directed by the Engineer .
The joints of all curved curb inlets shall be cut on radial lines .
A gutter mouth at least millimeters in depth and at least millimeters in length shall be cut in the front face of the stone as shown on the plans .
Granite curb inlets shall match the adjacent curbing in color .
M ..
Granite Curb Corners .
The granite for curb corners shall conform to M .. and shall have horizontal beds .
They shall match the adjacent curbing in size color and quality .
The front arris lines shall extend through of a circle having a radius of or millimeters respectively for Type A or Type B Curb Corner .
The back arris line shall be straight .
The plane of back shall be normal to top .
M ..
Granite Bounds .
Granite bounds shall be of sound granite the top and bottom faces parallel and the front and back shall be straight split .
The bounds shall be cut to the dimensions shown on the plans and shall be plain or lettered as indicated on the plans or as directed .
The stone shall be pointed on the top and on three sides and hammer dressed on the face for a distance of not less than millimeters below the top .
The top shall be millimeters square and shall have a drill hole in the center millimeters in depth and millimeters in diameter with the bottom somewhat flared .
M .. Dry Stone Masonry .
Stone for dry stone masonry shall be hard and durable and free from seams or other imperfections and of an approved quality and shape .
No stone shall be less than millimeters in its least dimension .
The stone shall be roughly square on joint beds and faces .
M .. Lumber and Wood Sheeting .
Lumber and Wood Sheeting shall be sound Spruce Douglas fir white or yellow Lodgepole or Ponderosa pine or western hemlock plank planed on one side and either tongue and grooved or splined .
Lumber sheeting shall not be less than nominal millimeters thick .
Wood sheeting shall not be less than nominal millimeters thick .
M ..
Treated Timber .
Treated timber shall meet AASHTO M except that only material meeting current EPA or DEP regulations will be allowed .
The properties of the timber selected for preservative treatment shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M Structural Timber Lumber and Piling .
M .. Wood Posts and Braces .
Wooden posts shall be round well seasoned straight sound cedar oak spruce or other approved wood not less than millimeters in diameter after the bark is removed .
Timber braces shall be millimeters square in III .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges cross section .
The posts and braces shall be wholly treated with a preservative conforming to the requirements of AASHTO M . M ..
Wooden Rails and Posts .
Fences shall consist of wooden rails braces and posts constructed as shown in the Department Standards .
Post for permanent barrier fences shall be select structural Douglas Fir or select structural spruce well seasoned straightgrained sound planed on all sides and of the dimensions shown on the plans .
Rails and braces shall be select structural longleaf yellow pine or select structural Douglas Fir wellseasoned straightgrained sound planed on all sides and free from loose and unsound knots .
Post rails and braces for portable barrier fences shall be select structural Douglas Fir or select structural longleaf yellow pine wellseasoned straightgrained sound planed on all sides and of the dimensions shown on the plans .
M ..
Wooden Pegs .
Wooden pegs shall be wedge shaped and approximately millimeters x millimeters at the butt end and millimeters or more in length as may be required .
M ..
Timber Preservatives .
Timber preservatives shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M . The method of treatment shall conform to American WoodPreservers Association Standards C C and C. M ..
Timber Piles .
A .
General Requirements .
Timber piles shall conform to the requirements of ASTM D and shall be cut from sound and live trees preferably during the winter season .
Piles shall be free from any defects which will impair their strength or usefulness for the purpose intended or that will prevent proper driving .
Unless otherwise specified untreated timber piles shall have the bark unpeeled .
Treated timber piles shall be cleanpeeled so that all of the outer bark and at least of the inner bark well distributed over the outer surface of the pile shall be removed .
In order to obtain proper preservative treatment no strips of inner bark wider than millimeters shall remain .
All piles shall be cut above the ground swell shall have a uniform taper from butt to tip end and shall be free from short kinks .
Knots or blemishes shall be trimmed off close and even with the body of the pile .
A line from the center of the butt to the center of the tip must lie wholly within the body of the pile .
B .
Inspection .
All piles will be subject to inspection before or after shipment to the site or both at the option of the Engineer .
Any pile that does not conform to all the requirements will be rejected .
C. Specific Requirements .
The kind of timber to be used for treated piles will be Southern Yellow Pine or Douglas Fir and shall be treated in accordance with AWPA Standard C for CCA .
All piles for which treatment is specified shall have not less than millimeters of sapwood at the butt end for Douglas Fir and a millimeter ring of sapwood at the butt end for Southern Pine .
Untreated piles shall be new spruce oak Douglas Fir yellow pine or any other species subject to the approval of the Engineer which will withstand the specified driving without injury .
Butt and tip dimensions for various lengths of piles shall be as set forth in the following table III .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges Minimum Minimum Dimension Tip Length Meter from Butt Dimension m mm mm Up to and up to and over For all piles the maximum dimension meter from the butt shall be millimeters .
Measurements are under the bark in all cases .
Where the piles are to support a concrete cap the maximum butt dimensions shall be millimeters less than the designated width of the concrete cap .
Where piles are to be in line in a bent all piles in the bent shall be of uniform size to permit the proper fastening of the bracing .
Cutting of piles to accommodate the bracing will not be permitted .
D. Preservative Treatment .
Preservative treatment when specified shall conform to Subsection M M .. Waterproof Paper Covers .
Waterproof paper covers shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M . The name of the manufacturer shall be marked or imprinted clearly on the paper for proper identification .
M .. Polyethylene Covers .
A .
Black Polyethylene Sheeting .
Black polyethylene sheeting suitable for use in covering storage piles of bulk or bag salt or sand piles which have been blended with salt shall meet the requirements of NBS Product Standard PS .
The covers shall be .
millimeters in thickness black in color and contain suitable inhibitors to prevent deterioration due to sunlight and heat .
The sheeting shall be a minimum of meters in width and a minimum of meters in length .
It shall be folded when packaged into rolls so that the shipping width is not greater than meters .
B .
White Polyethylene Sheeting .
This material shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M . C. Reinforced Polyethylene Sheeting .
Reinforced Polyethylene Covers for stockpiles of salt and treated sand shall be reinforced with nonwoven nylon or rayon cord shall have a minimum tear strength of Newtons in all directions and shall weigh no less than grams per square meter .
They shall be black in color .
The material shall be free from any additive which would reduce its resistance to water penetration or adversely affect the durability of the film .
The covers shall contain suitable inhibitors to prevent deterioration due to sunlight and heat .
They shall be a minimum of meters in width and a minimum of meters in length .
They shall be folded when packaged into rolls so that the shipping width is not greater than meters .
M .. Tar Paper .
Tar impregnated felted paper shall conform to the requirements of ASTM D . M .. Burlap .
Burlap shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M Class .
It shall not have been used as a container for sugar or other substances deleterious to concrete and shall be in good condition free from holes tears or other defects that would render it unsuitable for curing concrete .
It shall be furnished in strips not less than meter nor more than meters in width and not more than millimeters longer than the width of the pavement slab .
III .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges M .. Polyethylene Coated Burlap .
This material shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M White BurlapPolyethylene Sheet .
M .. Impervious Liquid Membrane .
This material shall consist of an impervious liquid conforming to the requirements of AASHTO M Type or .
When tested in accordance with AASHTO T the liquid membrane forming compound shall restrict the loss of water present in the test specimen at the time of application of the curing compound to not more than grams per square meter of surface after days .
When Type I is specified it shall contain a fugitive dye .
M ..
Plastic Waterstops .
Waterstops shall be fabricated from a plastic compound the basic resin of which shall be polyvinyl chloride .
The compound shall contain any additional resins plasticizers inhibitors or other materials such that when compounded it shall meet the performance requirements hereinafter specified .
Waterstops shall be extruded in such a manner that any cross section shall be dense homogenous and free from porosity or other imperfections .
The cross section of waterstops shall be as shown on Department Standard Details .
Physical Requirements .
The waterstops shall meet the following requirements .
Tensile Strength Die C ASTM D Min. . MPa .
Ultimate Elongation Die C ASTM D Min . .
Cold Bend Test See Appendix I No Cracking .
Impact Resistance See Appendix II No Cracking .
Resistance to Alkalis See Appendix III No Cracking Increase in mass after days Max. . Increase in mass after days Max . .
Decrease in mass after days Max . .
Decrease in mass after days Max. . Change in dimensions after days Max .
. . Hardness Durometer Shore A ASTM D . Water Absorption hours ASTM D Max. . by mass General Requirements .
The waterstops shall be spliced only at jointing made necessary by construction design .
Where joints are required they shall be made in accordance with the manufacturers instructions without appreciable loss in strength elasticity or permeability of the material .
The waterstop material shall be practically impervious to water and unaffected by most common acids alkalis sea water and mineral oils .
The material shall be such that it will not engage in electrolytic action with steel and will not discolor concrete .
The approved waterstop when properly installed as in a concrete construction or expansion joint shall be capable of maintaining a head of meters of water without leakage .
Qualification Samples .
A manufacturer requesting approval of a waterstop shall furnish to the Research and Materials Section D Street South Boston Massachusetts a meter length of each type of waterstop heshe intends to supply and a certificate of analysis shall be furnished with the samples .
The certificate shall state that the material furnished conforms without exception to all the requirements specified herein and shall also include all qualitative and quantitative test results .
M .. Preformed Sheet Membrane .
III .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges Only products preapproved by the Department will be accepted for use .
Chemical composition physical properties and dimensional requirements of the sheet membrane shall conform to the manufacturers specifications for the material .
Also all accessory materials such as flashing primer etc .
used in the application of the sheet membrane will be considered a part of this specification and shall conform to the manufacturers requirements .
M .. Bentonite Waterproofing System .
Bentonite waterproofing system shall consist of a biodegradable corrugated kraft paper panel with flutes filled with sodium bentonite and ends sealed .
The system shall also include trowel grade bentonite and protection board when necessary .
Panels shall meet the following specifications Bentonite content .
kgm minimum Panel thickness mm Panel dimensions mm x mm Panel mass .
kg minimum Bentonite shall be pure high swelling Wyoming sodium montmorillonite .
The gel volume shall be to times dry volume and the swelling action shall be indefinitely reversible .
The granular bentonite shall pass through a micrometer sieve and less than through a micrometer sieve .
Mineralogical composition is minimum montmorillonite with a maximum native sediments of feldspars mica and unaltered volcanic ash .
Proximate chemical analysis is silica alumina iron oxides magnesia soda and lime .
It shall contain chemically bound water of with minor of .
When a joint seal is necessary it shall be bentonite hydrated to partial gel strength .
In subfreezing weather use a gel with glycol added .
The protection board where required shall be a puncture resistant millimeters x millimeters x . millimeters multilayer flexible board composed of pressure bonded cellulose fibers weighing approximately grams per square meter .
M .. Jointing Materials for Pipes .
A. Jute or oakum furnished for use in pipe joints shall be of an accepted grade approved for common usage .
B. Mortar shall conform to the requirements of Section M C. Rubber ring or plastic gaskets shall be of tough flexible chemicalresistant material and of such size and shape as to ensure satisfactory pipe joints when incorporated in the work and shall conform to ASTM C . D. Mechanical joints shall conform to the requirements of the ASA Specifications A .. E. The yarning material for cast iron bellandspigot pipe joints shall be sterilized braided hemp or untarred twisted jute clean and dry and free from oil grease or any other deleterious matter .
F. Clay pipe may also be joined using pipe having factorycast mating collars of bituminous or plastic resilient materials .
These collars shall be of approved bituminous materials with demonstrated ability to make tight joints of plasticresilient materials conforming to ASTM C . Prior to jointing bituminous joints shall be treated with a satisfactory nonoily solvent plasticresilient joints shall be treated with a satisfactory lubricantadhesive each supplied by the manufacturer .
M ..
Insulation and Waterproof Jackets .
Where water pipe is installed or hung on structures it shall be covered with insulation conforming to the following requirements The insulating material shall be fiberglass cellular glass expanded polystyrene or urethane and shall be covered with a waterproof jacket as specified .
Section lengths and thickness shall depend on the pipe size and the III .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges recommendations of the insulation manufacturers .
Under no conditions shall the minimum total thickness be less than millimeters except when urethane is the insulating material and then the total thickness shall be no less than millimeters .
Unless the type of insulating material is specified the Contractor may use any one of the foregoing .
However only one type of insulating material shall be used throughout an installation .
M .. Cellular Glass .
Cellular glass insulation shall conform to the requirements of ASTM C Standard Specification for Cellular Glass Insulation or revisions thereof .
The following installation accessories shall be part of this specification a Stainless steel strapping millimeters x . millimeter and stainless steel clips .
b Asphalt coated glass fabric .
millimeter x . millimeter mesh conforming to M M .. Fiberglass .
Fiberglass insulation shall conform to the requirements of ASTM C Standard Specification for Mineral Fiber Blanket Thermal Insulation for Commercial and Industrial Applications or revisions thereof .
The following installation accessories shall be part of this specification a millimeters galvanized wire netting .
b Corrugated aluminum jacket .
millimeters thick .
M ..
Polystyrene .
Expanded polystyrene insulation shall conform to the requirements of ASTM C Standard Specification for Rigid Cellular Polystyrene Thermal Insulation or revision thereof .
The following installation accessories shall be part of this specification a Stainless steel strapping millimeters x . millimeters and stainless steel clips .
b Corrugated aluminum jacket .
millimeters thick with integral vapor barrier .
c A suitable polystyrene adhesive .
d Asphalt coated glass fabric .
millimeters x . millimeters mesh conforming to M M .. Urethane .
Urethane insulation shall conform to the requirements of ASTM C Standard Specification for Unfaced Preformed Rigid Cellular Polyurethane Thermal Insulation or revisions thereof .
The following installation accessories shall be part of this specification a Stainless steel strapping millimeters x . millimeter and stainless steel clips .
b Corrugated aluminum jacket .
millimeter thick with integral vapor barrier .
c A suitable urethane adhesive .
d Asphalt coated glass fabric .
millimeter x . millimeter mesh conforming to M M .. Waterproof Jackets .
Waterproof jackets for covering insulation on water pipes shall be assembled as specified from any of the following materials or combinations thereof .
a Asphalt coated glass fabric .
millimeter x . millimeter mesh conforming to M b Stainless steel strapping millimeters x . millimeter and stainless steel clips .
c millimeter galvanized wire netting .
d Corrugated aluminum jacket .
millimeter thick .
e Corrugated aluminum jacket .
millimeter thick with integral vapor barrier .
f A polystyrene adhesive .
III .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges g A urethane adhesive .
M .. Reflectors for Barriers .
An oversized yellow reflectorized cluster diamond shape millimeters x millimeters and a millimeter x millimeter x millimeter thick plywood panel shall be bolted onto barrier as directed .
The yellow reflectorized cluster Type H shall conform to the requirements of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices and the approved standard detail sheets .
Copies of these items are available upon request to the Departments Research and Materials Division D Street Boston Massachusetts .
The panel shall be millimeter x millimeter x millimeter exterior type Grade AA Commercial Standard PS .
M .. Hydrated Lime .
Hydrated Lime shall consist of a minimum of calcium and magnesium oxides pulverized so that at least .
will pass a micrometer sieve and at least pass a micrometer sieve .
M .. Preformed Expansion Joint Filler .
This specification covers nonextruding and resilient nonbituminous types of preformed expansion joint fillers and shall conform to AASHTO M . M .. Preformed Compression Joint Seals Bridges .
This specification covers the materials requirements for preformed polychloroprene elastomeric joint seals for bridges .
The seal consist of a multipleweb design composed of polychloroprene and functions only by compression of the seal between the faces of the joint with the seal folding inward at the top to facilitate compression .
The seal is installed with a lubricant adhesive and is designed to seal the joint and reject incompressibles .
The compression seal and the lubricantadhesive shall conform to AASHTO M . M .. Polyurethane Joint Sealer .
This specification covers the requirements for a cold applied two component elastomeric joint sealing compound suitable for use as a joint sealer andor caulking compound on joints in portland cement concrete or steel surfaces .
This material shall meet Federal Specifications TTSE Type I Class A. M .. Polyurethane Joint Sealer NonSag .
This specification covers the requirements for a cold applied single component elastomeric joint sealing compound for sealing caulking vertical joints on bridges and other structures .
This material shall meet Federal Specification TTS Type II Class A. M .. Elastomeric Bridge Bearing Pads .
Elastomeric bearing pads include plain bearings consisting of elastomer only and laminated bearings consisting of layers of elastomers restrained at their interfaces by bonded metal laminates .
The type of bearing plain or laminated durometer and dimensions will be as specified on the plans .
The elastomer portion of the elastomeric compound shall be virgin chloroprene neoprene meeting the requirements of Section of the AASHTO Standard Specifications for Highway Bridges .
M ..
Liquid PenetrantSealant .
III .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges Liquid penetrantsealant for portland cement concrete surfaces used to protect concrete surfaces from chloride intrusion shall be a material previously approved by the Department for the purpose intended and listed on the Qualified Product Listing maintained by the Research and Materials Section D Street South Boston Massachusetts .
M .. RubberCotton Duck Bearing Pad .
The bearing pads shall be manufactured of all new unused materials and composed of multiple layers of prestressed duck grams per square meter duck warp count threads per millimeters and filling count threads per millimeters plies per millimeters of finished pad thickness impregnated and bound with a high quality rubber compound containing rot and mildew inhibitors and antioxidants compounded into resilient pads of uniform thickness .
The pads shall withstand compressive loads perpendicular to the plane of laminations of not less than MPa before breakdown .
Load deflection properties in accordance with procedures of MILC shall be the following maximum percentages of total pad thickness at MPa at MPa .
When loaded to MPa permanent set as load is removed in accordance with procedures of MILC shall be a maximum of .
of the original zero point thickness .
Shore Durometer shall not be less than nor more than .
The ratio of lateral expansion to vertical deflection shall not exceed .
when loaded to MPa .
The material shall not lose effectiveness throughout a temperature range of C to C. No visual evidence of damage or deterioration by environmental effects of sunshine humidity salt spray fungus and dust in accordance with MILE .
Thickness shall be as shown on drawings within tolerances of .
M .. Moulded Fabric Bearing Pad .
The preformed pads shall consist of a fabric and rubber body .
The pad shall be made with new unvulcanized rubber and unused fabric fibers in proper proportion to maintain strength and stability .
The surface hardness expressed in standard rubber hardness figures shall be Shore A Durometer durometer average the ultimate breakdown limit of the pad under compression loading shall be no less than MPa for the specified thickness without extrusion or detrimental reduction in thickness .
The pads shall be furnished to specified dimensions with all bolt holes accurately located .
M .. Reflective Sheeting .
Reflective sheeting shall meet the requirements of AASHTO M . This specification covers flexible retroreflective sheeting designed to reflectorize traffic control signs delineators barricades and other devices .
Types Type II Super Engineering Grade Type III High Intensity Encapsulated Glass Bead Type IV High Intensity Unmetallized Microprismatic Element Type VI Flexible High Intensity M .. Acrylic Prismatic Reflectors and Embossed Aluminum Frames for Signs .
Shall meet the requirements of AASHTO M . M .. Acrylic Plastic .
Millimeter Diameter CenterMount Reflector Type A. Acrylic plastic .
millimeter diameter centermount reflectors Type A shall be a material previously approved by the Department for the purpose intended and listed on the Qualified Product Listing maintained by the Research and Materials Section D Street South Boston Massachusetts telephone number III .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges .
M ..
Temporary Raised Pavement Markers .
Temporary raised pavement markers shall be a material previously approved by the Department for the purpose intended and listed on the Qualified Product Listing maintained by the Research and Materials Section D Street South Boston Massachusetts .
M .. Demountable Reflectorized DelineatorGuard Rail .
Demountable reflectorized delineators for guard rail shall be fabricated in accordance with the Standard Drawings for Signs and Supports .
The panel shall conform to ASTM A Steel Sheet ZincCoated galvanized by the HotDip Process Coating Designation G. Reflectorized sheeting shall conform to M ..
Type III .
M .. Reflectorized Flexible Delineator Post .
Reflectorized Flexible Delineator Posts shall be used as directed for delineation of roadways and ramps .
Only those products previously approved for the purpose intended and listed on the Qualified Product Listing maintained by the Research and Materials Section D Street South Boston Massachusetts may be used .
M .. Reflectorized Plastic Drum .
Reflectorized plastic drums are to be used as channelizing devices in highway work zones .
Drums shall be constructed of an approved ultraviolet resistant low density impact resistant linear polyethylene or approved equal with a minimum thickness of .
millimeters .
They shall be approximately meter in height and a minimum of millimeters in diameter .
Drum design and application shall conform to applicable sections of the MUTCD .
Reflective sheeting shall meet the requirements of M ..
Type IV .
M .. Delineation for Guard Rail Termini Delineators for Guard Rail Termini shall be fabricated in accordance with the Standard Drawings for Signs and Supports .
The panel shall consist of Type A aluminum sign panel .
Reflectorized sheeting shall conform to M ..
Type III High Intensity .
M .. Geotextile Fabrics .
General .
The geotextile fabric shall be a woven or nonwoven fabric consisting only of long chain polymeric filaments or yarns such as polypropylene polyethylene polyester polyamide or polyvinylidenechloride formed into a stable network such that the filaments of yarns retain their relative position to each other .
The fabric shall be inert to commonly encountered chemicals and free of defects or flaws which significantly affect its physical andor filtering properties .
The fabric except wrapping placed directly against perforated pipe shall be formed in widths of at least meters .
Sheets of fabric may be sewn together at the point of manufacture or other approved locations .
The geotextile manufacturer is responsible for establishing and maintaining a quality control program so as to assure compliance with the requirements of this specification .
Packaging .
During all periods of shipment and storage the fabric shall be wrapped in a heavy duty protective covering to protect the fabric from direct sunlight ultraviolet rays temperatures greater than C mud dirt dust and debris .
Physical Requirements .
The fabric furnished may be either woven or nonwoven at the Contractors option .
The fabric shall meet III .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges the requirements of Table I Table II Table III Table IV or Table V as specified for each use .
Table I Type I Geotextile Fabric SEPARATION Property Minimum Value Test Method Grab Strength kN .
ASTM D Grab Elongation ASTM D Sewn Seam Strength kN .
ASTM D Puncture Strength kN .
ASTM D Trapezoid Tear kN .
ASTM D Burst Strength kPa ASTM D Apparent Opening Size mm Smaller than .
ASTM D Permeability kf cmsec kf ks .
ASTM D Ultraviolet Strength Retention at hours ASTM D Table II Type II Geotextile Fabric STABILIZATIONREINFORCEMENT Property Minimum Value Test Method Grab Strength kN .
ASTM D Grab Elongation ASTM D Sewn Seam Strength kN .
ASTM D Wide Width Strength kN ASTM D Puncture Strength kN .
ASTM D Trapezoid Tear kN .
ASTM D Burst Strength kPa ASTM D Apparent Opening Size mm Smaller than .
ASTM D Permeability kf cmsec kf ks .
ASTM D Ultraviolet Strength Retention at hours ASTM D Table III Type III Geotextile Fabric FILTRATIONDRAINAGE Property Minimum Value Test Method Grab Strength kN .
ASTM D Grab Elongation ASTM D Sewn Seam Strength kN .
ASTM D Puncture Strength kN .
ASTM D Trapezoid Tear kN .
ASTM D Burst Strength kPa ASTM D Apparent Opening Size mm Smaller than .
ASTM D Permeability kf cmsec kf ks .
ASTM D Thickness mm .
ASTM D Ultraviolet Strength Retention at hours ASTM D Table IV Type IV Geotextile Fabric III .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges EROSION CONTROLSLOPE PROTECTION Property Minimum Value Test Method Grab Strength kN .
ASTM D Grab Elongation ASTM D Sewn Seam Strength kN .
ASTM D Puncture Strength kN .
ASTM D Trapezoid Tear kN .
ASTM D Burst Strength kPa ASTM D Apparent Opening Size mm Smaller than .
ASTM D Permeability kf cmsec kf ks .
ASTM D Ultraviolet Strength Retention at hours ASTM D Table V Type V Geotextile Fabric SEDIMENT CONTROL Property Minimum Value Test Method Grab Strength kN .
ASTM D Grab Elongation at .
kN ASTM D Soil Retention Efficiency ASTM D Puncture Strength kN .
ASTM D Trapezoid Tear kN .
ASTM D Burst Strength kPa ASTM D Apparent Opening Size mm Smaller than .
ASTM D Permeability kf cmsec .
ASTM D Ultraviolet Strength Retention at hours ASTM D Notes Minimum values are for medium construction survivability by rating AASHTO Task Force .
All numerical values represent minimum average roll value MARV with lot sampled according to ASTM D . kf permeability of fabric and ks permeability of soil .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifiactions for Highways and Bridges A. APPENDIXES Page APPENDIX A NUMERICAL INDEX OF PAYMENT ITEMS A .
APPENDIX B CONTRACT ALLOWANCE PAYMENT ITEMSB .
APPENDIX C GENERAL INDEXC .
APPENDIX D MATERIALS INDEX D. APPENDIX E METRIC UNITS TERMS SYMBOLS AND CONVERSION FACTORSE .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifiactions for Highways and Bridges A .
This page intentionally blank .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifiactions for Highways and Bridges A .
NUMERICAL INDEX OF PAYMENT ITEMS Item Numbers Item Unit Page .
Clearing and Grubbing Hectare II . .
Selective Clearing and Thinning Hectare II. . Tree RemovedDiameter under Millimeters Each II. . Tree RemovedDiameter Millimeters and Over Each II. . Stump Removed Each II. . Demolition of Building No .
___ or Structure No .
___ Lump Sum II. . Demolition of Superstructure of Bridge No .
___ Lump Sum II. . Demolition of Bridge No .
___ or Structure No .
___ Lump Sum II. . Rodent Control Lump Sum II. . Earth Excavation Cubic Meter II. . Unclassified Excavation Cubic Meter II. . Class A Rock Excavation Cubic Meter II. . Presplitting Rock Square Meter II. . Muck Excavation Cubic Meter II. . Topsoil Excavated and Stacked Cubic Meter II. . Bituminous Concrete Excavation by Cold Planer Square Meter II. . Bridge Excavation Cubic Meter II. . Bridge Excavation within Cofferdam Cubic Meter II. . Class A Trench Excavation Cubic Meter II. . Class B Trench Excavation Cubic Meter II. . Channel Excavation Cubic Meter II. . Class B Rock Excavation Cubic Meter II. . Drainage Structure Abandoned Each II. . Drainage Structure Removed Each II. . Dredging and Disposing of Material Cubic Meter II. . Dredging and Disposing of Material Hydraulic Method Cubic Meter II . .
Removal and Disposal of Rock from Dredged Area Cubic Meter II . .
Removal and Disposal of Ledge from Dredged Area Cubic Meter II. . Dredging Mobilization and Demobilization Lump Sum II . .
Ordinary Borrow Cubic Meter II. . Special Borrow Cubic Meter II. . Gravel Borrow Cubic Meter II. . Gravel Borrow Type c Cubic Meter II. . Gravel Borrow for Bridge Foundation Cubic Meter II. . Gravel Borrow for Backfilling Structures and Pipes Cubic Meter II . .
Processed Gravel Cubic Meter II . .
Sand Borrow Cubic Meter II . .
Crushed Stone for Drainage Revetment and Water Work Foundations Metric Ton II . .
Crushed Stone for Bridge Foundations Metric Ton II. . Fine Grading and CompactingSubgrade Areas Square Meter II. . Drive Sample Boring Meter II . .
Hollow Stem Auger Borings Meter II . .
Core Boring Meter II. . Undisturbed Sample Prep .
Boring Meter II. . Undisturbed Sample Each II .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifiactions for Highways and Bridges A. . Vane Shear Test Prep .
Boring Meter II. . Vane Shear Test Each II. . Auger Boring Meter II. . Auger Boring Sample Each II . .
Thin Wall Steel Tube Drive Sample Each II. . Test Pit Each II. . Test Pits through Pavements Each II . .
Ground Water Observation Wellpoint Type I Meter II . .
Ground Water Observation Wellpoint Type II Meter II . .
Ground Water Observation Wellpoint Type III Solid Pipe Meter II . .
Ground Water Observation Wellpoint Type III Wellscreen Meter II . .
Ground Water Observation Wellpoint Type IV Solid Pipe Meter II . .
Ground Water Observation Wellpoint Type IV Wellscreen Meter II. . Mobilization and Dismantling of Boring Equipment Lump Sum II. . Catch Basin Each II. . Manhole Each II. . Manhole meters to meters depth Each II. . Manhole meters to meters depth Each II. . Special Manhole Each II. . Gutter Inlet Each II. . Leaching Basin Each II. . Drop Inlet Type A Each II. . Drop Inlet Type AF Each II. . Drop Inlet Type B Each II. . Drop Inlet Type BF Each II. . Drop Inlet Type C Each II. . Drop Inlet Type CF Each II. . Drop Inlet Type D Each II. . Drop Inlet Type DF Each II. . Drainage Structure Adjusted Each II. . Drainage Structure Rebuilt Meter II. . Drainage Structure Change in Type Each II. . Drainage Structure Remodeled Each II. . Sanitary Structures Adjusted Each II. . Frame and Cover Each II. . Frame and Grate Each II. . Frame and Grate MHD Cascade Type Each II. . Frame and Grate or Cover Removed and Reset Each II. . ___ millimeter Hood Each II. . ___ millimeter Corrugated Metal Pipe ___ micrometer Meter II. . ___ millimeter Coated Corrugated Metal Pipe End Section ___ micrometer Each II. . ___ millimeter Coated Corrugated Metal Pipe Aluminum ___ micrometer Meter II. . ___ millimeter Asphalt Smooth Steel Linear Helically Corrugated Shell Metal Pipe ___ micrometer of outer shell Meter II. . ___ millimeter Corrugated Metal Pipe Aluminum End Section ___ micrometer Each II. . Asphalt Coated Corrugated Metal PipeArch ___ micrometer Meter II. . Cement Concrete Pipe Meter II. . ___ millimeter Drainage PipeOption Meter II. . Ductile Iron Pipe Meter II . .
Structural Plate Pipe Meter II .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifiactions for Highways and Bridges A. .
Structural Plate PipeArch ___ micrometer Meter II. . to .
___ millimeter Reinforced Concrete Pipe Meter II. . to .
___ millimeter Reinforced Concrete Pipe Flared End Each II. . ___ millimeter Corrugated Plastic Polyethylene Pipe Meter II. . Polymeric Precoated Corrugated Metal Pipe Meter II. . ___ millimeter Polyethylene Pipe Meter II. . Stone for Pipe Ends Square Meter II . .
Crushed Stone for Bleeders Metric Ton II. . ___ millimeter Perforated Corrugated Metal Pipe ___ micrometer Subdrain Meter II. . ___ millimeter Perforated Corrugated Aluminum Pipe ___ micrometer Subdrain Meter II. . ___ millimeter Pipe SubdrainOption Meter II. . ___ millimeter SlotPerforated Corrugated Plastic Pipe Subdrain Meter II . .
Pipe Removed and Relaid Meter II . .
Pipe Removed and Stacked Meter II. . Bituminous Concrete Waterway Square Meter II. . Cement Concrete Paving Waterway Square Meter II . .
Cast Iron Water Pipe Rubber Gasket Meter II. . Ductile Iron Water Pipe Rubber Gasket Meter II. . Ductile Iron Water Pipe Mechanical Joint Meter II . .
Cast Iron Water Pipe Cement Lined Meter II . .
Cast Iron Fittings for Water Pipe Kilogram II. . Ductile Iron Fittings for Water Pipe Kilogram II . .
Cast Iron Water Main Removed and Relaid Meter II . .
Cast Iron Water Main Removed and Stacked Meter II. . Copper Tubing Type K Meter II. . Gate Valve Each II. . Gate and Gate Box Each II. . Gate and Gate Box Removed and Reset Each II. . Gate Box Removed and Reset Each II. . Gate and Gate Box Removed and Stacked Each II. . Gate Box Each II. . Gate Box Adjusted Each II .
Corporation Cock Each II . .
Cast Iron Plug Each II. . Water Pipe Insulation Meter II. . Hydrant Each II. . Hydrant Removed and Reset Each II. . Hydrant Removed and Stacked Each II. . Service Box Each II. . Service Box Removed and Reset Each II. . Service Box Removed and Stacked Each II. . Service Box Adjusted Each II. . Curb Stop Each II. . Curb Stop Removed and Reset Each II . .
Dense Graded Crushed Stone for Subbase Cubic Meter II . .
Dense Graded Crushed Stone for Subbase Metric Ton II. . Reclaimed Base Course Square Meter II . .
Crushed Stone for Blending Metric Ton II. . Reclaimed Pavement Borrow Material for Base Course Cubic Meter II. . Gravel for Base Course Cubic Meter II. . Class I Bituminous Concrete Base Course Type I Metric Ton II .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifiactions for Highways and Bridges A. . Cement Concrete Base Course Square Meter II. . High Early Strength Cement Concrete Base Course Square Meter II. . Calcium Chloride for Roadway Dust Control Kilogram II. . Bitumen for Roadway Dust Control Liter II. . Water for Roadway Dust Control Kiloliter II. . Class I Bituminous Concrete Pavement Type I Metric Ton II. . Class I Bituminous Concrete Pavement Type I Open Graded Metric Ton II. . Class I Dense Bituminous Concrete Type ST Metric Ton II. . Class I Dense Protective Bottom Course for Bridges Metric Ton II. . Bitumen for Tack Coat Liter II . .
Hot Poured Rubberized Asphalt Sealer Meter II . .
Stress Absorbing Membrane Interlayer Square Meter II . .
Crushed Stone for Peastone Cover Metric Ton II. . Bitumen for Peastone Cover Liter II. . Class I Bituminous Concrete Berm Type A Metric Ton II. . Bituminous Concrete for Patching Metric Ton II. . Cement Concrete Pavement Square Meter II . .
Granite Rubble Block Pavement Square Meter II . .
Granite Curb Type VA Straight Meter II . .
Granite Curb Type VA Curved Meter II . .
Granite Curb Type VA Straight Meter II . .
Granite Curb Type VA Curved Meter II . .
Granite Curb Type VA Straight Meter II . .
Granite Curb Type VA Curved Meter II . .
Granite Curb Type VA Straight Meter II . .
Granite Curb Type VA Curved Meter II . .
Granite Curb Type VA Straight Meter II . .
Granite Curb Type VA Curved Meter II . .
Granite Curb Type VB Straight Meter II . .
Granite Curb Type VB Curved Meter II . .
Granite Transition Curb for Wheelchair RampsStraight Meter II . .
Granite Transition Curb for Wheelchair RampsCurved Meter II . .
Granite Edging Type SA Meter II . .
Granite Edging Type SA Radius Meters or Less Meter II . .
Granite Edging Type SB Straight Meter II . .
Granite Edging Type SB Radius Meters or Less Meter II . .
Granite Edging Type SC Meter II . .
Granite Edging Type SC Radius Meters or Less Meter II . .
Granite Curb Inlet Straight Each II . .
Granite Curb Inlet Curved Each II . .
Granite Curb Corner Type A Each II . .
Granite Curb Corner Type B Each II . .
Concrete Curb Type VA Meter II . .
Concrete Curb Corner Type A Each II . .
Concrete Curb Corner Type B Each II . .
Concrete Edging Type SA Meter II. . Bituminous Concrete Curb Type Meter II. . Bituminous Concrete Curb Type Meter II. . Bituminous Concrete Curb Type Meter II. . Bituminous Concrete Curb Type Metric Ton II. . Bituminous Concrete Curb Type Metric Ton II. . Bituminous Concrete Curb Type Metric Ton II. . Curb Removed and Reset Meter II .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifiactions for Highways and Bridges A. . Curb Inlet Removed and Reset Each II. . Curb Corner Removed and Reset Each II . .
Edging Removed and Reset Meter II. . Curb Removed and Stacked Meter II. . Curb Inlet Removed and Stacked Each II. . Curb Corner Removed and Stacked Each II . .
Edging Removed and Stacked Meter II. . Curb Removed and Discarded Meter II. . Curb Inlet Removed and Discarded Each II. . Curb Corner Removed and Discarded Each II . .
Edging Removed and Discarded Meter II . .
Individual Post Each II. . St. Bm .
Hwy .
GuardType SS Single Faced Meter II. . St. Bm .
Hwy .
GuardType SS Single Faced Curved Meter II. . St. Bm .
Hwy .
GuardType SS Buried End Single Faced Each II. . St. Bm .
Hwy .
GuardType SS Double Faced Meter II. . St. Bm .
Hwy .
GuardType SS Double Faced Curved Meter II. . St. Bm .
Hwy .
GuardType SS Buried End Double Faced Each II. . St. Bm .
Hwy .
GuardType SS Single FacedWood Posts Meter II. . St. Bm .
Hwy .
GuardType SS Single FacedWood PostsCurved Meter II. . St. Bm .
Hwy .
GuardType SS Buried End Single FacedWood Posts Each II. . St. Thrie Bm .
Hwy .
GuardType SS Single Faced Meter II. . St. Thrie Bm .
Hwy .
GuardType SS Single Faced Curved Meter II. . St. Thrie Bm .
Hwy .
GuardType SS Buried End Single Faced Each II. . St. Thrie Bm .
Hwy .
GuardType SS Double Faced Meter II. . St. Thrie Bm .
Hwy .
GuardType SS Double Faced Curved Meter II. . St. Thrie Bm .
Hwy .
GuardType SS Buried End Double Faced Each II. . St. Bm .
Hwy .
GuardType SS Single FacedSP Base Anch .
Meter II. . St. Bm .
Hwy .
GuardType SS Double FacedSP Base Anch .
Meter II. . St. Thrie Bm .
Hwy .
GuardType SS Single FacedSP Base Anch .
Meter II. . St. Thrie Bm .
Hwy .
GuardType SS Double FacedSP Base Anch .
Meter II. . St. Bm .
Terminal Section Single Faced Each II. . St. Bm .
Terminal Section Double Faced Each II. . St. Thrie Bm .
Terminal Section Single Faced Each II. . St. Thrie Bm .
Terminal Section Double Faced Each II. . Special St. Bm .
Terminal Section Single Faced Each II . .
Leading End for St. Bm .
Hwy .
Guard at Bridge Each II . .
Trailing End for St. Bm .
Hwy .
Guard at Bridge Each II . .
Leading End for St. Thrie Bm .
Hwy .
Guard at Bridge Each II. . Impact Attenuator for Shoulder Incapable of Redirection Each II. . Impact Attenuator for Shoulder Capable of Redirection Each II. . Impact Attenuator for Median Incapable of Redirection Each II. . Impact Attenuator for Median Capable of Redirection Each II . .
Trailing End for St. Thrie Bm .
Hwy .
Guard at Bridge Each II. . Precast Concrete Barrier Single Faced Meter II. . Precast Concrete Median Barrier Double Faced Meter II. . CastinPlace Concrete Barrier Single Faced Meter II. . CastinPlace Concrete Median Barrier Double Faced Meter II. . CastinPlace Median Barrier Cap Cubic Meter II. . Highway Guard Removed and Reset Meter II . .
Individual Post Removed and Reset Each II. . New Post ion Highway Guard Removed and Reset Each II. . Highway Guard Removed and Stacked Meter II .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifiactions for Highways and Bridges A. . Anchor Removed and Stacked Each II . .
Individual Post Removed and Stacked Each II. . ___ meter Chain Link Fence Spring Tension Wire Fabric and Line Post Option Meter II. . ___ meter Chain Link Fence Spring Tension Wire Vinyl Coated Line Post Option Meter II. . ___ meter Chain Link Fence Pipe Top Rail Fabric and Line Post Option Meter II. . ___ meter Chain Link Fence Pipe Top Rail Vinyl Coated Line Post Option Meter II. . ___ meter Chain Link Fence Cable Top Fabric and Line Post Option Meter II. . ___ meter Chain Link Fence Cable Top Vinyl Coated Line Post Option Meter II. . ___ meter Chain Link Fence Pipe Top Rail with Barbed Wire Fabric and Line Post Option Meter II. . ___ meter Chain Link Fence Cable Top with Barbed Wire Fabric and Line Post Option Meter II. . ___ meter Chain Link Fence Spring Tension Wire with Barbed Wire Fabric and Line Post Option Meter II. . ___ meter Chain Link Gate With Gate Posts Meter II. . ___ meter Chain Link Gate With Gate Posts and Barbed Wire Meter II. . ___ meter Chain Link Fence End Post Each II. . ___ meter Chain Link Fence Corner and Intermediate Brace Post Each II. . ___ meter Chain Link Fence Fabric Meter II. . Metal Pipe Rail Meter II . .
Fence Removed and Reset Meter II. . ___ meter Chain Link Fence Removed and Reset Meter II. . ___ meter Chain Link Fence Gate with Gate Posts Removed and Reset Each II. . Iron Pipe Fence Removed and Reset Meter II. . Stock Fence Gate Removed and Reset Each II. . Wood Gate Removed and Reset Each II . .
Fence Removed and Stacked Meter II. . ___ meter Chain Link Fence Removed and Stacked Meter II. . ___ meter Chain Link Gate with Gate Posts Removed and Stacked Each II. . Field Stone Masonry in Cement Mortar Cubic Meter II. . Field Stone Masonry Dry Cubic Meter II. . Stone Masonry Wall Removed and Rebuilt in Cement Mortar Cubic Meter II. . Stone Masonry Wall Removed and Rebuilt Dry Cubic Meter II. . Balance Stone Wall Removed and Rebuilt Meter II . .
Concrete Sidewalk Square Meter II . .
Concrete Sidewalk at Driveways Square Meter II . .
Concrete Wheelchair Ramp Square Meter II. . Bituminous Concrete Walk Surface Metric Ton II. . Bituminous Concrete Wheelchair Ramp Metric Ton II. . Bituminous Concrete Driveway Metric Ton II. . BoundLettered Granite Each II. . BoundPlain Granite Each II . .
Bound Removed and Reset Each II . .
Bound Removed and Stacked Each II . .
Rural Mail Box Removed and Reset Each II .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifiactions for Highways and Bridges A. . Metal BinType Retaining Wall Square Meter II . .
Engineers Field Office and Equipment Type A Month II . .
Engineers Field Office and Equipment Type B Month II . .
Engineers Field Office and Equipment Type C Month II . .
Engineers Field Office and Equipment Type D Month II. . Materials Laboratory and Equipment Month II. . Transportation Vehicle No .
___ Month II. . Transportation Office Van Month II. . Mobilization Section II. . Loam Borrow Cubic Meter II. . Plantable Soil Borrow Cubic Meter II. . Topsoil Rehandled and Spread Cubic Meter II . .
Processed Planting Material Cubic Meter II. . Impervious Soil Borrow Cubic Meter II. . Seeding Square Meter II . .
Seed for Erosion Control Kilogram II. . Refertilization Square Meter II. . Hay Mulch Metric Ton II . .
Straw Mulch Cubic Meter II. . Wood Chip Mulch Cubic Meter II. . Wood Fibre Mulch Metric Ton II . .
Aged Pine Bark Mulch Cubic Meter II. . Bales of Hay for Erosion Control Each II. . Pavement Milling Mulch Under Guard Rail Meter II . .
Lawn Sodding Square Meter II. . Field Sodding Square Meter II. . Natural Growth Sod Lowbush Blueberry Each II. . Natural Growth Sod Bearberry Each II. . Natural Growth Sod Mountain Laurel Each II. . Natural Growth Sod Sweet Fern Each II. . to .
Evergreen Trees Balled and Burlapped Each II. . to .
Deciduous Trees Balled and Burlapped Each II. . to .
Evergreen Shrubs Balled and Burlapped Each II. . to .
Deciduous Shrubs Balled and Burlapped Each II. . Vines and Groundcover PotGrown Each II. . Seedlings Each II. . to ___ millimeter Electrical Conduit Type NM .
mm to mm diameter single double bank or bank Meter II. . to ___ millimeter Electrical Conduit Type NM Plastic UL .
mm to mm diameter Meter II. . to ___ millimeter Electrical Conduit Type NM Plastic NEMA .
mm to mm diameter Meter II. . to ___ millimeter Electrical Conduit Type RM Steel Galvanized .
Meter II. . to ___ millimeter Electrical Conduit Type RM Aluminum .
mm to mm diameter Meter II. . to ___ millimeter Electrical Conduit Type RM Steel Plastic Coated .
mm to mm diameter Meter II. . to ___ millimeter Electrical Conduit Flexible Metallic .
mm to mm diameter Meter II. . Conduit Encased in Concrete SD .
Meter II. . to .
Electric Manhole SD .
SD .
to SD .
Each II .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifiactions for Highways and Bridges A. . to .
Electric Handhole SD .
SD .
to SD .
Each II . .
Pull Box millimeters by millimeters SD .
Each II . .
Pull Box millimeters by millimeters SD .
Each II . .
Pull Box Adjusted Each II. . Electric Manhole Adjusted Each II. . Electric Handhole Adjusted Each II. . to .
Junction Box ___ mm x ___ mm x ___ mm Each II. . to .
Light Standard Foundation SD .
SD .
to SD .
Each II . .
Lighting Load Center Foundation Each II. . Standard Signal Post Foundation Each II. . Pedestal Signal Post Foundation SD .
Each II. . Signal Mast Arm Foundation Each II. . Signal Control Cabinet Foundation Each II. . Traffic Signal Steel Messenger Cable Type Meter II. . to .
Traffic Signal Cable Type to Meter II. . Traffic Signal Head Wire Type Meter II. . to .
Wire Type No .
Direct Burial to Meter II. . to .
Wire Type No .
Direct Burial to Meter II. . Wire Type Special Purpose TWTHW Meter II. . Wire Type Special Purpose UF Meter II. . Wire Type Grounding and Bonding Meter II. . Wire Type Loop Detector Leadin Meter II. . Wire Type Heavy Duty Portable Cord Meter II. . Wire Type Loop Detector Wire and Tube Meter II. . Equipment Grounding Lump Sum II . .
Ground Rod Meter II . .
Ground Rod .
Meters Long Each II . .
Ground Rod .
Meters Long Each II. . Service Connection Overhead Lump Sum II. . Service Connection Underground Lump Sum II. . to .
Traffic Control Signal Type DW to DW Lump Sum II. . to Traffic Control Signal Type to .
Lump Sum II. . Footing Cost Adjustment Meter II. . Traffic Signal Removed and Reset Lump Sum II. . Traffic Signal Reconstruction Location No .
Lump Sum II. . Traffic Control Signal Removed and Reset Lump Sum II. . Traffic Control Signal Removed and Stacked Lump Sum II. . Traffic Control Signal Removed and Transported Lump Sum II. . Signal Post and Base Standard .. meters Each II. . Signal Post and Base Standard .
meters Each II. . Signal Post and Base Pedestal .
meters Each II. . Signal Post and Base Pedestal .
meters Each II. . Signal Base Standard millimeters Octagonal Each II. . Signal Base Pedestal millimeters Square Each II. . to .
Signal Mast Arm ___ meters Aluminum Each II. . to .
Signal Mast Arm ___ meters Steel Each II. . to .
Signal and Lighting Mast Arm ___ meter x ___meter Each II. . to .
Signal Head Way ___ ___ Section millimeter Lens Each II. . to .
Signal Head Way ___ ___ Section millimeter Lens Each II. . to .
Signal Head Way ___ ___ Section millimeter Lens Each II. . to .
Signal Head Way ___ ___ Section millimeter Red Lens Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifiactions for Highways and Bridges A .
Each II. . Signal Head Way ___ Section millimeter Square Lens Each II. . millimeter Incandescent Pedestrian Signal Head International Symbols Each II. . millimeter Incandescent Pedestrian Signal Head International Symbols Each II. . millimeter Fiberoptic Pedestrian Signal Head International Symbols Each II. . to .
Way Post Top Mounting Assembly Each II. . to .
Mast Arm Mounting Assembly ___ ___ Way Each II. . to .
Post Side Mounting Assembly ___ ___ Way Each II. . to .
Span Wire Mounting Assembly ___ ___Way Each II. . to .
Louvered Hood for meter Signal Section Each II. . to .
Back Plates for millimeter Signal Head millimeters Each II. . Back Plates for Combined mm mm Signal Head Each II. . to .
Ornamental Pole Clamp millimeter Diameter millimeters Each II . .
Pole Clamp with Wire Entrance Each II. . to .
Traffic Signal Controller Type DW to DW Lump Sum II .
Phase Menu Driven Traffic Controller Unit Each II. . Railroad PreEmptor Each II. . Fire Station PreEmptor Each II. . Special Internal Unit Each II. . Special Function Unit Each II. . to .
Coordinating Unit Type Type FF to Type S Each II. . Signal Light Switching Assembly Type DC Each II. . Signal Light Switching Assembly Type SS Each II . .
Detector Unit Conflicting Green Each II. . to Traffic Signal Controller Type to .
Lump Sum II . .
Magnetic Detector Amplifier Each II . .
Vehicle Detector Directional Compensated Magnetic Each II . .
Vehicle Detector MultiLane NonCompensated Magnetic Each II . .
Vehicle Detector SingleLane NonCompensated Magnetic Each II . .
Detector Amplifier Magnetic Special Each II . .
Detector Sensing Head Magnetic Special Each II . .
Vehicle Presence Detector Ultrasonic Each II . .
Vehicle Motion Detector Ultrasonic Each II. . Inductive Loop Detector Amplifier Each II. . Wire Loop Installed in Roadway Meter II. . Microloop Installed in Roadway Meter II. . Pedestrian Push Button Each II. . Push Button for Green Light Sign Each II. . Push Button for Walk Signal Sign Each II. . Highway Lighting Roadway Lump Sum II. . Highway Lighting Underpass Lump Sum II. . Highway Lighting Area Lump Sum II. . Highway Lighting Sign Lump Sum II. . to .
Highway Lighting Pole Anchor Base meter Bracket Each II. . to .
Highway Lighting Pole Anchor Base Twin meter Bracket . . meters Each II .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifiactions for Highways and Bridges A. . to .
Highway Lighting Pole Transformer Base meter Bracket Each II. . to .
Highway Lighting Pole Transformer Base Twin meter Bracket . . meters Each II. . to .
Area Lighting Hinged Pole meter Mounting Height meters Each II. . to .
Area Lighting Mast Pole or Tower meter Mounting Height meters Each II. . to .
Area Lighting Mast Pole or Tower meter Mounting Height meters Each II. . to .
Highway Lighting Luminaire Watt Watt Each II. . to .
Area Lighting Luminaire Watt Watt Each II . .
Flood Lighting Luminaire Less Than Watt Each II . .
Flood Lighting Luminaire Watt and Over Each II. . to .
Underpass Lighting Luminaire meters Fluorescent Each II. . to .
Sign Lighting Luminaire meters Fluorescent .. meters Each II. . Sign Lighting Luminaire Watt Each II. . Sign Lighting Luminaire Watt Each II. . Photo Electric Control Each II . .
Multiple Control Switch Each II . .
Multiple Circuit Contactor Each II. . Time Clock Each II. . Highway Lighting Load Center Lump Sum II. . Highway Lighting Pole and Luminaire Removed and Reset Each II. . Highway Lighting Pole and Luminaire Removed and Stacked Each II. . Highway Lighting Pole and Luminaire Removed and Transported Each II . .
Flashing Warning Beacon Type D Lump Sum II . .
Flashing Warning Beacon Type A Lump Sum II . .
Flashing Warning Beacon Type B Lump Sum II . .
Flashing Warning Beacon Type C Lump Sum II . .
Flashing Warning Beacon Removed and Reset Lump Sum II . .
Flashing Warning Beacon Removed and Stacked Lump Sum II. . Highway Warning Sign Illuminated Each II. . Highway Warning Sign Illuminated Lump Sum II. . Highway Warning Sign Illuminated Removed and Reset Lump Sum II. . Highway Warning Sign Illuminated Removed and Stacked Lump Sum II. . Highway Warning Sign Illuminated Removed and Transported Lump Sum II. . Lighted Barrier Arrows Each II. . Lighted Barrier Arrows Lump Sum II. . Lighted Barrier Arrows Removed and Reset Lump Sum II. . Lighted Barrier Arrows Removed and Stacked Lump Sum II. . Lighted Barrier Arrows Removed and Transported Lump Sum II. . Lighted Barrier Arrows Removed Transported and Reset Lump Sum II. . millimeter Warning Cluster H Aluminum Panel Type A Each II. . millimeter Warning Cluster H Aluminum Panel Type A Each II. . Abutment Warning Sign H Plywood Panel Each II. . Abutment Warning Sign H Aluminum Panel Type A Each II . .
Overhead Guide Sign Option Square Meter II . .
Overhead Guide Sign Aluminum Panel Type B Square Meter II . .
Roadside Guide Sign MR Aluminum Panel Type B Square Meter II . .
Roadside Guide Sign FR Over .
square meters Option Square Meter II . .
Roadside Guide Sign FR Over square meters Aluminum Panel Type B Square Meter II . .
Roadside Guide Sign FR .
square meters and under Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifiactions for Highways and Bridges A .
Aluminum Panel Type A Square Meter II . .
Warning Regulatory and Route Marker Aluminum Panel Type A Square Meter II. . WH Demountable Reflectorized Delineator H Each II. . AM Demountable Reflectorized Delineator H Each II. . WH Demountable Reflectorized Delineator H Each II. . AM Demountable Reflectorized Delineator H Each II. . AM Demountable Reflectorized Delineator H Each II. . Demountable Reflectorized Delineator Guard Rail Each II. . Delineation for Guard Rail Termini Each II. . Demountable Reflectorized Kilometer Marker Each II. . Demountable Reflectorized TenthofKilometer Marker Each II. . Demountable Reflectorized TenthofKilometer Marker Excluding Post Each II. . Reflectorized Flexible Delineator Post Amber Each II. . Reflectorized Flexible Delineator Post White Each II. . Demountable Reflectorized Hazard Marker H Each II. . Demountable Reflectorized Project Marker with P Post Each II. . Demountable Reflectorized Project Marker Excluding Post Each II. . Demountable Relectorized Station Marker with P Post Each II. . Demountable Reflectorized Station Marker excluding post Each II. . to Supports for Overhead Guide Sign .
OD thru OD Steel Lump Sum II. . to Supports for Guide Sign D thru D Steel .
Lump Sum II. . to Supports for Guide Sign GF thru GF Steel .
Lump Sum II. . to Supports for Guide Sign D thru D Steel .
Lump Sum II. . to Supports for Guide Sign G thru G Steel .
Lump Sum II . .
Supports for Guide Sign E Steel Lump Sum II . .
Supports for Guide Sign EA I Steel Lump Sum II. . Sign Support Not Guide and Route Marker w Breakaway Post Assembly Steel Each II. . Sign Support Not Guide and Route Marker w Breakaway Post Assemblies Steel Each II. . Safety Controls for Construction Operations Lump Sum II. . Safety Signing for Construction Operations Square Meter II. . Portable Barricade Type III Each II. . Portable Breakaway Barricade Type III Each II . .
Temporary Precast Concrete Median Barrier Meter II . .
Temporary Precast Concrete Median Barrier Removed and Reset Meter II . .
Temporary Impact Attenuator for Shoulder Incapable of Redirection Each II . .
Temporary Impact Attenuator for Shoulder Incapable of Redirection Removed and Reset Each II . .
Temporary Impact Attenuator for Shoulder Capable of Redirection Each II . .
Temporary Impact Attenuator for Shoulder Capable of Redirection Removed and Reset Each II . .
Temporary Impact Attenuator for Median Incapable of Redirection Each II . .
Temporary Impact Attenuator for Median Incapable of Redirection Removed and Reset Each II . .
Temporary Impact Attenuator for Median Capable of Redirection Each II .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifiactions for Highways and Bridges A. .
Temporary Impact Attenuator for Median Capable of Redirection Removed and Reset Each II . .
Temporary AntiGlare Screen Paddle Type Meter II . .
Temporary AntiGlare Screen Removed and Reset Meter II . .
Temporary AntiGlare Screen Removed and Stacked Meter II . .
Temporary Raised Pavement Markers Each II . .
Temporary Pavement Markings Millimeters Painted Meter II . .
Temporary Pavement Markings Millimeters Painted Meter II . .
Temporary Pavement Markings Millimeters NonRemovable Tape Meter II . .
Temporary Pavement Markings Millimeters NonRemovable Tape Meter II . .
Temporary Pavement Markings Millimeters Removable Tape Meter II . .
Temporary Pavement Markings Millimeters Removable Tape Meter II. . Pavement Marking Removal Paint Square Meter II. . Pavement Marking Removal Thermoplastic Square Meter II. . Pavement Marking Removal Tape Square Meter II. . Pavement Marking Masking Removable Tape Square Meter II . .
Hazard Identification Beacon Type B Each II . .
Hazard Identification Beacon Type D Each II. . Special Lighting Unit Flashing Arrow UnitDay II. . Portable Changeable Message Sign UnitDay II. . Reflectorized Drum DrumDay II. . Reflectorized Drum with Flasher Type A DrumDay II. . Reflectorized Drum with Light Type C DrumDay II. . to .
millimeter Reflectorized White Line Painted Meter II. . to .
millimeter Reflectorized Yellow Line Painted millimeters Meter II. . Pavement Arrow Reflectorized White Painted Square Meter II. . Pavement Arrow and Legends Reflectorized White Tape Inlay Square Meter II. . Pavement Arrow and Legends Surface Applied Tape Square Meter II. . to .
millimeter Reflectorized White Line Thermoplastic Meter II. . to .
millimeter Reflectorized Yellow Line Thermoplastic millimeters Meter II. . millimeter White Reflective Tape Inlay Meter II. . millimeter Yellow Reflective Tape Inlay Meter II. . millimeter White Reflective Tape Surface Applied Meter II. . millimeter Yellow Reflective Tape Surface Applied Meter II. . MPa mm kg Cement Concrete Masonry Cubic Meter II. . MPa mm kg Cement Concrete Masonry Cubic Meter II. . MPa mm kg Cement Concrete Masonry Cubic Meter II. . MPa mm kg Cement Concrete Masonry Cubic Meter II. . MPa mm kg Cement Concrete Masonry Cubic Meter II. . MPa mm kg Cement Concrete Masonry Cubic Meter II. . MPa mm kg Cement Concrete Masonry Cubic Meter II. . Latex Modified Mortar and Concrete Overlayment Square Meter II. . Steel Reinforcement for Structures Kilogram II. . Steel Reinforcement for Structures Epoxy Coated Kilogram II. . Shear Connectors Lump Sum II. . Prestressed Concrete Deck Beams Lump Sum II. . Prestressed Concrete Box Beams Lump Sum II .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifiactions for Highways and Bridges A. . Prestressed Concrete Beams I or Bulb Section Lump Sum II. . Elastomeric Bridge Bearing Pad Square Meter II. . Elastomeric Bridge Bearing Pad Each II. . Untreated Timber Piles Meter II . .
Treated Timber Piles Meter II. . Steel Pile HP ___ x ___ Meter II. . Steel Pipe Pile ___ millimeter OD Meter II. . CastinPlace Concrete Piles Meter II. . PrecastPrestressed Concrete Pile Meter II . .
Timber Test Pile Meter II. . Short Duration Load Test Each II . .
Maintained Load Test Each II. . Quick Load Test Each II . .
Dynamic Load Test Preparation Each II . .
Dynamic Load Test by Contractor Each II. . Pile Shoes Each II. . Lumber Sheeting Cubic Meters II. . Wood Sheeting Cubic Meters II. . Steel Sheeting Kilograms II . .
Treated Timber Cubic Meters II . .
Structural Steel Kilograms II. . Membrane Waterproofing for Bridge Decks Square Meter II. . Waterproofing Protective Course Square Meter II. . Membrane Waterproofing Square Meter II. . Bituminous Dampproofing Square Meter II. . Metal Bridge Railing Rail Aluminum Type AL Meter II. . Metal Bridge Railing Rail Aluminum Type AL Meter II. . Metal Bridge Railing Rail Steel Type SPL Galvanized Meter II. . Dumped Riprap Metric Ton II. . Riprap Metric Ton II. . Stone and Stone Chips for Waterway Revetments Groins Jetties Breakwaters and Mounds Metric Ton II. . Slope Paving Square Meter II . .
Modified Rockfill Metric Ton II. . Special Slope Paving under Bridge Option Square Meter II. . Special Slope Paving Under Bridge Quarry Stone Square Meter II. . Special Slope Paving Under Bridge Quarry Stone Grouted Square Meter II. . Special Slope Paving Under Bridge Precast Concrete Blocks Square Meter II. . Special Slope Paving Under Bridge Cement Concrete Masonry Square Meter II. . Channel Paving Square Meter II. . Grouted Channel Paving Square Meter II. . Bridge Structure Bridge No .
___ Lump Sum II .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges B .
CONTRACT ALLOWANCE PAYMENT ITEMS Item Numbers Item Unit Page .
etc .
Traffic Police I. .
Trainees Hours .
Extra Depth Class A Trench Excavation Cubic Meter II. . Test Pit Excavation Cubic Meter II. . Cofferdam Class B Rock Excavation Cubic Meter II. . Railroad Flagging Dollars I. . etc .
Asphalt Adjustment Metric Ton .
Interest Dollars .
etc .
Diesel Adjustment Liter .
etc .
Gasoline Adjustment Liter .
Telephone Dollars II. . etc .
Extra Work Order .
Allowance for High Early Strength Cement Cubic Meter II. . Untreated Timber Pile CutOff Meter II . .
Treated Timber Pile CutOff Meter II. . etc .
Materials On Hand II. . Increase in Concrete Quantity Cubic Meter II . .
Decrease in Concrete Quantity Cubic Meter II .
B .
This page intentionally blank .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges C. GENERAL INDEX A Abandoned Drainage Structures II .
Abbreviations Definition ofI .
Abutment Warning Sign II .
Acts of God Definition ofI .
Adjacent Contracts I .
Adjustment Rebuilding and Remodeling of Drainage Structures II .
Aged Pine Bark Mulch II .
Aggregates and Related MaterialsIII .
Aggregates for Bituminous Concrete III .
Cement ConcreteIII .
Dense Graded Crushed Stone for SubbaseIII .
GravelIII .
Agreement Final I. I .
Supplementary I. I .
Air Content Cement Concrete Masonry III .
Cement Concrete PavementIII .
Concrete SidewalksIII .
Air Entraining MaterialIII .
Air Pollution ControlI .
Allowance for Cement Concrete Masonry Bridge Structures II .
High Early Strength Cement in Cement Concrete Base Course II .
Pavement II .
Masonry II .
Overbreakage on Class A Rock Excavation II .
Pile Cutoff Timber or Treated Timber II .
AlterationsI .
Alternative Items Payment Chain Link Fence II .
Drainage Pipe Culverts II .
Drainage Subdrains II .
Electrical Conduit II .
Metal Bridge Railings II .
Special Slope Paving Under Bridges II .
Aluminum Alloy Chain Link FenceIII .
Culvert Pipe III .
Metal Bridge Railing III .
SubdrainIII .
Anchors Removed and Stacked II .
Anticipated ProfitsI .
Approval and Acceptance of Materials III .
Archeological and Paleontological Discoveries I .
Area Lighting Hinged PoleII .
II .
Area Lighting Mast Pole or TowerII .
II .
Arrows Lighted Barrier II .
Asphalt Bituminous Concrete Curb III .
Bituminous Concrete Pavement III .
Coated Corrugated Pipe and Pipe Arch II .
Coated Corrugated SubdrainsII .
Prime Coat II .
Roadway Dust Control II .
Tack CoatII .
Asphalt Tar and Allied Materials See Section M Bituminous Materials III .
Assignment of Contract Subletting or I. Auger BoringsII .
Auger Borings Hollow StemII .
Auger Boring SamplesII .
Authority and Duties of Engineers AssistantsI .
Authority of EngineerI .
Award and Execution of ContractI .
Award of Contract I .
B Backfill for Culvert Storm Drains and Pipe SewersII .
Electrical ConduitII .
Muck Excavation AreasII .
StructuresII .
Subdrains II .
Balance Stone Wall Removed and RebuiltII .
Bales of Hay for Erosion ControlII .
Barricades and Warning Signs I. Barricade Portable Type IIIII .
Bars See Reinforcement III .
III .
Base Courses II .
Cement Concrete II .
Class I Bit .
Conc .
Base Course Type I II .
Gravel Base Course II .
Reclaimed Base Course II .
Bases Cement Concrete for Chain Link FenceII .
Woven Wire Fence II .
Bases and Posts for Rural Mail BoxesII .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges C. Basic Estimate of Quantities Interpretation ofI .
Basins Manholes and Inlets II .
Batching Equipment for Bituminous Concrete III .
Cement Concrete III .
Beacons FlashingII .
Beams Concrete See PrestressedII .
Steel II .
TestIII .
Bearing Pads III .
Bearing Plates Bronze SelfLubricating III .
Bench Marks in Cement Concrete Masonry II .
Berms Class I Bit .
ConcreteII .
Bidder Definition ofI .
Bid Prices Preparation of ProposalsI .
Bids Proposals Consideration ofI .
Billet Steel Reinforcing Bars III .
Bitumen See Asphalt or Tar Tabulation of WeightsII .
Bitumen for Prime Coat II .
Roadway Dust ControlII .
Tack CoatII .
Bituminous Concrete Excavation by Cold PlanerII .
Bituminous Fibre Electrical Conduit Type NMII .
Bituminous Concrete Berms Class I II .
Bituminous Concrete Curb Type or II .
Bituminous Concrete Driveways II .
Bituminous Concrete for PatchingII .
Bituminous Concrete Mixtures Tabulation of General Composition III .
Bituminous Concrete Pavement See Class I Bit .
Conc .
Pave .
Type I II .
Bituminous Concrete Walk SurfaceII .
Bituminous Concrete WaterwaysII .
Bituminous DampProofingII .
Blasting Control of I. Bleeders See Crushed Stone for Bleeders II .
Blended Hydraulic Cements III .
Blocks Cement Concrete II .
Bonding to Concrete Already Set II .
Bonds Required I. PaymentI .
Performance I. BoringsII .
Drilling MethodsII .
Auger Borings II .
Auger Boring Sample II .
Core BoringII .
Drive Sample BoringII .
GeneralII .
Ground Water Observation Wellpoint II .
Hollow Stem Auger Borings II .
Mobilization and Dismantling of Boring EquipmentII .
Test PitsII .
ThinWall Steel Drive Sample II .
Undisturbed SampleII .
Undisturbed Sample Preparatory Boring .. II .
Vane Shear Test II .
Vane Shear Test Preparatory BoringII .
Description II .
Boring Samples and ReportsII .
Driller QualificationII .
SupervisionII .
Borrow See Embankment II .
Borrow Payment Items Crushed Stone for Drainage Revetment and Water Work Foundation II .
Crushed Stone for Subbase Dense Graded II .
Gravel II .
Gravel Borrow for Bridge FoundationII .
Impervious SoilII .
LoamII .
OrdinaryII .
Processed Planting Material II .
SandII .
Special BorrowII .
Borrow Pit Restrictions II .
BoundsII .
Boxes Junction II .
Brick ClayII .
Brick MasonryII .
Bridge Definition of I. LengthI .
Roadway Width I. Bridge Demolition of PresentII .
Bridge ExcavationII .
Bridge Excavation within CofferdamII .
Bridge Railing See Metal Bridge Railings II .
Bridge Seats Preparation ofII .
Bridge Structure II .
Construction MethodsII .
Description II .
MaterialsII .
Bridge Superstructure Demolition of Present See Bridge Demolition of PresentII .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges C. Bronze SelfLubricating Bearing Plates III .
Brush Disposal of II .
Buildings Removal or Demolition and Land TakingsI .
Burlap for Curing Cement Concrete Base Course II .
PavementII .
C Cable Top Chain Link FenceII .
Calcium Chloride for Roadway Dust ControlII .
Camber Steel Beams and GirdersII .
Castings Iron and Steel for BasinsII .
Inlet II .
ManholesII .
Structural SteelII .
Castin Place Concrete Piles See Driven Piles II .
Cast Iron Fittings for Water MainII .
Pipe for Water Systems III .
Cast Steel for Metal Bridge Railings II .
Catch Basin Frames and GratesII .
Catch Basins Manholes and Gutter Inlets See Basins Manholes and Inlets II .
Catch Basins or Manholes Abandoned or Removed See Drainage Structures Abandoned or Removed II .
Catch Basins or Manholes Change in Type or Remodeled See Adjustment Rebuilding and Remodeling of Drainage Structures II .
Cement Blended Hydraulic Cements III .
Normal Portland Cement III .
Cement and Cement Concrete Materials III .
Cement Brick III .
Cement Concrete Base CourseII .
Cement Concrete Blocks II .
III .
Cement Concrete Masonry II .
Construction Methods II .
Anchors II .
Concrete Construction during Cold WeatherII .
Concrete PenetrantSealerII .
Date Seal Bench Marks and OrnamentsII .
FormsII .
Handling and Placing Concrete II .
Joints II .
ConstructionII .
Expansion II .
Partition Title II .
Protection Curing and FinishingII .
Protection of Pipes and ConduitII .
ReinforcementII .
Removal of Forms and Loading on StructuresII .
Shear Connectors II .
Weep Holes and DrainsII .
Description II .
MaterialsII .
Cement Concrete PavementII .
Compensation II .
Pavement DeficiencyII .
Price AdjustmentII .
Construction MethodsII .
Batching and Mixing ConcreteII .
Conditioning of SubbaseII .
Curing II .
Cold WeatherII .
Impervious MembraneII .
Moist Initial and FinalII .
Waterproof Paper II .
White Polyethylene SheetingII .
Equipment and ToolsII .
Finishing ConcreteII .
Alternate Finishing and FloatingII .
Edging at Forms and Joints II .
Final Finish II .
Finishing at Joints II .
Hand FinishingII .
LongitudinalII .
Transverse Machine FinishingII .
Straightedge Testing and Surface Corrections II .
Forms and Form SettingII .
Joints II .
Load Transfer DevicesII .
Longitudinal II .
Transverse ConstructionII .
ContractionII .
ExpansionII .
Limitations of Mixing II .
Mixing ConcreteII .
Numbering SlabsII .
Opening to TrafficII .
Placing Concrete II .
Placing Steel Reinforcement II .
Preparation of GradeII .
Protection of Pavement II .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges C. Removing Forms II .
Sealing Joints II .
Spreading and StrikeOff of Concrete II .
Surface Test II .
Test Specimens II .
Tolerance in Pavement Thickness II .
Materials II .
Cement Concrete Paving WaterwayII .
Cement Concrete Pipe III .
Certified Check Proposal GuaranteeI .
Certificate of ComplianceI .
Certification of Materials III .
Chain Link Fences and GatesII .
Chain Link Fences and Gates Removed and Reset See Fences and Gates Removed and ResetII .
Chain Link Fences and Gates Removed and Stacked See Fences and Gates Removed and Stacked II .
Changed ConditionsI .
Channel ExcavationII .
Character of Workmen Methods and EquipmentI .
Circuit IdentificationII .
Claims against Contractor for Payment of Labor Materials and Other PurposesI .
Claims of Contractor for Compensation I .
Claim for Delay or Suspension of WorkI .
Class A Rock ExcavationII .
II .
Class A Trench ExcavationII .
II .
Class B Rock ExcavationII .
II .
Class B Trench ExcavationII .
II .
Class I Bituminous Concrete Base Course Type III .
Class I Bituminous Concrete Pavement Type III .
Construction Methods II .
CompactionII .
JointsII .
Opening to Traffic II .
Pavement on BridgesII .
Spreading and Finishing II .
Tack Coat II .
Testing Surfaces II .
Transportation and Delivery of MixturesII .
DescriptionII .
Composition and Compaction Acceptance Tests II .
MaterialsII .
Class I Dense Bituminous Concrete Type ST III .
Class I Dense Protective Binder Course for Bridges III .
Clay BrickIII .
Cleaning Up Final I .
Clearing and Grubbing II .
Coarse Aggregate for Cement Concrete III .
Cofferdams and Pumping II .
Cold Weather Cement Concrete MasonryII .
Pavement II .
Collars Payment for Cement Concrete for Drainage Structures in Pavement AreasII .
Collected Natural Growth Sodding II .
III .
Commission Definition of I. Commonwealth Definition of I .
Compensation Insurance for Traffic OfficersI .
Workmans I. Competency of Bidders I .
Completion Determination and Extension of Contract Time forI .
Composition General for Bituminous Concrete Mixtures III .
Concrete Barrier II .
Concrete Beams See Prestressed II .
Concrete Bituminous See Bituminous Concrete Concrete Cement Base CourseII .
Masonry III .
Pavement II .
Concrete Curb Corners Types A and B See Section II .
Concrete Curb Type VA See Section II .
Concrete Edging Type SA See Section II .
Concrete Envelope for Conduit II .
Concrete Masonry Construction See Cement Concrete MasonryII .
Concrete Piles See Driven PilesII .
Concrete Protection and Curing Base CourseII .
MasonryII .
Pavement II .
Precast Units III .
Waterways II .
Concrete SidewalkII .
Connectors ShearII .
Conduit Manholes Handholes Pullboxes and FoundationsII .
Construction Methods ConduitII .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges C. Electric Manholes Handholes Pull and Junction Boxes II .
Foundations II .
Condulets II .
Conformity with Plans and SpecificationsI .
Consideration of ProposalsI .
Construction Stakes StakingI .
Contract Award and Execution ofI .
AwardI .
Bonds RequiredI .
Execution ofI .
Failure to Execute I. Subletting or Assignment ofI .
Time for Completion Determination and Extension ofI .
Unit Price BidI .
Contractor Definition ofI .
Contractors Responsibility for the WorkI .
Control of MaterialsI .
Control of Rodents Extermination II .
Control of WorkI .
Convenience Public Safety andI .
Convenience TerminationI .
Cooperation by Contractor I .
Coordination of Special Provisions Plans Supplemental Specifications and Standard SpecificationsI .
Copper Tubing III .
Core Boring II .
Cork Filter Preformed Expansion Joints Structures III .
Corrugated Plastic Pipe III .
Cost PlusI .
Coupling Conduit See Electrical Conduit III .
Covenants General Requirements and I .
Crushed Gravel Stone III .
Crushed Stone III .
Crushed Stone for Bleeders II .
Crushed Stone for Drainage Revetment and Water Work Foundations II .
II .
Crushed Stone for Bridge FoundationsII .
II .
Crushed Stone for Peastone Cover II .
Crushed Stone Sizes Tabulation of Grading III .
Culverts Definition ofI .
Culverts Storm Drains and Sewer Pipes II .
Construction Methods II .
Bedding PipesII .
ExcavationII .
Pipe Joints II .
Structural Plate Pipe and Pipe ArchII .
Culverts Pipes Removed and Relaid See Pipes Removed and RelaidII .
Culverts Pipes Removed and Stacked See Pipes Removed and StackedII .
Curb Curb Inlets Curb Corners and EdgingII .
Construction MethodsII .
Bituminous Concrete CurbII .
Bridge CurbII .
Concrete Curb Corners and EdgingII .
Excavating Trench II .
Filling About TrenchII .
PointingII .
Preparing FoundationII .
Setting Curb and Edging II .
Transition Curb for Wheelchair Ramps .. II .
Curb or Edging Removed and Reset Removed and Stacked Removed and Discarded II .
Curing Cement Concrete Base CourseII .
Cement Concrete Masonry II .
Cement Concrete PavementII .
Precast Units III .
Prestressed Concrete BeamsII .
Cylinder Test Concrete II .
D Damage Claims Responsibility for I. Dampproofing See Bituminous DampproofingII .
Date and Seal Bridge II .
Decreased Quantities Increased or I. Deciduous Ornamental Trees II .
Deciduous Shade Trees II .
Deciduous ShrubsII .
Default Termination I .
Defective Materials I .
Definition of TermsI .
Delay and Suspension of Work I. Delineators See Section II .
Delivery of ProposalI .
Delivery and Storage of MaterialsI .
Delivery of Crushed StoneII .
Demolition of Buildings Structures and BridgesII .
Demountable Reflectorized Delineator II .
Demountable Reflectorized Hazard MarkerII .
Demountable Reflectorized Mile MarkerII .
Demountable Reflectorized Project Marker II .
Demountable Reflectorized TenthofMile Marker II .
Dense Graded Crushed Stone for SubbaseII .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges C. Department Definition ofI .
Design Strength of Cement ConcreteIII .
Detail Drawings Plans andI .
Determination and Extension of Contract Time for CompletionI .
Determination of Low BidI .
Detours Maintenance ofI .
Devices Patented Materials and Processes I .
Differ Substantially or Materially Definition ofI .
Discarding Curb or EdgingII .
Disposal and Removal of Structures and Obstructions I. Disqualification of BiddersI .
Domestic MaterialsI .
Double Faced Steel Beam Highway Guard Type SSII .
Dowels See Steel Reinforcement II .
Dowels Holes for CompensationII .
Drainage See Section II .
Drainage Structures Abandoned II .
II .
Adjusted See Section II .
Remodeled See Section II .
Removed II .
II .
Drawings Furnished by Contractor Shop II .
Steel ScheduleII .
DredgingII .
Drill Steel Rods II .
Drive Sample BoringsII .
Driven Piles II .
Construction Methods II .
Driving AppurtenancesII .
HammersII .
DescriptionII .
Pile Schedule II .
PrecastPrestressed Piles II .
Materials II .
Pile Installation II .
CutoffsII .
Defective PilesII .
Determination of Required Pile Driving Resistance II .
Pile Load TestsII .
Placing and Protecting Concrete Filled Piles II .
Preparation for DrivingII .
Procedure for DrivingII .
Splices II .
Test Piles II .
Drop Inlets See Basins Manholes and Inlets II .
Dry Stone Masonry for Leaching BasinsIII .
Duck for Bearing PlatesIII .
Ductile Iron Pipe and FittingsIII .
Dumped Riprap See RevetmentII .
Dust Control See Section II .
Dutch Elm Diseased WoodII .
Dynamite Explosive Use of I. E Earthwork Grading Demolition Rodent Control See Section II .
Edging II .
ConcreteII .
GraniteII .
Edging Curbing or Removed and Discarded II .
Edging Curbing or Removed and ResetII .
Edging Curbing or Removed and StackedII .
Eight Hour LawI .
Electrical ConduitII .
Electrical ManholesII .
Electrodes GroundII .
EmbankmentII .
Construction MethodsII .
Backfilling Muck Excavation AreasII .
Backfilling for Structures and PipesII .
Borrow Pit RestrictionsII .
CompactionII .
Crushed Stone for Bridge FoundationII .
Crushed Stone for Drainage Revetment and Water Work FoundationsII .
Embankment Construction with Materials other than RockII .
Gravel Borrow for Bridge FoundationII .
Preparation of Foundation AreasII .
Rock in EmbankmentII .
Employment of LaborI .
Hours ofI .
Preference inI .
Enamels See M. III .
End Markers for ConduitII .
End Flared Reinforced Concrete Pipe .. II .
II .
Ends Stone for PipeII .
End Section Metal Pipe II .
Engineer Authority of the I .
Engineer Definition ofI .
Engineers Assistants Authority and Duties ofI .
Engineers Field Office and Materials Laboratory Building Each with Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges C. Pertinent Equipment II .
Description II .
Area Enclosure Surfacing and Maintenance II .
General II .
Heating and Air Conditioning II .
Insurance and Replacement II .
Plumbing II .
Wiring and Lighting II .
Materials Equipment II .
Engineers Field Office Type AII .
Engineers Field Office Type B C and DII .
Materials Laboratory II .
Equipment for Engineers Field Office and Materials LaboratoryII .
Erection Procedure for Structural Steel II .
Establishment Period ofII .
Evergreen Seedlings Shrubs and TreesII .
Examination of Plans Specifications Special Provisions and Site I. Excavation II .
Construction Methods II .
Bituminous Concrete Excavation by Cold Planer II .
Class A Rock Excavation II .
Earth Excavation II .
General II .
Disposal of Excavated MaterialsII .
Grading Outside the LocationII .
Sequence of Operations II .
Muck ExcavationII .
Presplitting Rock II .
Topsoil Excavated and StackedII .
Unclassified Excavation II .
DescriptionII .
Excavation for StructuresII .
Construction Methods II .
Channel ExcavationII .
Class B Rock ExcavationII .
Drainage Structures Abandoned or RemovedII .
General II .
CofferdamsII .
Disposal of Excavated MaterialsII .
Excavation of Stepped FootingsII .
Shoring and Bracing of TrenchesII .
Water Control in Foundation Areas II .
DescriptionII .
Execution of ContractI .
Executive Order I .
Executive Order I .
Expansion Joints Cement ConcreteII .
Base CourseII .
MasonryII .
PavementII .
Granite Rubble Block PavementII .
Explosives Use of I .
Extension of Contract Time for Completion I .
Extra WorkI .
I .
Extra Work Definition of I .
Extra Work Order Definition of I. F Fabrication of Structural SteelII .
Fabric Bands Chain Link Fences and Gates III .
Fabric Waterproofing II .
II .
Failure to Complete Work on Time I .
Execute ContractI .
Falsework for Cement Concrete Masonry II .
Fastenings andor Fittings for Chain Link FenceII .
Highway GuardII .
Treated TimberII .
Federal ParticipationI .
Fence Fabric Chain Link Fence and GateII .
Fences and Gates Removed and Reset II .
Construction MethodsII .
ErectionII .
Removal II .
Description II .
Fences and Gates Removed and StackedII .
Construction MethodsII .
Removal II .
StackingII .
Description II .
Fertilizer II .
II .
Field Sodding See Section SoddingII .
Field Stone MasonryII .
Final Acceptance I. I .
Final Acceptance and PaymentI .
Final Cleaning UpI .
Fine Aggregate for Bituminous Concrete III .
Cement Concrete III .
Fine Grading and CompactingII .
Finishing Cement Concrete Base CourseII .
Cement Concrete Masonry II .
Cement Concrete PavementII .
Cement SidewalksII .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges C. Grading and Finishing Other than Subgrade Areas II .
Precast Units III .
Fittings for Cast Iron Water Mains II .
Chain Link Fence and Gate II .
Highway Guard II .
Treated Timber II .
Flashing Beacons Illuminated Warning Signs and Lighted Barrier Arrows II .
Flood Lighting LuminaireII .
II .
Foreign CorporationsI .
ForemanI .
Forms Construction Cement Concrete Base CourseII .
Cement Concrete MasonryII .
Cement Concrete Pavement II .
Concrete Curb II .
Precast Units III .
Sidewalks Bituminous Concrete II .
ConcreteII .
Form Ties and Spreaders II .
Foundations Special Conditions Roadways II .
Frames and Covers Castings II .
G Galvanized Steel Beam Highway Guard Type SSII .
Galvanizing for Chain Link Fence and Gate III .
Highway Guard III .
Woven Wire Fence III .
Gates Chain Link Fence III .
Woven Wire Fence III .
General Requirements and Covenants I. Geotextile Fabrics III .
Grading Earthwork and See Section II .
Grading Outside of the LocationII .
Grading and Finishing II .
Grading Tabulation for Crushed Stone Sizes III .
Graphite Paste Composition III .
Granite Curb II .
Granite Curb Corners Types A B See Section II .
Granite Curb Inlets See Section II .
Granite Edging Types SA SB SC See Section II .
Granite for BoundsII .
Curbing GeneralIII .
Curb CornersIII .
Curb Inlets III .
EdgingIII .
Rubble Block PavementIII .
Special Slope Paving Under Bridges III .
Granite Rubble Block Pavement II .
Grass Seed for Erosion Control III .
Grass Plots III .
Slopes and Shoulders III .
Grates See Frames and GatesII .
Gravel Base CourseII .
Gravel for Backfill for Abutments and WingwallsII .
Bridge FoundationsII .
Gravel Stone See Crushed Gravel Stone III .
Gravel Subbase II .
Gravity HammerII .
Ground CoverII .
Grounding Ground RodII .
Ground Water Observation WellpointII .
Grubbing See Clearing and GrubbingII .
Guarantee MaterialI .
ProposalI .
Return of I .
Guard Highway See Highway Guard Section II .
Gutter Inlets See Basins Manholes Inlets Section II .
H Hammers for Driving PilesII .
Hand Holes Electrical See Section II .
Hand Rail Iron Pipe See Metal Pipe Rail Section II .
Hardware See Fittings Hay Mulch III .
Hazard Identification BeaconII .
Headers See Field Stone Masonry Section II .
Heating and Protection Cement Concrete Masonry II .
High Early Strength Cement Concrete Pavement II .
Concrete Masonry Allowance forII .
Highway Guard Fences and WallsII .
Highway Guard Removed Reset Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges C. Removed Stacked II .
Highway Guard II .
Highway Lighting II .
Construction Methods II .
Description II .
Materials II .
General II .
Design Requirements II .
Equipment II .
Tests Required Before Acceptance II .
Highway Lighting Load CenterII .
Highway Lighting LuminaireII .
Highway Lighting PoleII .
Holes for Dowels in Cement Concrete MasonryII .
Hollow Stem Auger BoringsII .
Hoods II .
Hydrants Protection and AvailabilityI .
Hydrated LimeII .
I Impervious Soil BorrowII .
Incidental Work See Section II .
Increased or Decreased Contract QuantitiesI .
Inlets Curb Granite III .
Inspection of WorkI .
Insulation Water Pipe III .
III .
Insurance RequirementsI .
Contractors Public Liability and Property Damage Liability InsuranceI .
Contractors Protective Public Liability and Property Damage Liability InsuranceI .
Railroads Protective Public Liability and Property Damage Liability Insurance I .
Traffic Officers I. Workmens CompensationI .
Intent of ContractI .
Interpretation of Basic Estimate of QuantitiesI .
Iron Castings Structural Steel III .
J Jacks Screw for Cement Concrete MasonryII .
Jets Water for Driving PilesII .
Joints Bituminous Concrete PavementII .
LongitudinalII .
TransverseII .
Joints Cast Iron Bell and Spigot III .
Joints Cement Concrete Base Course II .
Expansion II .
Transverse ContractionII .
Joints Cement Concrete Masonry II .
ConstructionII .
Expansion II .
Joints Cement Concrete PavementII .
Joints Granite Rubble Block PavementII .
Jointing Materials for Pipe Culverts Storm Drains and Pipe SewersIII .
Jute III .
Mortar III .
Oakum III .
Plastic Gaskets III .
Rubber Ring Gaskets III .
Junction Boxes See Section II .
K Keys Construction Joints in Cement Concrete Masonry II .
Kilometer MarkersII .
L Labor Lodging Board Maximum Hours of Employment Weekly Payment Keeping of Payroll RecordsI .
Labor Preference in Employment ofI .
Land MonumentsI .
Land Takings Removal or Demolition of Buildings I .
Lane Tape ReflectorizedII .
Latent Physical Conditions Definition ofI .
Latex Modified Mortar and Concrete Overlayments III .
Lawn SoddingII .
Laws to be Observed I .
Layout Plans Definition of I. Leaching Basins See Section II .
Lead Rope for BoundsII .
Ledge Excavation See Class A Rock ExcavII .
II .
Ledge Removed from Dredged Area and Disposed See Section II .
Legal Relations and Responsibility to PublicI .
Liability of Public Officials Personal I .
Licenses Permits and I .
Lighting Highway See Section II .
Limestone Limitations of OperationsI .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges C. Loading Structures Cement Concrete Masonry II .
Loading Tests Pile II .
Load Transfer AssemblyIII .
Loam Borrow Plantable Soil Borrow Processed Planting Material II .
Topsoil Rehandled and Spread II .
Construction Methods II .
Placing Loam Topsoil Plantable Soil Borrow or Processed Planting Material II .
Preparation of Areas on which Loam Topsoil Plantable Soil Borrow or Processed Planting Material are To be placedII .
Topsoil Rehandled and SpreadII .
DescriptionII .
Materials II .
Location Lines Definition ofI .
Longitudinal Finishing Cement Concrete Base CourseII .
Cement Concrete Pavement II .
Lumber Sheeting See Sheeting Section II .
Luminaire See Section II .
M Mail Boxes See Rural Mail Boxes Removed and Reset II .
Magnetic Particle Inspection SteelII .
Maintenance of Barricades and Warning SignsI .
DetoursI .
Lights and Illumination I. Seeded Areas Care During Construction II .
Sodded Areas II .
Traffic I. Manholes Electrical See Section II .
Manholes See Basins Manholes and Inlets II .
Manhole Frame and Cover III .
Markers End for Electrical Conduit II .
ProjectII .
Markings See Reflectorized Pavement MarkingsII .
Masonry Brick .
II .
Cement ConcreteII .
FieldstoneII .
Stone Removed and RebuiltII .
Masonry for Adjustment of Basins and Manholes II .
Material Definition of I .
Material Guarantee I .
Materials Control of I .
Defective I .
Delivery and Storage of I .
Found on the Work Rights in Use of I .
Inspection of I. Patented I .
Present Bridge Removal ofII .
Removal and Disposal of SurplusII .
Source of Supply and QualityI .
Materials Specifications Index D. Measurement and PaymentI .
Measurement of QuantitiesI .
Method of Measurement See Pertinent Items Method of Payment See Pertinent Items Membrane Waterproofing and Protective CourseII .
Construction MethodsII .
ApplicationII .
Preparation of SurfaceII .
Protective CourseII .
Description II .
MaterialsII .
Membrane Waterproofing and Protective Course for Bridge Decks II .
Construction MethodsII .
ApplicationII .
Coal Tar EmulsionII .
Preformed Sheet Membrane II .
Thermoplastic Asphalt MembraneII .
Bituminous Concrete Protective CourseII .
Messenger Cable II .
Metal Bin Type Retaining WallII .
Metal Bridge RailingsII .
Construction MethodsII .
InspectionII .
Painting II .
Setting Railings II .
Shop DrawingsII .
WeldingII .
Description II .
MaterialsII .
Metal End Sections III .
Metal Forms for CastinPlace Concrete PilesII .
Cement Concrete Masonry II .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges C. Cement Concrete Pavement II .
Concrete Curb II .
Precast Units III .
Metal Pipe Rail II .
Metals and Related Materials III .
Microfilm of Structural Steel DrawingsI .
Mineral Aggregate for Bituminous ConcreteIII .
Mineral Filler for Bituminous ConcreteIII .
Minimum Dump Truck Rates I. Miscellaneous Materials See Section M III .
Mixing Bituminous Concrete III .
Cement Concrete III .
Mobilization II .
Mobilization and Dismantling of Boring EquipmentII .
Monuments Preservation ofI .
Mortar for Curbing and Edging III .
Drainage Structures III .
Fieldstone Masonry III .
Granite Rubble Block Pavement III .
Pipe Culverts Pipe Drains and Pipe Sewers III .
Stone Masonry Walls Removed and Rebuilt III .
Motor Vehicles I. Mulch Aged Pine Bark III .
Hay III .
Straw III .
Wood Chip III .
Wood Fibre III .
Mulching Seed for Erosion ControlII .
Construction Methods II .
Bales of Hay for Erosion Control II .
Hay Mulch with Seed For Erosion Control II .
Placing MulchII .
Preparation for MulchingII .
Multiple Control Switch II .
Multiple Circuit ContactorII .
N Natural Growth Sods II .
New Posts in Highway Guard Removed Reset II .
No Waiver of Legal RightsI .
Numerical Index of Payment ItemsA .
O Obstructions Removal and Disposal of Structures and I .
Opening of Proposals Public I .
Opening of Pavement or Surface to Traffic Bituminous ConcreteII .
Cement ConcreteII .
Operations Limitations of I .
Operations Schedule of I .
Ordinary Borrow See Embankment Section II .
Overhead Guide SignsII .
P Paints and Protective Coatings See Section M III .
Partial PaymentsI .
Participation FederalI .
Party of the First Part Definition ofI .
Patented Devices Materials and ProcessesI .
Paved Waterways See Waterways Section II .
Pavement Marking Removal II .
Paved Markings See Reflectorized Pavement MarkingsII .
Pavements andor Surfacing Bituminous Concrete for PatchingII .
Cement Concrete PavementII .
Class I Bituminous Concrete PavementII .
Granite Rubble Block PavementII .
Peastone Cover II .
Payment Bond ContractI .
Payment Allowance for High Early Strength Cement Used In Cement Concrete MasonryII .
Overbreakage Class A Rock Excavation II .
Payment for Extra WorkI .
Payment Measurement andI .
Payments PartialI .
Payments Scope of I .
Payment to Subcontractors I. Peastone Cover for Bituminous Concrete Paved Shoulders II .
Peat Excavation See Muck Excavation Section II .
Percentage Retained Partial PaymentsI .
Perforated Asphalt Coated Corrugated Metal Pipe III .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges C. Perforated Asphalt Coated Corrugated Aluminum Pipe III .
Performance Bond ContractI .
Period of Establishment Planting II .
Permit Restoration of Surface Opened byI .
Permits and Licenses I .
Personal Liability of Public OfficialsI .
PhotoElectric Control Highway Lighting II .
Piles Driven See Driven Piles II .
Pipe Asphalt Coated Corrugated Aluminum Pipe III .
Asphalt Coated Corrugated Metal Pipe III .
Asphalt Coated Corrugated Metal Pipe Arches III .
Asphalt Coated Smooth Steel Helically Corrugated Shell Metal Pipe III .
Cast Iron Pipe for Water Systems III .
Cement Concrete Pipe III .
Clay Pipe III .
Ductile Iron Pipe and Fittings III .
Perforated Asphalt Coated Corrugated Aluminum Pipe III .
Perforated Asphalt Coated Corrugated Metal Pipe III .
Plastic PVC Pipe III .
Polymeric Precoated Corr .
Metal Pipe III .
Reinforced Concrete Pipe III .
Slot Perforated Corrugated Plastic Pipe III .
Structural Plate for Pipe and Pipe Arches III .
Pipe Culvert Sections and Conduit III .
Pipe Ends Stone for II .
Pipes Removed and Relaid or Stacked II .
Plantable Soil BorrowII .
Planting PitsII .
Planting Trees Shrubs and Groundcover II .
DescriptionII .
Planting Methods II .
Care and Maintenance II .
Excavation of Planting PitsII .
MulchingII .
Period of EstablishmentII .
Planting Balled Burlapped PlantsII .
Planting Bare Rooted PlantsII .
Planting Bare Rooted Seedlings II .
Planting Container Grown PlantsII .
Protective ScreenII .
Pruning II .
Replacement of Defective Plant MaterialII .
Staking and Guying II .
Turf RemovalII .
WateringII .
Weeding II .
WrappingII .
Materials Backfill Mixture II .
Container Grown MaterialII .
Delivery and ProtectionII .
GeneralII .
Storing of MaterialsII .
Plans and Detail Drawings I .
Plans Definition of I .
Plans Proposal Forms and I. Plantable Soil Borrow II .
Plant Pest ControlI .
PneumaticTired Roller II .
Pointing Joints in CurbstoneII .
Polymeric Precoated Corr .
Metal Pipe II .
Portable Barricade Type IIIII .
Potting Mixture for Container Grown PlantsII .
Precast Concrete BarrierII .
PrecastPrestressed Concrete Piles See Driven PilesII .
Preference in Employment of LaborI .
Preparation of ProposalsI .
A .
Bid Prices I .
B. Signatures I. C. AffidavitsI .
Prequalification Prior to Requesting Proposal Forms I. Preservation of Roadside GrowthI .
Presplitting Rock I. Prestressed Concrete BeamsII .
Construction MethodsII .
Curing II .
Mortaring KeywaysII .
Prestressed Concrete Deck and Butted Box BeamsII .
Description II .
MaterialsII .
Prevention of Water PollutionSanitary Provisions I .
Processed Planting Material II .
Project Markers II .
Proposal Definition of I .
Proposal Forms and Plans Issuance ofI .
Prequalification Prior to RequestingI .
Proposal Guaranty RequiredI .
Proposal Requirements and ConditionsI .
Prosecution and ProgressI .
Prosecution of WorkI .
Protection and Restoration of WorkI .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges C. Public Opening of Proposals I .
Public Safety and ConvenienceI .
Pull Boxes See Section II .
Pumping of Concrete II .
Q Quantities Contract Increased or Decreased I .
Quantities Interpretation of Basic Estimate ofI .
Quantities Measurement See Pertinent Items R Radiographic Inspection SteelII .
Reclaimed Base Course II .
References Definition ofI .
RefertilizationII .
Reflective Lane Tape Pressure SensitiveII .
Reflectorized Drum II .
II .
Reflectorized Flexible Delineator PostII .
Reflectorized Pavement MarkingsII .
Construction Methods II .
Accommodation of Traffic II .
Application of MarkingsII .
EquipmentII .
Layout of Work II .
Protection of MarkingsII .
Materials II .
Reflectorized White Lines See Section II .
Reflectorized Yellow lines See Section II .
Rejection of ProposalsI .
Removal or Demolition of Buildings and Land TakingsI .
Removal and Discarding of Curb or Edging II .
Removal and Disposal of Structures and Obstructions I .
Removal of Catch Basins or Manholes See Section II .
Removal of Defective or Unauthorized WorkI .
Replacement of Defective Plant Material II .
Resistance Tests Wiring and GroundingII .
Responsibility for Damage Claims I .
Restoration of Surfaces Opened by PermitI .
Restrictions Borrow PitII .
Retaining Walls Metal Bin TypeII .
Retention of Proposal Guarantee I. RevetmentII .
Construction MethodsII .
Channel Paving and Grouted Channel PavingII .
Dumped Riprap II .
Modified Rock FillII .
RiprapII .
Slope PavingII .
Special Slope Paving Under BridgesII .
DescriptionII .
Classification of RevetmentII .
GeneralII .
Materials II .
Right of Way Definition ofI .
Rights in the Use of Material Found on the WorkI .
Riprap See RevetmentII .
Roadside Development Materials III .
Roadside Growth Preservation ofI .
Roadside Guide SignsII .
Roadside Dust Control II .
Construction MethodsII .
Sand CoverII .
Treatment with Bitumen II .
Calcium ChlorideII .
WaterII .
Roadway Excavation See Excavation Section II .
Rock Excavation Class A II .
Rock Excavation Class B II .
Rocks Removed from Dredged Area and Disposed ofII .
Rodents Control of II .
Rods Drill Steel II .
Rollers Pneumatic and VibratoryII .
Rubbed Surface Finishing Cement Concrete Masonry II .
Concrete Curb Type VAII .
Rural Mail Boxes Removed and ResetII .
S Safety Controls for Construction Operations II .
Safety Signing for Construction Operations II .
Samples and Tests I .
Sampling and Testing of Materials III .
Sand BorrowII .
Sand Borrow Cover II .
Sand for Mortar III .
Sanitary Provisions Prevention of Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges C. Water PollutionI .
Schedule of OperationsI .
Scope of PaymentsI .
Scope of WorkI .
Screed Rails II .
Seed for Erosion ControlIII .
Field SoddingIII .
Grass Plots and Islands III .
Lawn Sodding III .
Slopes and ShouldersIII .
Seed for Erosion Control Mulch and II .
Seeding II .
Construction Methods II .
Application of Fertilizer for Grass II .
Application of Limestone II .
Care During ConstructionII .
Liability II .
Seeding Grass II .
Grass by Spray Machine II .
SeedlingsII .
Service Connections See Wiring Grounding and Service ConnectionsII .
Sequence of Operations Embankment II .
ExcavationII .
Excavation for StructuresII .
Shear ConnectorsII .
SheetingII .
Construction Methods II .
Care Near Railroads II .
CutOff II .
Defective Work II .
Disposal of CutOff and Waste Materials II .
Placing Sheeting II .
DescriptionII .
Materials II .
Shells CastinPlace Concrete Piles III .
Shop Coat Structural Steel II .
Shop DrawingsII .
ShouldersII .
Construction Methods II .
DescriptionII .
Shrubs II .
Side Forms See Forms Sidewalks Wheelchair Ramps and DrivewaysII .
Sieves Definition of I .
Signals Traffic Control II .
Signatures Preparation of ProposalsI .
Signs Barricade and Warning I .
Signs Illuminated WarningII .
Sign Lighting LuminaireII .
Sign Supports II .
Construction MethodsII .
DescriptionII .
FabricationII .
Materials II .
Signs TrafficII .
Single Faced Steel Beam Highway Guard Type SS See Highway GuardII .
Slope Paving See RevetmentII .
Slope Paving at Bridges See RevetmentII .
Slump Test Cement Concrete Masonry III .
Cement Concrete PavementII .
Prestressed Concrete Beams III .
Sod Collected Natural Growth III .
Field III .
Lawn III .
SoddingII .
Construction MethodsII .
Fastening Sod to Slopes II .
Laying Sod II .
Maintenance and CareII .
Surface Dressing of SoddingII .
Source of Supply and QualityI .
Spalls See Stone Masonry Walls Removed and Rebuilt II .
Special BorrowII .
II .
Special Lighting Unit Flashing Arrow II .
Special ManholeII .
Special Provisions Coordination of Plans Supplemental Specifications and Standard Specifications I .
Special Provisions Definition ofI .
Special Slope Paving Under Bridges See RevetmentII .
Specifications Definition ofI .
Specific Insurance RequirementsI .
Spiral ReinforcementII .
Splices Piles SteelII .
Reinforcing Steel II .
Splicing Wire and CableII .
Stakes ConstructionI .
Staking and Guying TreesII .
Steam or Air HammersII .
Bearing Power Formulas II .
Wave Equation MethodII .
Steel Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges C. Beams II .
Billet III .
Inspection II .
Magnetic Particle II .
Radiographic II .
Piles II .
III .
PinsIII .
Pipe RailIII .
RailIII .
ReinforcementIII .
Shop Drawings II .
Steel Bar MatsIII .
StructuralIII .
Steel Beam Highway Guard See Highway Guard II .
Steel Drawings Reinforcement II .
StructuralII .
Steel Piles See Driven Piles II .
Steel Posts Bridge RailingII .
Chain Link Fence and GateII .
Highway Guard II .
Steel Reinforcement for Concrete Masonry II .
II .
PavementII .
Load Transfer Assembly III .
Tie Bars and Bolts III .
Welded Steel Wire Fabric III .
Piles CastinPlace III .
Structures II .
II .
Steel ScheduleII .
Steel Sheeting See Sheeting II .
Steel Sheeting CutOffII .
Steel Shells for CastinPlace Concrete Piles III .
Steel Structural II .
Stock Piling Aggregates Cement Concrete III .
Course III .
Fine III .
Stone for Balance Stone Walls Removed and Rebuilt II .
Field Stone Masonry II .
Leaching Basins III .
Masonry Walls Removed and RebuiltII .
Pipe Ends II .
Revetment II .
Slope Paving II .
Special Slope Paving Under Bridges II .
Stone for Pipe Ends II .
Stone Masonry Walls Removed and RebuiltII .
Construction MethodsII .
Stone Masonry Walls II .
Balance Stone WallsII .
Stone Screenings III .
Storage of Materials Delivery and I .
Straw Mulch III .
Streams Protection of I .
Strength Design of Cement Concrete III .
Stress Absorbing Membrane Interlayer II .
Striping PowderII .
Stripping Gravel Pits II .
II .
Structural Paints See Section MII .
Structural Steel II .
Construction MethodsII .
Design Fabrication and Erection II .
CamberII .
Inspection Radiographic II .
Magnetic ParticleII .
Welding II .
Painting II .
Preparation of Bridge SeatsII .
Shop DrawingsII .
Description II .
MaterialsII .
StructuresII .
Structures and Obstructions Removal and Disposal ofI .
Studs ShearII .
Stumps Removal and Disposal ofII .
Subbase Gravel See Section II .
Dense Graded Crushed Stone for See Section II .
SubContractor Definition ofI .
SubdrainsII .
Construction MethodsII .
ExcavationII .
Filling Drain TrenchII .
Laying Pipe II .
Protection of Inlets and Open Outlets II .
SubgradeII .
Construction MethodsII .
Fine Grading and Compacting II .
GeneralII .
Description II .
Subgrade definition ofI .
Subletting or Assignment of ContractI .
Superstructure Demolition of PresentII .
SuperintendentI .
Supplementary Agreement I .
Supplemental Specifications Definition of I .
Supports Sign II .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges C. SuretyI .
Surface Finish Cement Concrete Masonry II .
Pavement II .
Precast Units III .
Surfacing or Pavement See Pavements and Surfacing Suspension of Work Claim for Delay andorI .
T Table of Contentsiii Division I General Requirements and Covenants iii Division II Construction Details vii Division III Material Specificationsx Tabulation Classification and Proportioning of Cement Concrete III .
General Composition of Bituminous Concrete Mixtures III .
Grading of Crushed Stone Sizes III .
Tack Coat Bitumen for II .
Takings Land and Removal or Demolition of BuildingsI .
Tape Reflective LaneII .
Tar Paper III .
Temporary Pavement MarkingsII .
Temporary Precast Concrete Median BarrierII .
Temporary AntiGlare ScreenII .
Termination of Contract ConvenienceI .
DefaultI .
Terms Definition of I .
Test Beams and Cylinders III .
Test Piles Indicator PilesII .
Test PitsII .
II .
Tests Samples andI .
Tests Water SystemsII .
Thermoplastic Pavement Markings II .
ThinWall Steel Drive SampleII .
Thrust Blocks and Pipe Anchors II .
Tie Bars and Bolts III .
Tie Rods or WiresII .
Timber Piles Treated or Untreated See Driven PilesII .
Timber Test PilesII .
Time ClocksII .
Time for Completion Determination and Extension of ContractI .
Timing Requirements for ControllersII .
Tolerance in Pavement Thickness Cement Concrete Pavement II .
Topsoil Excavated and Stacked II .
Rehandled and Spread II .
Traffic Accommodation I .
Traffic Control DevicesII .
Traffic Controls for Construction and Maintenance OperationsII .
Construction MethodsII .
Hazard Identification BeaconII .
Pavement Marking Removal II .
Portable Barricade Type IIIII .
Portable Breakaway Barricades Type IIIII .
Safety Controls for Construction Operations II .
Safety Signing for Construction OperationsII .
Special Lighting Unit Flashing Arrow II .
Temporary Pavement Markings II .
Temporary Precast Median BarrierII .
Temporary mm Glare Screen Paddle Type II .
Description II .
GeneralII .
Hazard Identification BeaconII .
Reflectorized Drums II .
Safety Controls for Constr .
Operations II .
Safety Signing for Constr .
OperationsII .
Special Lighting Unit II .
Temporary Pavement Markings II .
MaterialsII .
Traffic Control SignalsII .
Construction MethodsII .
As Built DrawingsII .
ControllersII .
Detectors II .
Disposal of Existing EquipmentII .
Painting II .
SignalsII .
Test Required Before AcceptanceII .
Description II .
EquipmentII .
GeneralII .
MaterialsII .
ControllersII .
Detectors II .
GeneralII .
Louvered Hood and Optically Programmed Adapters II .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges C. Mast Arms II .
Pedestrian Signal Heads II .
Posts and Bases II .
Traffic Signal Lamps II .
Vehicle Signal Heads II .
Traffic Signs II .
Description II .
General II .
Plans II .
Erection II .
Attachment to P Posts II .
General II .
Fabrication II .
Demountable Reflectorized Delineator .. II .
Demountable Reflectorized Kilometer and TenthofKilometer Marker II .
Demountable Reflectorized Project Markers II .
Hazard Markers II .
Legends II .
Panels II .
Reflective SheetingII .
Reflective Flexible Delineator Posts II .
Materials II .
Demountable Reflectorized DelineatorII .
General II .
Legends Type A B C and DII .
Panels II .
Reflective SheetingII .
Reflectorized Flexible Delineator Posts II .
Traffic Officers and Railroad Flagging ServiceI .
Transportation Vehicle II .
Transverse Contraction Joints II .
Expansion Joints II .
Transverse and Anchor Rods Prestressed Beams III .
Treated TimberII .
Treated Timber Piles See Driven Piles II .
Trees Planting II .
Trees Removal and Disposal ofII .
Tree Wells II .
Tremie Cement Concrete Masonry II .
II .
Trench Excavation Class A Trench ExcavationII .
Class B Trench Excavation II .
U Unauthorized Work Removal of Defective and I. Unclassified Excavation II .
Underwater ConcreteII .
Undisturbed SamplesII .
Undisturbed Sample Preparatory BoringII .
Use of Explosives I. V Validity of Extra Work I. Vane Shear TestII .
Vane Shear Test Preparatory BoringII .
Vehicles Motor I. Vibration Cement Concrete MasonryII .
Precast Concrete Units III .
Vibratory Rollers Bit Concrete PavementII .
Vines II .
Vines and GroundcoverII .
W Walks See Sidewalks II .
Walls Metal Bin Type RetainingII .
Walls Removed and RebuiltII .
Balance Stone Removed and RebuiltII .
Stone Masonry Removed and RebuiltII .
Cement Mortar II .
Dry II .
Warning Cluster II .
II .
II .
Warning Regulatory and Route MarkerII .
II .
Warning Signs Barricades and I .
Warning Signs HighwayII .
Warranties of EquipmentII .
Water Jets for Driving Piles II .
Waterproofing Membrane Protective CourseII .
II .
Water Systems Section II .
Waterways II .
Construction MethodsII .
Bituminous ConcreteII .
Cement ConcreteII .
Weather Conditions Bituminous Concrete PavementII .
Cement Concrete Masonry II .
II .
Wedges Wood for Cement Concrete Masonry II .
Weep Holes for Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges C. BasinsII .
Cement Concrete Masonry II .
Weighing and Batching Equipment Bituminous ConcreteIII .
Cement Concrete MasonryIII .
Weights of Bituminous Materials Tabulation II .
Welded Steel Wire FabricIII .
Welding Inspection II .
Metal Bridge Railings II .
Metal Pipe Rail II .
Structural Steel II .
Wells for Trees See Tree Wells II .
Wetted Burlap II .
Wheelchair Ramps See Sidewalks II .
White Reflectorized Pavement Markings Traffic II .
White Traffic Paint III .
Wiring DiagramII .
II .
Wiring Grounding and Service Connections II .
Cable Types and UsesII .
Construction Methods Equipment Grounding II .
Ground ElectrodesII .
Service Connections II .
Wire and CableII .
Withdrawal of ProposalsI .
Wood Chip Mulch III .
Wood Fibre Mulch III .
Wood Forms for Cement Concrete MasonryII .
Cement Concrete Pavement II .
Precast Units III .
Work Contractors Responsibility for the I .
Control ofI .
Delay andor Suspension ofI .
Definition ofI .
Extra I .
Failure to Complete on Time I. IncidentalII .
Inspection ofI .
Payment for Extra I .
Prosecution of I .
Scope of I .
Workman Character ofI .
Workmans Compensation Insurance I. Y Yarning Materials for Water MainsII .
Yellow Reflectorized Pavement Markings TrafficII .
Yellow Traffic Paint III .
Yield Cement Concrete III .
Z Zinc Paint for Galvanizing Repair III .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges C. This page intentionally blank .
D. MATERIALS INDEX A Section No .
Page Acrylic Plastic .
millimeter Diameter CenterMount Reflector Type A M .. III .
Acrylic Prismatic Reflectors and Embossed Aluminum Frames for Signs M .. III .
Acrylonitrile Butadiene Styrene ABS Pipe M .. III .
Aged Pine Bark Mulch M .. III .
Aggregates and Related Materials M III .
Aggregate for Sand Blasting M .. III .
Aluminum Pipe Rail or Fence M .. III .
Aluminum Sign Panels M .. III .
Aluminum Signal Posts and Bases M .. III .
Approval and Acceptance of Materials M III .
Anchor Bolts Nuts and Washers M .. III .
Anchor Rods Prestressed Beams M .. III .
AntiGlare Systems M .. III .
Asphalt AntiStripping Additive M .. III .
Asphalt Cement M .. III .
Corrugated Aluminum Metal Pipe M .. III .
Corrugated Metal Pipe M .. III .
Asphalt Coated Corrugated Metal Pipe Arches M .. III .
Asphalt Coated Smooth Steel Liner Helically Corrugated Shell Metal Pipe M .. III .
Asphalt Emulsions M .. III .
Asphalt Pipe Coating M .. III .
Asphalt Primer M .. III .
B Bentonite Waterproofing System M .. III .
Class I Bituminous Concrete M .. III .
Bituminous Concrete Curb Types or M .. III .
Bituminous Materials M .. III .
Blended Hydraulic Cements M .. III .
Bone Meal M .. III .
Bridge Railings Aluminum Types AL and AL M .. III .
Bridges Railings Steel Type SPL M .. III .
Bronze SelfLubricating Bearing Plates M .. III .
Burlap M .. III .
C Calcium Chloride M .. III .
Cast Iron Pipe for Water Systems M .. III .
Cationic Emulsified Asphalt M .. III .
Cellular Glass M .. III .
Cement and Cement Concrete Materials M III .
Cement M .. III .
Cement Concrete M .. III .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges D. Cement Concrete Additives M .. III .
Cement Mortar M .. III .
Coarse Aggregates M .. III .
Cold Weather Concrete M .. III .
Fine Aggregate M .. III .
Lightweight Aggregates M .. III .
Measuring Materials M .. III .
Mixers and Agitators M .. III .
Mixing and Delivery M .. III .
Plant and Equipment M .. III .
Precast Units M .. III .
Proportioning M .. III .
Storage and Handling of Materials M .. III .
Test Specimens M .. III .
Water M .. III .
Cement Concrete Blocks M .. III .
Cement Concrete Bricks M .. III .
Cement Concrete Pipe M .. III .
Cement Mortar M .. III .
Certification of Materials M III .
Chain Link Fences and Gates M .. III .
Channel Paving M .. III .
Class I Bituminous Concrete Pavement M .. III .
Bituminous Materials M .. III .
Composition and Compaction Acceptance Tests M .. III .
Composition of the Mixture M .. III .
Composition Limits Master Ranges M .. III .
Inspection M .. III .
Job Mix Formula M .. III .
Mineral Aggregate M .. III .
Mineral Filler M .. III .
Plant Requirements M .. III .
Clay Brick M .. III .
Clay Pipe M .. III .
Coated Glass Fabric M .. III .
Cold Drawn Steel Wire M .. III .
Concrete Curb Precast Units M .. III .
Conduit See Electrical Conduit M. III .
Copper Tubing M .. III .
Corrugated Plastic Pipe M .. III .
Crushed Stone M .. III .
Crushed Stone Tabulation of Sizes M .. to III .
M .. III .
Curb and Edging M .. III .
Cutback Asphalts M .. III .
D Demountable Reflectorized Delineator Guard Rail M .. III .
Dense Graded Crushed Stone for Subbase M .. III .
Drill Steel Rods M .. III .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges D. Dry Stone Masonry M .. III .
Ductile Iron Pipe and Fittings M .. III .
Dumped Riprap M .. III .
E Elastomeric Bridge Bearing Pads M .. III .
Electrical Conduit Rigid Nonmetallic Type NM M .. III .
Electrical Conduit Rigid Metallic Type RM M .. III .
Electrical Conduit Flexible Metallic Type FM M .. III .
Electrical Wire and Cable M .. to III .
M .. III .
Enamels M. III .
Encapsulated Lens Reflective Sheeting M .. III .
Epoxy Coated Reinforcing Bars M .. III .
Epoxy Protective Coatings M. III .
Epoxy Resin Base Bonding System for Concrete M .. III .
Erosion Seed M .. III .
F Fertilizer M .. III .
Fiberglass M .. III .
Field Stone Masonry M .. III .
Fine Aggregate M .. III .
Fly Ash M .. III .
G Galvanized Coatings M. III .
Gate Valves M .. III .
General Planting M .. III .
Geotextile Fabrics M .. III .
Glass Beads M .. III .
Granite Bounds M .. III .
Granite Curb M .. III .
Granite Curb Corners M .. III .
Granite Curb Inlets M .. III .
Granite Edgestone M .. III .
Granite Rubble Block M .. III .
Gravel Borrow M .. III .
Gravel Processed for Subbase M .. III .
Ground Rod M .. III .
H Hay Mulch M .. III .
Herbicides M .. III .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges D. High Tensile Strength Bolts M .. III .
Hot Applied Bituminous Concrete Crack Sealer M .. III .
Hot Poured Joint Sealer M .. III .
Hydrated Lime M .. III .
Hydrants M .. III .
I Impervious Liquid Membrane M .. III .
Impervious Soil Borrow M .. III .
Insecticides M .. III .
Insulation and Waterproof Jackets M .. III .
Iron Castings M .. III .
J Joint and Crack Sealer Asphalt Fiber M .. III .
Jointing Materials for Pipes M .. III .
Junction Boxes Metallic Pull and M .. III .
L Latex Modified Mortar and Concrete Overlayments M .. III .
Limestone M .. III .
Liquid PenetrantSealant M .. III .
Load Transfer Assembly M .. III .
Loam Borrow M .. III .
Lumber and Wood Sheeting M .. III .
M Mast Arms M .. III .
Materials for Guying and Staking M .. III .
Metal BinType Retaining Wall M .. III .
Metal End Sections M .. III .
Metals and Related Materials M III .
Miscellaneous Coatings M. III .
Miscellaneous Materials M III .
Modified Rock Fill M .. III .
Modular Guidance Systems M .. III .
Mortar for Prestressed Concrete Deck Beams M .. III .
Molded Fabric Bearing Pad M .. III .
Mulch M .. III .
N Nursery Stock M .. III .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges D. O Octagonal Bases M .. III .
Ordinary Borrow M .. III .
P Paints and Protective Coatings M III .
General Requirements M .. III .
Listing of Paints Enamels M. III .
Epoxy Protective Coatings M. III .
Galvanized Coatings M. III .
Miscellaneous Coatings M. III .
Pavement Markings M. III .
Structural Paints M. III .
Sampling and Testing M .. III .
Peat Borrow M .. III .
Pedestal Bases M .. III .
Perforated Corrugated Aluminum Metal Pipe M .. III .
Perforated Corrugated Metal Pipe M .. III .
Pipe Culvert Sections and Conduit M III .
Plantable Soil Borrow Topsoil and M .. III .
Plastic Waterstops M .. III .
Polyethylene Coated Burlap M .. III .
Polyethylene Covers M .. III .
Polymeric Precoated Corrugated Plastic Pipe M .. III .
Polystyrene M .. III .
Polyurethane Joint Sealer M .. III .
Polyurethane Joint Sealer Non Sag M .. III .
Portland Cement M .. III .
Precast Concrete Block for Slope Paving M .. III .
Precast Prestressed Piles M .. III .
Precast Units M .. III .
Preformed Bituminous Joint Filler for Concrete M .. III .
Preformed Compression Joint Seals Bridges M .. III .
Preformed Expansion Joint Filler M .. III .
Preformed Sheet Membrane M .. III .
Pressure Injected Footing Piles M .. III .
Prestressed Concrete Beams M .. III .
Aggregates M .. III .
Concrete M .. III .
Drawings M .. III .
Forms M .. III .
Mix Design M .. III .
Mixing Placing and Curing Concrete M .. III .
Mortar for Prestressed Concrete Deck Beams M .. III .
Pretensioning Strands M .. III .
Placing M .. III .
Draped M .. III .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges D. Quality Control M .. III .
Slump M .. III .
Steel M .. III .
Test Requirements M .. III .
Transferring Tension to Concrete M .. III .
Processed Glass Aggregate PGA M .. III .
Processed Gravel for Subbase M .. III .
Processed Planting Material M .. III .
Protective Seal Coat Emulsion M .. III .
Pull and Junction Boxes Metallic M .. III .
R Reclaimed Pavement Borrow Material for Base Course M .. III .
Reflective Sheeting M .. III .
Reflectorized Flexible Delineator Post M .. III .
Reflectorized Plastic Drum M .. III .
Reflectors for Barriers M .. III .
Reinforced Concrete Pipe M .. III .
Reinforced Concrete Pipe Flared Ends M .. III .
Reinforcing Bars M .. III .
Riprap M .. III .
Roadside Development Materials M III .
Rockfill M .. III .
Rubber Cotton Duck Bearing Pad M .. III .
S Sampling and Testing of Materials M III .
Sand Borrow M .. III .
Sand Borrow for Subdrains M .. III .
Seed M .. III .
Seed for Erosion Control M .. III .
Sidewalk Brick M .. III .
Signal Posts M .. III .
Slope Paving M .. III .
SlotPerforated Corrugated Plastic Pipe M .. III .
Sod M .. III .
Sodium Chloride M .. III .
Soils and Borrow Materials M III .
Special Borrow M .. III .
Special Slope Paving Under Bridge Quarry Stone M .. III .
StayinPlace Bridge Deck Forms M .. III .
Steel Baffles and Drainage Troughs M .. III .
Steel Bar Mats M .. III .
Steel Beam Highway Guard Type SS M .. III .
Steel Castings M .. III .
Steel Piles M .. III .
Steel Pins M .. III .
Steel Pipe Piles M .. III .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges D. Steel Pipe Rail or Fence M .. III .
Steel Sheeting M .. III .
Steel Shells Cast in Place Piles M .. III .
Steel Supports M .. III .
Stone for Pipe Ends M .. III .
Stone Screenings M .. III .
Strand Chuck M .. III .
Straw Mulch M .. III .
Structural Paints M .. III .
Structural Plate for Pipe and Pipe Arches M .. III .
Structural Steel M .. III .
Stud Shear Connectors M .. III .
T Tar Paper M .. III .
Temporary Raised Pavement Markers M .. III .
Thermoplastic Asphalt Membrane M .. III .
Tie Bars and Bolts M .. III .
Timber Piles M .. III .
Timber Preservatives M .. III .
Topsoil and Plantable Soil Borrow M .. III .
Traffic Signal Cable See Electrical Wire M .. III .
Transverse and Anchor Rods Prestressed Beams M .. III .
Treated Timber M .. III .
Tree Paint M .. III .
U Urethane M .. III .
W Water for Irrigation M .. III .
Waterproof Jackets M .. III .
Waterproof Paper Covers M .. III .
Welded Steel Wire Fabric M .. III .
Wood Chip Mulch M .. III .
Wood Fibre Mulch M .. III .
Wooden Pegs M .. III .
Wooden Rails and Posts M .. III .
Wood Posts and Braces M .. III .
Woven Wire Fence M .. III .
Wrapping Material M .. III .
Y Yarning Materials for Water Pipes M .. III .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges D. This page intentionally blank .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges E. METRIC UNITS TERMS SYMBOLS AND CONVERSION FACTORS THE BASIC METRIC SYSTEM Base Units There are seven metric base units of measurement six of which are used commonly in design and construction .
The seventh mole is the amount of molecular substance and is used primarily in physics and chemistry .
Base Units Quantity Unit Symbol length meter m mass kilogram kg time second s electric current ampere A temperature kelvin K luminous intensity candela cd Derived Units Fifteen units with special names are derived from the base units and commonly used in engineering calculations .
Derived Units Quantity Name Symbol Expression frequency hertz Hz Hz s force newton N N kgms pressure stress pascal Pa Pa Nm energy work quantity of heat joule J J Nm power radiant flux watt W W Js electric charge quantity coulomb W W As electric potential volt V V WA or JC capacitance farad F F CV electric resistance ohm   VA electric conductance siemens S S AV or  magnetic flux weber Wb Wb Vs magnetic flux density tesla T T Wbm inductance henry H H WbA luminous flux lumen lm lm cdsr illuminance lux lx lx lmm Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges E. Decimal Prefixes Many numbers resulting from metric calculation using the units above are too large or small to be practically used in design and construction .
Therefore three decimal prefixes are commonly used with the base units to produce a manageable number .
Decimal Prefixes Prefix Symbol Order of Magnitude Expression mega M one million kilo k one thousand milli m . one thousandth The prefixes giga G for one billion micro  for one millionth and nano n for are used in some engineering calculations .
The metric system includes a number of additional historically used multiples such as centi c for one hundredth deci d for one tenth deca da for ten and hecto h for one hundred but these should be avoided as much as possible .
Pronunciation candela Accent the second syllable candellah .
hectare Accent the first syllable hecktare .
The second syllable rhymes with care .
joule Rhymes with pool .
kilometer Accent the first syllable killometer .
pascal Rhymes with rascal .
siemens Sounds like seamens .
RULES FOR WRITING METRIC SYMBOLS NAMES AND NUMBERS Print unit symbols in upright type and in lower case except for liter L or unless the unit name is derived from a proper name such as Pascal P. Print unit names in lower case even those derived from a proper name .
Print decimal prefixes in lower case for magnitudes and lower i.e .
k m  and n and print the prefixes in upper case for magnitudes and higher e.g .
M and G. Leave a space between a numeral and a symbol write kg or .
mm not kg or .mm .
Exceptions No space is left between the numerical value and the symbols for degree minute and second of plane angle e.g .
write and not .
In the case of the symbol for the degree Celsius this space is optional but the degree symbol must always be attached to C e.g .
write C or C and not C. Do not leave a space between a unit symbol and its decimal prefix write kg not k g. Do not use the plural of unit symbols e.g .
write kg not kgs but do use the plural of written unit names e.g .. several kilograms .
For technical writing use symbols in conjunction with numerals e.g .
the area is m write out unit names if Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges E. numerals are not used e.g .
carpet is measured in square meters .
Numerals may be combined with written unit names in nontechnical writing e.g .
meters .
Indicate the product of two or more units in symbolic form by using a dot positioned above the line e.g .
kgms .
Do not mix names and symbols e.g .
write Nm or newton meter not Nmeter or newtonm .
Do not use a period after a symbol e.g .
write g not g. except when it occurs at the end of a sentence .
Always use decimals not fractions e.g .
write .
g not g. Use a zero before the decimal marker for values less than one e.g .
write .
g not .
g. Use spaces instead of commas to separate blocks of three digits for any number over four digits e.g .
write kg or .
kg or kg .
Note that this does not apply to the expression of amounts of money .
In the United States the decimal marker is a period in other countries a comma usually is used .
CONVERSION AND ROUNDING Soft Metric Conversion Soft Metric means No Physical Change .
This means that the product in question will not be physically modified to be used in a metric project but rather a direct mathematical conversion is performed to its exact or nearly exact metric equivalent .
All that is required is that the product literature and engineering data on these products be available with metric dimensions .
It is acceptable if product literature contains both metric and english dimensions .
Since product literature costs can be substantial firms without metric product literature need only develop a supplement to their existing literature .
Supplements will be accepted as submittals for an interim period .
There is no problem with competitive availability of soft converted products on a metric project since these same products are competitively available today .
In the future as standard international metric product sizes are developed by ISO International Standard Organization or another standards organization these products may undergo modification to be compatible in the world market .
Hard Metric Conversion Hard Metric means Product Requires Physical Change .
The product in question must be physically modified in order to be efficiently utilized in a metric project which is planned on a metric grid .
A handful of currently used construction products must undergo hard conversion to new metric sizes .
General Notes When converting numbers from inchpounds to metric round the metric value to the same number of significant digits as there were in the inchpound number e.g .
miles at .
kmmi equals .
km which rounds to km .
Convert mixed inchpound units feet and inches pounds and ounces to the smaller inchpound unit before converting to metric and rounding e.g .
feet inches inches inches x . mmin .
mm round to mm .
Wherever possible convert measurements to rounded rationalized hard metric numbers .
For instance if anchor bolts are to be embedded to a depth of inches the exact converted length of mm might be rounded to either Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges E. mm .
inches or mm .
inches .
The less critical the number the rounder it can be but ensure that allowable tolerances or safety factors are not exceeded .
When in doubt stick with the exact soft conversion .
Round to preferred metric numbers .
While the preferred numbers for the foot inches system are in order of preference those divisible by and preferred metric numbers are in order of preference those divisible by .
and or decimal multiples thereof .
Use hand calculators or software conversion programs that convert inchpounds to metric .
They are readily available and are indispensable to the conversion process .
Be careful with the decimal marker when converting areas and volumes metric numbers can be significantly larger than inchpound numbers a cubic meter for instance is one billion cubic millimeters .
VISUALIZING METRIC UNITS A few basic comparisons are worth remembering to help visualize metric units One meter is the length of a yardstick plus about inches .
One gram is about the mass weight of a large paper clip .
One kilogram is about the mass weight of a one liter bottle of soda about .
pounds One liter is about the volume of a inch cube x x millimeters .
One liter of water has a mass of kilogram .
One inch is just inch longer than millimeters inch .
millimeters millimeters inch .
Four inches are about inch longer than millimeters inches .
millimeters millimeters inches .
One foot is about inch longer than millimeters inches .
millimeters millimeters inches .
The metric equivalent of a typical foot by foot ceiling grid is x mm so metric ceiling tiles and lighting fixtures are about inch smaller in one dimension and inch smaller in the other .
Similarly the metric equivalent of a by sheet of plywood or drywall is x millimeters so metric sheets are about inch narrower and inches shorter .
Rounding down from multiples of inches to multiples of mm makes dimensions exactly .
percent smaller and areas about .
percent smaller .
About inch is lost in every linear foot .
One foot is about inch longer than millimeters inches .
millimeters millimeters inches .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges E. Temperature Comparisons C WATER FREEZES C Cold C Comfortable room temperature C Hot C Normal body temperature C High fever C Hot coffee C Record high temperature Sahara Desert C WATER BOILS at sea level pressure Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges E. USE OF METRIC UNITS IN DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION Linear Measurement Length Use only the millimeter mm meter m and kilometer km in highway design and construction .
Use millimeters to represent all linear measurements less than one .
meter .
Use meters to represent all linear dimensions greater than one .
meter .
Use the kilometer for long distances and the micrometer for precision measurements .
Do not use the centimeter .
For survey measurement use the meter and the kilometer .
Survey stationing will be at meter intervals .
Since the U.S. basis of length measurement has been derived from metric standards .
In the definition of the length of the foot was changed from to .
exactly which resulted in the new value being shorter by two parts in a million .
At the same time it was decided that any data derived from and published as a result of geodetic surveys within the United States would remain with the old standard .
Thus all land measurements in U.S. customary units are based upon the U.S. survey foot which related to the meter by the old standard . . MHD survey is based on the U.S. survey foot .
Area The square meter m is preferred .
Very large areas may be expressed in square kilometers km and very small areas in square millimeters mm Use the hectare ha which is equal to square meters for land and water measurement only .
Do not use the square centimeter .
Linear dimensions such as mm x mm may be used if so indicate width first and length second .
Volume and Fluid Capacity Cubic meter m is preferred for dry volumes in construction and for large storage tanks .
Use liter L and milliliter mL for fluid capacity liquid volume .
Plane and Solid Angles and Slope Plane angles in surveying cartography will continue to be measured in degrees either decimal degrees or degrees minutes and seconds rather than the metric radian .
The radian rad and steradian sr denote plane and solid angles .
They are used in lighting work and in various engineering calculations .
Slope is expressed as a nondimensional ratio avoid the use of angles or percentages .
The vertical component is shown first and then the horizontal .
For instance a rise of one meter in four meters is expressed as .
The units that are compared should be the same meters to meters millimeters to millimeters etc .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges E. For slopes less than the vertical component should be unitary for example .
For slopes over the horizontal component should be unitary for example Time The preferred unit of time is the second s. In cases where time relates to life customs or calendar cycles the minute hour day and other calendar units may be necessary .
For example vehicle speed will normally be expressed in kilometers per hour .
Temperature Celsius temperature C formerly called centigrade is more commonly used than kelvin K and will be used by MHD .
Both have the same temperature gradients i.e .
Celsius temperature is simply .
degrees warmer than kelvin which begins at absolute zero .
For instance water freezes at .
K and at C while it boils at .
K and at C. To move between Celsius and Kelvin add or subtract .
i.e .
temperature in Celsius temperature in Kelvin minus .. Mass Force and Weight The kilogram kg is the base unit for mass which is the unit quantity of matter independent of gravity .
The metric ton t which is equal to kg is used to denote large loads such as those used in excavating .
The newton N is the derived unit for force mass times acceleration or kgms .
For calculations where the force is due to the selfweight of an object acceleration is the acceleration due to gravity and is equal to .
ms .
The principal departure of the metric system from other measuring systems is the use of explicitly distinct units for mass and force .
In metric the name kilogram is restricted to the unit of mass and the kilogramforce from which the suffix force was in practice often erroneously dropped should not be used .
In its place the metric unit of force the newton is used see next page .
Likewise the newton rather than the kilogramforce is used to form derived units which include force for example pressure or stress Nm Pa energy Nm J and power Nms W. Considerable confusion exists in the use of the term weight as a quantity to mean either force or mass .
In commercial and everyday use the term weight nearly always means mass thus when one speaks of a persons weight the quantity referred to is mass .
This nontechnical use of the term weight in everyday life will probably persist .
In science and technology the term weight of a body has usually meant the force that if applied to the body would give it an acceleration equal to the local acceleration of free fall .
The use of force of gravity mass time acceleration of gravity instead of weight with this meaning is often recommended .
Because of the dual use of the term weight as a quantity this term should be avoided in technical practice except under circumstances in which its meaning is completely clear .
When the term is used it is important to know whether mass or force is intended and to use metric units properly by using kilograms for mass or newtons for force .
The term load means either mass or force depending on its use .
A load that produces a vertically downward force because of the influence of gravity acting on a mass may be expressed in mass units kilograms .
Any other load is expressed in force units Newtons .
Pressure Stress and Elastic Modulus The pascal Pa is the unit for pressure and stress and is defined as Pa Nmm .
The term bar is not a metric unit and should not be used .
Structural calculations should be shown in MPa or kPa .
It may be convenient to note that MPa Nmm .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges E. Energy The joule J is the unit for energy and is defined as J Nm .
The joule is used wherever energy is specified such as energy absorption in Charpy Vnotch tests .
Do not use the joule to designate torque or bending moment always use newtonmeter Nm or kilonewton meter kNm .
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges E. CONVERSION FACTORS Complete tables of conversion factors from the inchpound system to the metric system may be found in the following ASTM Standards Standard Practice for Use of the International System of Units SI the Modernized Metric System American Society for Testing Materials Designation E. Standard Practice for the Use of the Metric SI Units in Building Design and Construction Committee E Supplement to E American Society for Testing Materials Designation E Reapproved .
Commonly used conversions in highway design and construction are summarized below .
Commonly Used Conversion Factors Quantity From InchPound Units To Metric Units Multiply By mile kilometer km .
yard meter m . Length foot meter m . millimeter mm .
inch millimeter mm .
square mile square kilomters km .
acre square meters m . hectare ha m . Area square yard square meters m . square foot square meters m . square inch square millimeters mm .
acre foot cubic meter m . cubic yard cubic meter m . cubic foot cubic meter m . Volume cubic foot liter L . board foot cubic meter m . gallon liter L . cubic inch cubic millimeter mm .
Continued on next page Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges E. Quantity From InchPound Units To Metric Units Multiply By pound kilogram kg .
Mass kip lb metric ton kg .
ton metric ton .
Massunit length poundlinear foot kilogrammeter kgm .
Massunit area poundsquare foot kilogramsquare meter kgm .
Mass density poundcubic foot kilogramcubic meter kgm .
Force pound Newton N . kip kiloNewton kN .
Forceunit length poundlinear foot Newtonmeter Nm .
kiplinear foot kiloNewtonmeter kNm .
poundsquare foot Pascal Pa . Pressure stress modulus of kipsquare foot kiloPascal kPa .
elasticity poundsquare inch kiloPascal kPa .
kipsquare inch megaPascal MPa .
Bending moment torque footpound Newtonmeter Nm .
moment of force footkip kiloNewtonmeter kNm .
Moment of intrtia or second inch millimeter mm moment of area foot meter m . section modulus cubic inch cubic millimeter mm .
Temperature degree Fahrenheit degree Centigrade C F . Energy footpound Joule J .
